The  Ramakrishna  Mission 
Institute  of  Culture  Library 

Presented  by 

Dr.  Baridbaran  Mukerji 

H MI  CL - 8 


20052B 


20052 


Linguistic  Survey  of  India 

Vol.  IX 

INDO- ARYAN  FAMILY 

CENTRAL  GROUP 
Part  IV 

SPECIMENS  OF  THE  PAHARI  LANGUAGES  A^D 

GUJURE 


Agents  for  the  Sale  of  Books  Published  by  the 
Superintendent  of  Government  Printing,  India,  Calcutta. 


IN  EUROPE. 


Constable  A Co.,  10,  Orange  Street,  Leicester  Square,  London, 
W.C. 

Kegan  Paul,  Trench,  Triibner  A Co.,  (58-74,  Carter  Lane,  E.C., 
and  25,  Museum  Street,  London,  W.C. 

Bernard  Quaritcli,  11,  Grafton  Street,  New  Bond  Street, 
London,  W.  _ 

P.  S.  King  A Sons,  2 & 4,  Great  Smith  Street,  Westminster, 
London,  S.  W. 

H.  S.  King  A Co.,  65,  Cornhill,  E.O.,  and  9,  Pall  Mall, 
London,  W. 

Grindlny  & Co.,  54,  Parliament  Street,  London,  S.W. 


Luzac  A Co.,  40,  Great  Russell  Street,  London,  W.C. 

W.  Thacker  A Co.,  2,  Creed  Lane,  London,  E.C. 

T.  Fisher  Unwin,  Ltd.,  1,  Adetphi  Terrace,  London,  W.C. 
B.  H.  Blackwell,  fiO  A 51,  Broad  Street,  Oxford, 
j Doighton,  Bell  & Co.,  Ltd.,  Cambridge. 

Oliver  ar.d  Boyd,  Twecddale  Court,  Edinburgh. 

K.  Ponsonby,  Ltd.,  116,  Grafton  Street,  Dublin. 

Ernest  Lerotix,  28,  Hue  Bonaparte,  Pari:. 

Martinus  Nijholf,  The  Ha^ue,  Holland. 


IN  INDIA  AND  CEYLON, 


Thacker,  Spink  A Co.,  Calcutta  and  Simla. 

Newnmn  A C<>.,  Calcutta. 

R.  Cambray  A Co.,  Calcutta. 

S.  K.  Lahiri  A Co.,  Calcutta. 

B.  Banerjeo  A Co.,  Calcutta. 

The  Indian  School  Supply  Dopftfc,  309,  Bow  Bazar  Street, 
Calcutta,  and  220,  Nawabpur,  Dacca. 

BuUerworth  A Co.  (India),  Ltd.,  Calcutta. 

Rai  M.  C.  Sarcar  Bahadur  and  Sons,  75-1-1,  Harrison  Road, 
Calcutta. 

The  Weldon  Library,  18-5.  Cliowringbee  Hoad,  Calcutta. 
Standard  Literature  Company,  Ltd.,  Calcutta. 

Higginbotham  A Co.,  Madras. 

V.  Kalyaiurauiit  Iyer  A Co.,  Madras. 

(r.  A.  Natesnn  A Co.,  Madras. 

S.  Murtliy  & Co.,  Madras. 

Thompson  A Co.,  Madras. 

Temple  A Co.,  Madras. 

P.  R.  Rama  Iyer  A Co.,  Madras 

M.  R.  Ry.  E.  M.  Gopalakrishnn  Koue,  Madura, 

Thacker  A Co.,  Ltd.,  Bombay. 

A.  .1.  Combridge  A Co.,  Bombay. 

D.  B.  Tarapurevala,  Sous  A Co.,  Bombay. 

Radliabai  Atmarnin  Sagoou,  Bombay. 

Sunder  Pnndurang,  Bombay. 


Gopal  Narayun  A Co.,  Bombay. 

Ram  Chandra  Govind  A Son,  Kallmdevi,  Bombay. 

A.  H.  Wbeeler  A Co.,  Allahabad,  Calcutti  and  Bombay. 

N.  B.  Mnthur,  Superintendent,  Xozir  Knnun  Hind  Press 
Allahabad. 

Rai  Sahib  M.  Guliib  Singh  A Sons,  Mulid-i-Am  Press,  Lahore 
and  Calcutta. 

A.  Chand  A Co.,  Lahore,  Punjab. 

Superintendent,  American  Baptist  Mission  Pre«s,  Rangoon. 

S.  C.  Talukdar,  Proprietor,  Students  A Go.,  Cooch  Bclmr. 

A.  M.  A Ji  Ferguson,  Ceylon. 

Mauager,  Educational  Book  Depots,  Nagpur  and  Jnhhulpore.* 
Manager  of  the  Imperial  Book  Dejidt,  63,  Chandney  Chnuk 
Street,  Delhi.* 

Manager,  "The  Agra  Medical  Hall  and  Co-operative  Associa- 
tion, Ltd.  (Successors  to  A.  .John  A Co.,  Agra).* 

T.  K.  Scetharam  Aiyar,  Kumbakonam.* 

Superintendent,  Basel  Mission  Book  and  Tract  Depository, 
Mangalore.* 

P.  Varadacharv  A Co.,  Madras.* 

H.  Liddell,  Printer,  etc.,  7,  South  Road,  Allahabad.* 

D.  C.  Antnd  A Sous,  Peshawar.* 

Ram  Dayai  Agarwala,  184,  Kntra,  Allahabad.* 

Manager,  Newal  Klshorc  Press,  Lucknow.* 


\4cutp  lor  the  tale  of  Leg islutive  Department  publications  only. 


Linguistic7  Survey  of  India 


VOL.  IX 

INDO- ARYAN  FAMILY 

CENTKAL  GROUP 

PART  IV 

SPECIMENS  OF  THE  PAHARl  LANGUAGES  AND 

GUJURI 


COLLECT KD  AND  EDITED  BY 

SIR  GEORGE  ABRAHAM  GRIERSON,  K.C.I.E.,  Ph.D.,  ILLitt.,  I.C.S.  (Retd.), 

HONORARY  FELLOW  OF  THE  AhlATIC  80GIETT  OF  BENGAL , HONORARY  MEMBER  OF  THE  XAOARl  PRACHAkivT  SA BUI,  THE  AMEBIC  IV 
ORIENTAL  SOCIETY,  THE  mXH6t£  PINNO-OUGRIKNNE,  AND  THE  ASSOCIATION  PHONl^TlQrE  INTERNATIONALE  *9  FOREIGN 
ASSOCIATE  MEMBER  OF  THE  SOCi£t£  ASIATIQDE  DE  PARIS  ; CORRF.SPONDIXa  MEMBER  0?  THE  KuSlGLICHE 
QEB'ELLSCHAFT  DF.R  WISSENSCHAFTEN  ZU  GOTTINOF-N. 


CALCUTTA 

SUPERINTENDENT  GOVERNMENT  PRINTING,  INDIA 

1916  ' 


Subject  to  subsequent  revision,  the  following  is  the  proposed  list  of  volumes 

of  the  Linguistic  Survey  of  India. 

Yol.  I..  Introductory. 

„ II.  Mon-Khmer  and  Tai  families. 

„ III.  Part  I.  Tibeto-Burman  languages  of  Tibet  and  North  Assam. 

„ II.  Bodo,  Naga,  and  Kachin  groups  of  the  Tibeto-Burman  lan- 
guages. 

„ III.  Kuki-Chin  and  Burma  groups  of  the  Tibeto-Burman  lan- 
guages. 

„ IY.  Munda  and  Dravidian  languages. 

,,  V.  Indo- Aryan  languages,  Eastern  group. 

Part  I.  Bengali  and  Assamese. 

„ II.  Biliari  and  Oriya. 

„ VI.  Indo- Aryan  languages,  Mediate  group  (Eastern  Hindi). 

„ VII.  Indo- Aryan  languages,  Southern  group  (Marathi). 

„ VIII.  Indo-Aryan  languages,  North-Western  group  (Sindhi  and  Lahnda),  and 
the  Piiiacha  languages. 

„ IX.  Indo-Aryan  languages,  Central  group. 

Part  I.  Western  Hindi  and  Panjabi. 

„ IT.  Rajasthani  and  Gujarati. 

„ III.  Bhil  languages,  KhandeSi,  etc. 

„ IV.  Pahari  and  Gujuri. 

„ X.  Eranian  family. 

„ XI.  “ Gipsy  ” languages  and  supplement. 


CONTENTS, 


SYSTEM  OF  TRANSLITERATION 


PAOK 

ix 


PAHART. 

GENERAL  INTRODUCTION- 

Name  of  tlio  Language  and  where  spoken  , , 1 

The  throe  main  divisions  % . I 

Number  of  speakers  , . ..1 

Gujurl ......  1 

The  Language 2 

The  Kbasa  Tribe , 2 

Tho  Gurjaras 8 

General  Results 14 

Results  on  the  Language  ,.14 

Gujurl  and  Rajasthani  1» 

KHAS-KURA  OB  NAIl’ALl 17 

W here  spoken 17 

Name  of  Languago  .....  # 18 

Dialects  ••«...  ...  ..•*«...  18 

Number  of  speakers  19 

Literature 2n 

Authorities  ......  ...........  20 

Grammar 21 

Alphabet  # # ....  21 

Pronunciation 21 

Accidence  .......  ....«».»  23 

Specimens 56 

P ALlVi  Diamjct 75 

List  of  Standard  Words  and  Sbntbncks  . 81 

CENTRAL  PAITARl H>1 

Whore  spoken  ...............  HU 

Tho  speakers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . .lnl 

Languages  of  the  Group  ......  ' . .......  102 

Central  Paliap  and  Rajasthani  . • . lull 

KUMAUNl . 108 

Where  spoken  108 

Name  of  Language 108 

The  speakers  lUS 

Origin  of  the  Language  . . , 108 

Dialocts  and  number  of  speakers  • , . . 100 

Literature  ......««  ,•••..**  Ill 

Authorities  . 112 

Grammar  of  Standard  Dialect 112 

Specimens  . • • ....  .........  158 

KiiaspabjiyA  1 8) 

P H AT.D  A.  K (Ypi  YA  .................  202 

Pacdhai 20  a 

KumadnI  of  Naini  Tal ...  218 



CHArOAUKUIYA  ....  . . • ■ 227 

GakoOix  . ...  2ji; 

Danpubiya  . .........  284 


CONTENTS 


KUMAUNT— «omtd. 

SCE1YALI  

Ashot  I • • • • •••••« 

SlBALl  • • • • • • • • 

JoHlBl  • • • • • • • • • 

Kumauni-English  Vocabulary  

E n gli  sh*Kumaum  Vocabulary 

GAflHWALl 

Where  spoken • • 

Dialects  and  Number  of  Speakers 

Literature  • 

Authorities  , 

Grammar  of  Standard  Dialect  • » • • . 

Specimens  • .•••«•  • 

RAthi  ob  RaTHWAU 


BadhanI  » 

Dasaulya  • • • 

MIjh-Kumaiya 

NaOITBIYA 

Salani 

Tbbbt  Ga^hwalt  ob  Ganoapabiya  .... 
List  ok  Standard  Words  and  Phrases  in  Chntbal  Pa  har! 

WESTERN  PA II A?. I 

Where  spoken  

The  speakers  ....... 

Groups  of  Dialects 

Written  character  ....  ... 

Pronunciation  ........ 


Declension 

Adjectives 

Pronouns 

Conjugation 

Authorities 


JATJNSARI  .... 

Written  character  . . 

Accidence  . • , 

Specimens 

Jaunsftri-English  Vocabulary 
English-  Jaunsftri  Vooabulary 

SIRMAURl  .... 

Where  spoken  • 

Name  of  Language  . 

Sirmur  Dialects  • . , 

J ubbal  Dialects  • 

Authorities  and  Literature  • 
Sibmaubi  Dharthi 

Written  character  • , 

Accidence  „ . , 

Specimens 

Sibmaubi  GibIpabi 
Vocabulary 

Accidence  . . , 

Specimens 

Bi§Sau  . . 

Specimen  . , 

J3AGBATI  .... 

Accidence  • • , 

Specimens 


466 

466 

* 466 

466 

• 466 

467 


CONTENTS, 


BAGHATI  — contd . 

Patiala.  Baghati , 

Pinjaur  Dialocts * . 

Dhararapur  Dialect 

List  of  Standard  Words  and  Phrases  in  JaunsIbt,  Sibmauri,  and  BaghIji 

THE  KlCTHALl  GROUP 

Kl&THALl 

Vocabulary 

Accidence  ...  .....  •*.••• 

Specimens , 

Patiala  KiOjhalI 

Specimens  . . . . ^ # 

HandOrI 

Accidence 

Specimen 

Simla  Sibaji 

Accidence . 

Specimen 

Baraht 

Accidence . • . 

Specimen  

fioRlcHOLl  

Vocabulary  ........  . 

Aocidence 

Specimen 

ElXNl  . . . W 

Specimen 

Kochi  

Written  character 

Accidence 

Vocabulary  « 

Specimen  ...  ........ 

List  of  Standard  Won  ns  and  Phrases  for  thb  KiOthali  Group  . 

THE  SATLAJ  GROUP 

SoDdCHl  It  . , • . 

Vocabulary  ............ 

Accidence 

Specimen  ........  . 

List  of  Standard  Words  and  Phrases  in  Sodochi  .... 

THE  KULU  GROUP 

Kului  

Special  peculiarities 

Authorities 

Written  character 

Vocabulary  

Accidence 

Specimens  

Inner  Siuaji 

Vocabulary 

Accidence  ■<••••»•  • • • • 

Specimen  



Accidenoe 

List  of  Standard  Words  and  Phrasbs  for  the  Kulu  Gbouf 

MAHDI  GROUP 

Where  spoken 

Dialects  • ...  ...... 

Humber  of  speakers  ......  ..... 

Vocabulary  ' . .... 


vii 

FAGS 

. 513 

514 
. 522 

529 

. 549 

550 
• 550 

559 
. 575 

582 
. 583 

586 
. 586 

588 
. 593 

593 
. 596 

599 

599 

600 

. 602 
602 

. 602 
605 

. 610 
611 
. 613 

614 
. 615 

616 

. 618 
627 
647 
647 
. 648 

652 
, 658 

663 

. 669 

670 
, 670 

670 
. 670 

672 
. 673 

680 
66S 
688 
. 689 

696 
. 7ul 
701 
. 705 

715 
. 715 

715 
. 715 

716 


▼iii 


CONTENTS, 


PAGB 


MAN  1)1  GROUP  -contd. 

Written  character  . 

Position  as  regards  the  Simla  and  Ktilu  Dialects  . 

Man  dk  \LT 

Accidcnco 

Specimens 

Man  pis  a lI  FahakI 

Specimens 




Specimen 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

List  of  Standard  Words  and  Phrases  for  thk  Mandi 

Group 

• 

• 

• 

e 

• 

• 

0 ham  kali 

• 

• 

• 

. 

• 

Dialects 

• 

• 

• 

• 

e 

Position  in  regard  to  neighbouring  Languages  . 

• 

• 

• 

Authorities 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Standard  Dialect 

• • 

• 

• 

• 

Written  and  printed  characters  ..... 

• 

• 

• 

• 

e 

Vocabulary 

• • 

• 

t 

• 

• 

Aeeideiico 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Specimen 

• 

• 

• 

Gadi  

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

The  speakers  ...••• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

« 

Peculiarities  of  the  Dialect  ..... 

. 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Vocabulary 

• • 

• 

• 

a 

• 

. 

. 

• 

• 

. 

• 

. 

• 

718 

720 

721 
721 
730 
746 
748 
767 
758 
769 

769 
709 

770 

771 

772 

772 

773 
776 
785 
792 
792 

792 

793 
795 


Accidence  4 9b 

Specimens 804 

SET 

General  ...........  817 

Vocabulary 817 

Written  character  . . • 821 

Accidence  821 

Specimens 630 

Pangwai.t 810 

General  ................  810 

Vocabulary  ................  846 

Accidence  ...•••••.••••••*.  818 

Specimen 855 

Liar  Ob’  Standard  Words  and  Phrases  in  thk  Chameali  Dialects S02 


BIT  A DRAW  All  G ROUP 88 1 

General  .......  ......••••881 

Bhadraw  vnT  and  BjtalksT 888 

Padart .<••••!  903 

List  ok  Standard  Words  and  Phrases  fob  the  Bhadbawaii  Grout  . . 915 


GUJURI. 


General  .................  925 

Gujurl  and  Mewati • . . , 925 

Gujnrl  of  Hazara  ......  930 

Gujuri  of  Swat  . 041 

Gujurl  of  Kashmir  ................  953 

Gujari  of  the  sub -montane  Punjab  ............  959 

960 

Gurdaspur  961 

Kangm  902 

llosbiarpnr  . . . . t . 963 

List  of  Standard  Words  and  Phrases  in  thh  various  Forms  of  GujubI 964 

MAPS. 

Map  illustrating  the  Central  Faha  I Languages  and  Dialects  . . . . * . .To  face  page  101 

Map  illustrating  the  Western  Pahari  Languages  and  Dialects .To  face  page  373 


LINGUISTIC  SURVEY  OF  INDIA. 


SYSTEM  OF  TRANSLITERATION  ADOPTED. 


A. — For  tho  Deva-nagarl  alphabet,  and  others  related  to  it — 


yTd, 

Ti, 

i * 

, ^ U, 

M fit 

Ve, 

Ve,  $ 

ai, 

0,  b. 

an. 

Vi  ka 

kha 

ga 

y gha 

ha 

V cha 

?g  cbha 

*ja 

Vfi  jha 

na 

Z (a 

Z (ha 

y 

da 

<£  dlia 

na 

7T  la 

V tha 

V da 

V ( lha 

•T  na 

V pa 

Xfi-pha 

V 

ba 

bha 

w 

ma 

v ya 

X ra 

la 

^ ra 

or  vea 

H 6a 

Vsha 

y sa 

y 

ha 

y fa 

7f  rha 

35  la 

acy  lha 

Visarga  (:)  is  represented  by  h,  thus  srjtvj  : kramasah.  Anuswdra  (*)  is  represented 
by  m,  thus  fyy  sithh,  varnS.  In  Bengali  and  some  other  languages  it  is  pronounced 
uy,  and  is  then  written  jig  ; tlius  bang  6a.  Anundsika  or  Chandra-bindn  is  re- 
presented by  tho  sign  ~ over  the  letter  nasalized,  thus  if  tnS. 

B. — For  the  Arabic  alphabet,  as  adapted  to  Hindostani — 


1 

a,  etc.  r 

j 

0 

d 

; 

r 

s J" 

s 

t 

C 

V 

b 5 

ch 

3 

d 

n 

) 

r 

A 

o- 

ah 

t 

ilk 

o 

V 

P r_ 

h 

3 

AT 

A/ 

j 

z 

u° 

? 

uJ 

f 

o 

1 t 

t 

ich 

* 

; 

£h 

? 

6 

y 

& 

]» 

i 

k 

t£> 

§ 

li 

* 

• * 

L J 

9 

J l 

C m 

when  representing  anundsika 
in  Deva-n5gari,  by  " oyer 
nasalized  vowel. 

j w or  v 

* h 

v. S y>  etc. 

Tanwin  is  represented  by  n,  tiius  \jyi  fauran.  Alif-e  inaqmra  is  represented 
by  q; — thus  da'wq. 

In  tho  Arabic  qjiaracter,  a final  silent  h is  not  transliterated, --thus  banda. 

When  pronounced,  it  is  written, — thus  gnndh. 

Vowels  when  not  pronounced  at  the  end  of  a word,  are  not  written  in  translitera- 
tion. Thus  ban,  not  bana.  When  not  pronounced  in  the  middle  of  a word  or  only 
slightly  pronounced  in  the  middle  or  at  the  end  of  a word,  they  are  written  in  small 
characters  above  the  line.  Thus  (Hindi)  dvkh'fd,  pronounced  ddkhtb ; (Kash- 
miri) ts"h ; ji  knr*,  pronounced  kor ; (Bihari)  dekhath'. 


X 


C — Special  letters  peculiar  to  special  languages  will  bo  dealt  with  under  the  head 
of  the  languages  concerned.  In  the  meantime  the  following  more  important  instances 
may  be  noted : — 

(a)  The  is  sound  found  in  Marathi  (w),  Pushto  (^),  Kashmiri  w),  Tibetan 

(i),  and  elsewhere,  is  represented  by  (a.  So,  the  aspirato  of  that  sound 
is  represented  by  (ah. 

(b)  The  dz  sound  found  in  Marathi  (w),  Pushto  {$■),  and  Tibetan  (#)  is  repre- 

sented by  <h,  and  its  aspirate  by  dgli . 

(c)  Kashmiri  ^ (sr)  is  represented  by  n. 

(d)  Sindhi  Western  Panjabi  (and  elsewhere  on  the  N.-W.  Frontier)  f,  and 

Pushto  j or  ^ are  represented  by  n. 

(e)  The  following  are  letters  peculiar  to  Pushto 

& / ; £ Is  or  dgt  according  to  pronunciation  ; 4 d ; j,  r ; A sh  or  g,  accord- 
ing to  pronunciation  ; ah  or  kh,  according  to  pronunciation  ; J or  ^ n. 

( f)  I ho  following  are  letters  peculiar  to  Sindhi  : — 

& th  ; ^ ( ; ^ (h  ; j;  ph  ; ^ jj  ; *=- jh  ; - chh  ; 

k n ; <3  dli  ; v>  d ; o t id  ; o dh  ; £=>  k ; kb  ; y gg  ; gh  ; 

'—t  n ; $ w. 

D.— Certain  sounds,  which  are  not  provided  for  above,  occur  in  transcribing 
languages  which  have  no  alphabet,  or  in  writing  phonetically  (as  distinct  from  transli- 
terating) languages  (such  as  Bengali)  whose  spelling  does  not  represent  the  spoken  sounds. 
The  principal  of  these  are  the  following : — 


A 

a , 

represents  the  sound  of  the  a in  all. 

)> 

91 

„ a in  hat. 

e, 

91 

11 

„ e in  met. 

6, 

JJ 

IJ 

„ o in  hot. 

e. 

13 

91 

„ e in  the  French  etait. 

o. 

99 

99 

„ o in  the  first  o in  jvromote. 

d. 

99 

19 

„ 6 in  the  German  achon. 

ii, 

91 

19 

„ w in  the  „ niiihe. 

tk, 

19 

19 

„ th  in  think. 

dh, 

19 

11 

„ th  in  this . 

'the  semi -consonants  peculiar  to  the  Munda  languages  are  indicated  by  an  apos- 
trophe. Thus  k\  /’,  p\  and  so  on. 

E.—  When  it  is  necessary  to  mark  an  accented  syllable,  the  acute  accent  is  used. 
Thus  in  (KhOwar)  dssistai,  he  Mas,  the  acute  accent  shows  that  the  accent  falls  on  the 
first,  and  not,  as  might  be  expected,  on  the  second  syllable. 


Substitute  the  following  for  the  Errata  already  mned : — ■ 

ERRATA  IN  “LINGUISTIC  SURVEY  OP  INDIA,"  VOLUME  IX, 

PART  IV. 

Pago  356,  No.  35,  Col.  2,  read  • Akhi.' 

Page  618,  L.  4 from  the  bottom,  insert  sf  at  end  of  line. 

Page  664,  No.  75,  Col.  2,  read  • fff.»  No.  95,  Col.  2 (Col.  4 of  page),  read  • A.’ 

Page  806,  L.  3,  for  read 

Page  823,  L.  17,  read  * maw’ 

Page  968,  No.  54,  Col.  4,  for  * N8y<Jo,’  read  ^Na^a.' 


Pahari. 

■ 


The  word  ‘ Pahari  * means  ‘ of  or  belonging  to  the  mountains,’  and  is  specially 
Name  of  the  Language  and  applied  to  the  groups  of  languages  spoken  in  the  sub-Bima- 
where  spoken.  layan  hills  extending  from  the  Bhadrawah,  north  of  the 

Panjab,  to  the  eastern  parts  of  Nepal.  To  its  North  and  East  various  Himalayan  Tibeto- 
Burman  languages  are  spoken.  To  its  west  there  are  Aryan  languages  connected  with 
Kashmiri  and  Western  Panjabi,  and  to  its  south  it  has  the  Aryan  languages  of  the  Panjab 
and  the  Gangetic  plain,  vis.: — in  order  from  West  to  East,  Panjabi,  Western  Hindi, 
Eastern  Hindi  and  Biliari. 


The  Pah5,ri  languages  fall  into  three  main  groups.  In  the  extreme  East  there  is 

Khas-Kura  or  Eastern  Pahari,  commonly  called  Naipali,  the 

The  three  main  Divisions.  . , , . 1,  , , 

Aryan  language  spoken  in  Is  opal.  Next,  m Kumaon  and 
Garhwal,  we  have  the  Central  Pahari  languages,  Kumauni  and  Garhwali.  Finally  in 
the  West  we  have  the  Western  Pahari  languages  spoken  in  Jaunsar-Bawar,  the  Simla 
Hill  States,  Kulu,  Mandi  and  Suket,  Chamba,  and  Western  Kashmir. 

As  no  census  particulars  are  available  for  Nepal  we  are  unable  to  state  how  many 

speakers  of  Eastern  Pahari  there  are  in  its  proper  home. 

Number  of  speakers.  Many  persons  (especially  Gurkha  soldiers)  speaking  the 

language  reside  in  British  India.  In  1891  the  number  counted  in  British  India  was 
24,262,  but  these  figures  are  certainly  incorrect.  In  1901  the  number  was  143,721. 
Although  the  Survey  is  throughout  based  on  the  Census  figures  of  1891,  an  exception 
will  he  made  in  the  case  of  Eastern  Pahari,  and  those  for  1901  will  be  taken,  as  in  this 
case* they  will  more  nearly  represent  the  actual  state  of  affairs  at  the  time  of  the  preceding 
census. 

Central  and  Western  Pahari  are  both  spoken  entirely  in  tracts  which  were  subject 
to  the  Census  operations  of  1891,  and  these  figures  may  he  taken  as  being  very  fairly 
correct.  The  figures  for  the  number  of  Pahari  speakers  in  British  India  are  therefore 
as  follows : — 

Eastern  Paha?I  (1901)  143,721 

Central  Pahari  (1891) 1,107,612 

Western  Pahari  (1891)  • . , . • • • • • 816,181 


Total  . 2,067,514 

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  these  figures  only  refer  to  British  India,  and  do  not 
include  the  many  speakers  of  Eastern  Pahari  who  inhabit  Nepal. 

To  these  speakers  of  Western  Pahari  must  be  added  the  language  of  the  Gujurs  who 

wander  over  the  hills  of  Hazara,  Murree,  Kashmir,  and  Swat 
and  its  vicinity.  Except  in  Kashmir  and  Hazara,  these  have 
never  been  counted.  In  Kashmir,  in  the  year  1901,  the  number  of  speakers  of  Gujurl 
was  returned  at  126,849  and  in  Hazara,  in  1891,  at  83,167,  and  a mongrel  form  of  the 
language,  much  mixed  with  Hindustani  and  Panjabi  is  spoken  by  226,949  Gujars  of  tho 

VOL.  I,  PART  IV.  B 


2 


pahArL 


submontane  districts  of  the  Panjab,  Gujrat,  Gurdaspur,  Kangra,  and  Hosliiarpur.  To 
make  a very  rough  guess  we  may  therefore  estimate  the  total  number  of  Gujuri  speakers 
at,  say,  600,000,  or  put  the  total  number  of  Pahari  speakers  including  Gujuri  at  about 


2,670,000. 

It  is  a remarkable  fact  that,  although  Pahari  has  little  oonnoxion  with  the  Panjabi, 

Western  and  Eastern  Hindi,  and  Biliarl  spoken  immediately 
The  Language.  |fs  south,  it  shows  manifold  traces  of  intimate  relationship 

with  the  languages  of  liajputana.  In  order  to  explain  this  fact  it  is  necessary  to  consider 
at  some  length  the  question  of  the  population  that  speaks  it.  This  naturally  leads  to  the 
history  of  the  Khavas  and  the  Gurjaras  of  Sanskrit  literature.  The  Sanskrit  KhaSa  and 
Gurjaro  arc  represented  in  modern  Indian  tongues  by  the  words  Kims,  and  Gujar,  Gujar 
or  Gujur  respectively.  The  mass  of  the  Aryan-speaking  population  of  the  Himalayan 
tract  in  which  Pahari  is  spoken  belongs,  in  the  West,  to  the  Kanet  and,  in  the  East,  to 
the  Klias  caste.  We  shall  see  that  the  Kanets  themselves  are  closely  connected  with  the 
Khavas,  and  that  one  of  their  two  sub-divisions  bears  that  name.  The  other  (the  Kao) 
sub-division,  as  wo  shall  see  below,1 * 1 believo  to  be  of  Gurjara  descent. 

Sanskrit  literature  contains  frequent®  references  to  a tribe  whose  name  is  usually 

spelt  Khasa  (*?pg),  with  variants  such  as  Khasa  (*re), 
The  Kha«a  Tnbe.  Khasba  (?pi),  and  Kha6lra  (*§vrtT).3  The  earlier  we  trace 

notices  regarding  them,  the  further  north-west  we  find  them. 

Before  citing  the  older  authorities  it  may  bo  well  to  recall  a legeud  regarding  a 
woman  named  Khasa  of  which  the  most  accessible  version  will  bo  found  in  the  Vishnu 
Purana,4 *  but  which  also  occurs  in  many  other  similar  works.  The  famous  KaSyapa,  to 
whom  elsewhere  is  attributed  the  origin  of  the  country  of  Kashmir,  had  numerous  wives. 
Of  these  KrodhavaSa  was  the  ancestress  of  the  cannibal  PiSita^Is  or  Pi  dachas  and  Khasa 
of  the  Yakshas  and  Rakshasas.  These  Yakshas  were  also  cannibals,6  and  so  wer®  tbe 
Rakshasas. 


In  Buddhist  literature  the  Yakshas  correspond  to  the  PiSachas  of  Hindu  legend.® 
Another  legend  makes  the  Pisaclms  the  children  of  Kapisa,  and  there  was  an  ancient 
town  called  Kapi&i  at  the  southern  foot  of  the  Hindu  Kush.7  That  the  Pi&ichas  were 


1 Sec  p.  13,  note 

* Authorities  on  Kanet  and  K has  : — 

Cunningham,  Sib  hw.Xkxv\wi-— Archeological  Survey  of  India , Vol.  XIV,  pp.  125  fF. 

Ibbetbox,  Sib  Denzil,— Outli nes  ofPaujdb  Ethnography  (Calcutta,  1883),  p.  268. 

Atkinson,  E.  T.,< — The  Himalayan  Districts  of  the  North - Western  Provinces  of  India , Yol.  II  (forming  Yol.  XI 
of  the  Gazetteer,  XoVth- Western  Provinces),  Allahabad,  1884,  pp.  268-70,  376-81,  430-12,  etc.  (nee  Index). 

Stein,  Sir  Aubel, — Translation  of  the  Rdja-Taruhgini,  London,  1000,  Note  to  i,  817;  II,  430,  and  elsewhere  (see 
Tndcx). 

Hodgson,  13.  H®r—  Origin  and  Classification  of  the  Military  Tribes  of  Ndpdl.  Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of 
Bengal,  II  (1833),  pp.  217  II'.  Reprinted  on  pp.  37  fF.  of  Part  II  of  Essays  on  the  Languages , Literature 
and  Jieligion  of  JV/pdl  and  Tibet  (London,  1871). 

Vansittabt,  E., — The  Tribes,  Clans,  amt  ('astes)of  Nepal,  Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  LXIlf 
(1804),  Part  I,  pp.  213  fF. 

Lfivi,  Stlvain,  Le  NtpfJ,  Paris,  1905.  Vol.  I,  pp.  257  ff.,  261-267,  276  fF.;  Yol.  II,  pp.  216  ff.,  etc.  (sec-  Index,. 

8 E.g,  Mahabhftrata,  VT,  375 : — Daraddh  Kdtmirdk  ....  Khatirdh,  Dards,  Kfishralrls,  and  Khaftias. 

Regarding  the  equution  of  the  last  named  with  Kii«4as,  of.  Wilson,  Vishnu  Purdna , II,  186. 

* Wilson,  II,  74  ff 

1 Bhfigavata  Purftna,  III,  xix,  21.  They  wanted  to  eat  Brahma  himself  ! 

* So  Kalhana,  lldjatars.hytni,  i.  181,  equates  Yaksha  and  Pifecha.  See  note  on  the  passage  in  Stein’s  translation. 

7 Thomas  in  J.  R.  A.  it.,  js»06,  p.  46). 


INTRODUCTION. 


3 


also  said  to  be  cannibals  is  well  known,  and  the  traditions  about  ancient  cannibalism  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  the  Hindu  Kush  have  been  described  elsewhere  by  the  present 
writer.'  Here  we  have  a series  of  legends  connecting  the  name  Khasa  with  cannibalism 
practised  in  the  mountains  in  the  extreme  north-west  of  India,  and  to  this  we  may  add 
Pliny’s  remark2  about  the  same  locality, — ‘ next  the  Attacori  (Uttarakurus)  are  the 
nations  of  the  Thuni  and  the  Porcari  ; then  come  the  Casiri  (KhaSiras),  an  Indian  people 
who  look  towards  the  Scythians  and  feed  on  human  flesh.’ 

Numerous  passages  in  Sanskrit  literature  give  further  indications  as  to  the  locality 
of  the  Khaias.  The  Mahabharata*  gives  a long  account  of  the  various  rarities  presented 
to  Yudhishthira  by  the  kings  of  the  earth.  Amongst  them  are  those  that  rule  over  the 
nations  that  dwell  near  the  river  Sailoda  where  it  flows  between  the  mountains  of  Mf;m 

and  Mandara,  i.e.  in  Western  Tibet.4  These  an;  the  Khasas the 

Paradas  (?  the  people  beyond  the  Indus),  the  Kulindas6  and  the  Tanganas.®  Especially 
interesting  is  it  to  note  that  the  tribute  these  people  brought  was  Tibetan  gold-dust,  the 
famous  pipilika,  or  ant-gold,  recorded  by  Herodotus7  and  many  other  classical  writers,  as 
being  dug  out  of  the  earth  by  ants. 

In  another  passage*  the  Khasas  are  mentioned  together  with  the  KaSmiras  (Kash- 
miris), the  inhabitants  of  Urasa  (the  modern  Panjab  district  of  Hazara),  the  Pi&ichas, 
Kambojas"  (a  tribe;  of  the;  Hindu  Kush),  the;  Daradas  (or  Hards)  and  the  Sakas  (Scyth- 
ians), as  be;ing  conquered  by  Krishna. 

In  another  passage  Huh&isana  leads  a forlorn  hope  consisting  erf  $akas,10  Kambojas,1'' 
Bahlikas  (inhabitants  of  Balkli),  Yavanas  (Greeks),  Paradas,1"  Kulingas  (a  tribe  on  the 
banks  of  the  Satlaj11),  the  Tanganas,10  Ambashthas  (of  the  (?)  middle  Panjab,  probably  the 
Ambastai  of  Ptolemy12),  Pi&ichas,  Barbarians,  and  mountaineers.'3  Amongst  them," 

i .1.  R.  A.  S„  1905,  pp.  286  ff. 

5 XVI,  17 McCrindle, — Ancient  Tndia  as  described  in  Classical  Literature , p.  113.  Is  it  possible  tlmt  ‘Thuni  and 
Korean ' represent 1 llQna  ami  Tukhara  ' ? 

s II,  1822  ff. 

4 II,  1858.  Cf.  Pargiter,  MiirkandSya  Purina,  p.  351. 

I Vide  post. 

• The  Tonuntfot  of  Ptolemy.  The  most  northern  of  all  the  tribos  on  the  Ganges.  They  lived  noar  Badrlnlth.  Hero  was 
the  district  of  Tanganapura,  mentioned  in  coppor-plafo  grants  preserved  at  the  tompleof  Pandukl&vara  near  Badrinfith  (Atkin- 
son, op.  cit.  p.  357). 

1 III,  104. 

• VII,  309. 

• According  to  Yaska's  Nirukta  (II,  i,  4),  the  Klmboja*  did  not  speak  pure  Sanskrit,  but  a dialectic  form  of  that  language 
As  an  example,  ho  quotes  the  K&mhoja  $aoati%  he  goes,  a verb  which  is  not.  used  in  Sanskrit.  Now  this  verb  fava/i,  although 
not  Sanskrit,  happens  to  bo  good  Eraiiian,  and  occurs  in  the  A vesta,  with  this  meaning  of  4 to  go/  Wo  therefore  from  tlis 
ono  oxamplo  learn  that  the  Kambdjas  of  the  Hindi!  Kush  spoke  an  Aryan  language,  which  was  closely  connected  with 
ancient  Sanskrit,  but  was  not  pure  Sanskrit,  and  which  included  in  its  vocabulary  words  belonging  to  Eraninn  langrages. 
We  may  further  noto  that  Yaska  does  not  consider  the  KSmbojas  to  bo  Aryans.  IFo  says  this  word  is  used  in  the  language 
of  the  K&mbdjas,  while  ouly  its  (according  to  his  account)  derivative,  toM,  a corpse,  is  used  in  the  language  of  the  Aryas. 

Again  in  the  same  passago  Yaska  states  that  * the  northerners 9 use  the  word  dttfra  to  mean  ‘ a sickle.’  Xow  we  shall  sec 
that  in  Western  Pahlyi  and  in  tin*  Pisacha  languages  generally,  tr  continually  becomes  ch  or  sit.  Tlius  the  Sanskrit  word 
putra , a son,  becomes  puck  or  push  in  Shinfi.  We  may  expect  a similar  change  to  occur  in  regard  to  the  word  dVru.  This 
word  actually  occurs  in  Persian  in  the  form  ddst  but  the  only  relation  of  it  that  lias  been  noted  in  the  Pi  dacha  dialects  is  the 
Klshxnlr!  dr6t ",  which  is  really  the  samo  word  as  Jdtra , with  metathesis  of  the  r. 

10  Sec  above. 

II  I.e if  they  are  the  some  as  the  Kuliugas  of  Mark.  P.,  LVII,  37. 

lJ  VII,  1,  66. 

« VII,  4818. 

14  VII,  4848. 

VOL.  I,  PART  IV.  B * 


4 pahArI. 

armed  with  swords  and  pikes  were  Daradas,1  Tanganas,1  Khavas,  Lampakas  (now  Kafirs 
of  the  Hindu  Kush),2  and  Pnlindas8. 

TYe  have  already  seen  that  the  Kha&is  were  liable  to  the  imputation  of  cannibalism. 
In  another  passage  of  the  Mahahharata,  where  Karna  describes  the  Bahikas  in  the  8th 
hook,  they  are  again  given  a had  character.1  Whore  the  six  rivers,  the  Satadru  (Satlaj), 
Vipasa  (Bias),  Travail  (ltavi),  Cliandmhhaga  (Ohinab),  Vitasta  (Jehlam),  and  the 
Sindliu  (Indus)  issue  from  the  hills,  is  the  region  of  the  Arattas,  a land  whose  religion 
has  been  destroyed.6  There  live  the  Bahikas  (the  Outsiders)  who  never  perform  sacri- 
fices and  whose  religion  has  been  utterly  destroyed.  They  eat  any  kind  of  food  from 
filthy  vessels,  drink  the  milk  of  sheep,  camels,  and  asses,  and  have  many  bastards.  They 
are  the  offspring  of  two  Pisaehas  who  lived  in  the  river  VipaSa  (Bias).  They  are 
without  the  Veda  and  without  knowledge.  The  Prasthalas,"  the  Madras,7  the  Gan- 
dliaras  (a  people  of  the  north-west  Panjab,  the  classical  Gandarii),  the  people  named 
Arattas,  the  Klia&is,  the  Vasatis,  the  Siudhus  and  Sauviras  (two  tribes  dwelling  on 
the  Indus),  arc  almost  as  despicable.* 

In  the  supplement  to  the  Mahahharata,  known  as  the  IlnrivamSa,  we  also  find  refer- 
ences to  the  Kha&ts.  Thus  it  is  said1*  that  King  Sagara  conquered  the  whole  earth,  and 
a list  is  given  of  certain  tribes.  The  first  two  are  the  Kha£as  and  the  Tukharas.  The 
latter  were  Iranian  inhabitants  of  Balkh  and  Badakhshan,  the  Tokharistan  of  Musal- 
man  writers. 

Tn  another  place,10  the  Harivnmga  tolls  how  an  army  of  Greeks  (Yavanas)  attacked 
Krishna  when  he  was  at  Mathura.  In  the  army  were  Sakas  (Scythians),  Tukharas 11 
Daradas  (Dards),  Paradas,11  Tanganas,11  Khasas,  Pahlavas  (Parthians),  and  other  barbar- 
ians (Mleehelihas)  of  tin.'  Himalaya. 

Many  references  to  the  Khn&ts  occur  in  the  PurSnas.  The  most  accessible  are 
those  in  the  Vishnu  and  Markandeva  Puranas,  which  have  translations  Avith  good  indexes. 
I shall  rely  principally  upon  these,  but  shall  also  note  a few  others  that  I have  collected. 

The  Vishnu  Purana12  tells  the  story  of  Khasa,  the  wife  of  Ka^yapa,  Avith  her  sons 
Yaksha  and  Kakshasa  and  her  Pisaeha  stepson  already  given.  It  also  tells  (IV,  iii)  the 

1 Set*  above. 

* Mark.  P.,  LV1I,  40,  and  Pargitor’s  nolo  thereon. 

2 Tli civ  wore  two  Pulindas,  one  in  the  south  and  another  in  tbe  north.  See  TTall  on  Wilson,  Vishpu  V.f  Vol.  II,  p.  169 

4 VJII,  3032  IT.  A elan  of  tbe  Bahikas  is  the  Jartika*  (2031),  who  perhaps  represent  the  modern  Jafts.  If  they  do 

the  passage  is  the  oldest  mention  of  tbe  Jafts  in  Indian  literature.  # 

I Note  that  their  religion  has  been  destroyed.  In  otrer  words  they  formerly  followed  Indo-Arvan  rites,  but  had 

abandoned  them.  They  are  not  represented  as  infidels  ab  initio . In  this  passage  the  Aranas  are  mentioned  in  verses  2066 
2001,  2061,  2068,  2009,  2070,  2081,  2100  and  2110.  The  name  is  usually  interpreted  >i«  meaning  'a  people  without  kings  ** 
hut  this  is  a doubtful  explanation.  9 

6 Locality  not  identified. 

7 In  the  Panjab,  eloso  to  the  Ambashthas  (see  above).  Their  capital  was  Sakala,  the  Sagalu  of  Ptolemy.  In  verse  2049 
of  tho  passage  quoted,  w e have  a song  .-elebrating  the  luxury  of  Sdkala.— ‘ “ When  shall  I next  sing  the  songs  of  tho  Bahikas 
in  this  Sfikala  town,  aftor  having  feasted  on  cow's  flesh,  and  drunk  strong  wins  P When  shall  I again,  dressed  in  (ho  gar- 
ments. in  tho  company  of  fair-complexiom-d  large  nixed  wom-m,  eat  much  mutton,  pork,  beef,  and  the  flesh  of  fowls,  asses 
and  camels?  Tl.cy  who  oat  not  mutton  live  in  vain.''  So  do  tbe  inhabitants,  drunk  with  wine,  sing.  How  can  virtue  be 
fonnd  among  such  a people?  a 

* ^le..tm'e  th.'*1t  lhe  ^taPntha  Brtlmttpa  was  written,  the  Buhikas  were  not  altogether  outside  the  Aiyan  pale.  It  is 
thero  vii,  iii,  8)  said  that  they  worship  Agni  under  the  name  of  Bhava 

* ?m. 

*D  6440. 

II  See  above, 

“ I,  r-i 


INTRODUCTION. 


5 


story  of  Sahara,  but  does  not  mention  the  Kha£as  in  this  connexion,  nor  does  the  Bha- 
gavata  Purana  in  the  corresponding  passage  (IX,  viii).  The  Vayu  Purana,  on  the  other  ‘ 
hand,  in  telling  the  story  mentions  the  Khavas,  hut  coupling  them  with  three  other 
tribes.  Of  these  three,  one  belongs  to  the  north-west,  and  the  other  two  to  the  south  of 
India,  so  Unit  we  cannot  glean  from  it  anything  decisive  as  to  the  locality  of  the  KhaSas. 

A remarkable  passage  in  the  Bliagavata  Purana  (II,  iv,  18)  gives  a list  of  a number 
of  outcast  tribes,  which  have  recovered  salvation  by  adopting  the  religion  of  Krishna. 
The  tribes  belong  to  various  parts  of  India,  but  the  last  four  are  the  Abhiras,1  the 
Kankas,'  the  Yavanas,  and  the  Khasas  (v.  1.  Sakas).  Here  again  we  have  the  Khasas 
mentioned  among ‘north-western  folk. 

Again  in  the  story  of  Bharata,  the  same  Purana  tells  how  that  monarch  conquered 
(IX,  xx,  29)  a number  of  the  barbarian  (Mlechchha)  kings,  who  had  no  Brahmans. 
These  were  the  kings  of  the  Kiratas,  Hunas,  Yavanas,  Andhras,  Kankas,  Kha&ts,  and 
$nkas.  The  list  is  a mixed  one,  but  the  last  three  are  grouped  together  and  point  to  the 
north-west. 

The  Markaudeya  Purana  (LVIT,  56)  mentions  the  Khasas  as  a mountain  (probably 
Himalayan)  tribe.  In  three  other  places  (LVTII,  7, 12  and  51)  they  have  apparently, 
with  the  Sakas  and  other  tribes,  penetrated  to  the  north-east  of  India.  This  would 
appear  to  show  that  by  the  time  of  the  composition  of  this  work  the  Kha&is  had  already 
reached  Nepal  and  Darjeeling,  where  they  are  still  a numerous  body.3 

We  may  close  this  group  of  authorities  by  a reference  to  the  Laws  of  Mann.  Look- 
ing at  the  KliaSas  from  the  Brahmanicai  point  of  view,  he  says  (X,  22)  that  Khasas  are 
the  offspring  of  outcast  Kshatriyas,  and  again  (X,  41),  after  mentioning  some  south 
Indian  tribes  he  says  that  Kambojas,4  Yavanas,4  Sakas,4  Paradas,4  Pahlavas,4  Chinas,® 
Kiratas,6  Daradas4  and  Khasas  are  those  who  became  outcast  through  having  neglected 
their  religious  duties,7  and,  whether  they  speak  a barbarous  (Mlechchha)  or  Aryan  lan- 
guage, are  called  Dasyus.  Here  again  we  see  the  Khavas  grouped  with  people  of  the 
north-west. 

Two  works  belonging  at  latest  to  the  6th  century  A.D.  next  claim  our  attention. 
These  are  the  Bharata  Ndtya  Sdstra  and  the  Brihat  Samliita  of  Varahamihira.  The 
former9  in  the  chapter  on  dialects  says,  ‘ The  Bahliki  language  is  the  native  tongue  of 
Northerners  and  Khasas.’  Bahliki,  as  we  have  seen  above,  is  the  language  then  spoken 
in  what  is  now  Balkh.9  Here  again  we  have  the  Kha&is  referred  to  the  north- 
west. 

1 On  tho  Indus,  the  Abiria  of  Ptolemy. 

9 Kankas  have  not  been  identified,  but  in  the  list  of  nation*  who  brought  presents  to  Yudhishthira  already  mentioned 
(Mahfibhgrata,  II,  1850)  they  arc  mentioned  together  with  the  Sakas,  Tukharas,  and  R5mas  (?  Romans),  i.e.  as  coming  from 
the  north-west. 

s Vide  post. 

4 See  above. 

6 Usually  translated  1 Chinese',  but  1 would  suggest  that  in  this  and  similar  passages,  they  are  the  great  Shin  race,  still 
surviving  in  Gilgit  and  the  vicinity. 

• At  present  mostly  in  Nepal. 

V So  KullQka. 

8 xvii,  52.  B&hlikabhdishfidichy&ndih  KhasdnUm  eka  svadMajd . I am  indebted  to  Pro2.  Konow  for  this  reference. 

8 Lakshmidhara,  a comparatively  late  Prakrit  Grammarian,  says  that  the  language  of  BShlika  (Balkh),  Kekaya  (N.  AY, 
Panjab),  Nepal,  GandhSra  (the  country  round  Peshawar),  and  Blidta  (for  Bhota,  i.e . Tibet),  together  with  certain  countries  in 
South  India  is  said  by  the  ancients  to  have  been  Pais&uhi.  See  Lassen,  Insist ulivnes  Lingua  Pracriticm,  p.  IS,  and 
Pisobel,  Qrammatik  dtr  PrakriUSprachen , § 27. 


6 


fahArI. 


Varahamiliira  mentions  Khavas  several  times.  Thus  in  one  place  (X,  12)  he  groups 
them  with  Kulutas.  (people  of  Kulu),  Tariganas  (sec?  page  3),  and  KaSmiras  (Kashmiris). 
In  his  famous  chapter  on  Geography,  he  mentions  them  twice.  In  one  place  (XIV,  6) 
lie  puts  them  in  Eastern  India,  and  in  another  (XIV,  30)  he  puts  them  in  the  north- 
east. The  latter  is  a mistake,  for  the  other  countries  named  at  the  same  time  are  certainly 
north-western.1  The  mistake  is  a curious  and  unexpected  one,  but  is  there  nevertheless, 
and  moreover  Varahamiliira  is  not  alone  in  this.  Bhattotpala,  in  his  commentary  to  the 
Brill  a tsamhi  ta,  quotes  Parasara  as  saying  the  same  thing.* 

In  the  section  dealing  with  those  men  who  are  technically  known  as  ‘swans,’3  Vara- 
hamiliira  says  that  they  are  a long-lived  race  ruling  over  the  Kliasas,  &urasenas 
(Eastern  Punjab),  Gandhara  (Peshawar  country),  and  the  Gangetic  Doab.  This  passage 
does  not  give  much  help. 

Kalhana’s  famous  chronicle  of  Kashmir,  the  Rajatarangini,  written  in  the  middle  of 
the  12th  century  A.  D.,  is  full  of  references  to  the  Klia&is,  who  were  a veritable  thorn  in 
the  side  of  (he  Kashmir  rulers.  Sir  Aurel  Stein’s  translation  of  the  work,  with  its 
excellent  index,  renders  a detailed  account  of  these  allusions  unnecessary.  It  will  be 
sufficient  to  give  Sir  Aurel  Stein’s  note  to  his  translation  of  verse  317  of  Book  I.  I have 
taken  the  liberty  of  altering  the  spelling  of  some  of  (lie  words  so  as  to  agree  with  the 
system  adopted  for  this  survey 

It  can  bo  shown  from  a careful  examination  of  all  tho  passages  that  their  (the  Khavas')  seats  were 
restricted  to  a comparatively  limited  region,  which  may  he  roughly  described  as  comprising  tho  valleys  lying 
immediately  to  the  south  and  west  of  tho  Pir  Pantsal  range,  between  tho  middle  course  of  tho  Vitasta  (or 
Jelilam)  on  tho  west,  and  Kashtavftfo  (Kishtwar)  on  tho  east. 

In  numerous  passages  of  tho  Rajataranginl  we  find  tho  rulers  of  Kajapuri,  tho  modern  Rajauri,  described 
as  * lords  of  tho  Khasas*,  and  their  troops  as  Khusas.  Proceeding  from  Kajapuri  to  tho  east  wo  have  tho 
valley  of  tho  Upper  Ans  River,  now  called  Panjgabbar  ....  as  a habitation  of  Kliasas.  Further  to  tho 
east  lies  Banasdla , the  modern  Ban'hal,  below  the  pass  of  the  same  name,  where  the  pretender  Bhikshiichara 
sought  refuge  in  the  castle  of  the  * Khasa- Lord  * Bhagika  . . . . Tho  passages  viii,  177,  1,074  show  that 
the  wholo  of  the  valley  leading  from  Ban*hal  to  the  Chandrabhaga  (Cheuab),  which  is  now  called  4 Biohhlari' 
and  which  in  tho  chronicle  hears  tho  name  of  VishaldtJ,  was  inhabited  by  Kha4as. 

Finally  we  have  evidence  of  the  latter’s  settlements  in  the  Valley  of  Khasalaya  ....  Khasalaya  is 
certainly  tho  Valley  of  Khaisal  (marked  ou  the  map  as  ‘Rasher  ’)  which  leads  from  the  Marbal  Pass  on  the 
south-oast  corner  of  Kashmir  down  to  Kishtw  ar  .... 

Turning  to  tho  west  of  Kajapuri,  we  find  a Khasa  from  tho  territory  of  ParnOtsa  or  Prints  mentioned 
in  the  person  of  Tunga,  who  rose  from  tho  position  of  a cowherd  to  he  chosen  Queen  Didda’s  all-powerful 
minister.  Tho  Queen’s  own  father,  Siihliaraja.  tlio  ruler  of  Lfihara  or  Lftharin,  is  designated  a Khasa,  .... 
and  his  descendants,  who  after  Didda  occupied  tho  Kashmir  throne,  wore  looked  upon  as  Khavas. — That 


1 The  whole  passage  (29  and  f;0)  runs  as  follows  : — ‘ Tn  North-East,  Mount  Mem,  the  Kingdom  of  thoso  who  have  lost 
caste  (nashtamjya),  the  nomads  (iHiSujuVasS  worshippers  of  Pusuputi),  the  Kiras  (a  tribe  near  Kashmir,  Stein,  Raja  Taran- 
gini,  tranu.  II,  217),  tho  KSsniirus,  the  Aldiisgias  (of  the  lower  hi!  Is  between  the  Jelilam  and  the  Chinab),  Danutas  (Kurds), 
Tahganas,  Kuliitas  (Kulu),  Sairindbras  (»mt  identified',  Forest  men,  lirahmapuras  (Bharmaur  in  Chaiuba),  Diirvas  (close  to 
Abhisfira),  Damiims  (apparently  a Kashmir  tril  Stein  II,  304  it.),  Foresters,  Kirfit/is,  Cliinus  (Shins  of  Oilgit,  see  above, 
or  Chinese),  Kauyindas  (see  hiduw),  l»L:d!as  inof  identified),  T^olas  (rot  identified),  J attorn  rag  (P  Jatt*).  Kuna^as  (see  below), 
Khasas,  Ghddms  and  Kuehikas  nn.t  identified/.  If  will  be  seen  that  every  ono  of  the  abovo  names  which  has  been  identified 
belongs  to  the  North-West.  Regarding  the  Kannindas  or  Kupindng,  it  may  be  mentioned  that  Cunningham  (Rep.  Arch.  Surv. 
India,  XIV  1-5)  identified  them  with  the  Kai.cfs  of  the  Simla  Hill  States,  whose  name  he  wrongly  spells  “ Kunet.”  The 
charge  from  ‘ Kuginda  to  * hanei  ’ is  violent  and  i n provable, 4 hough  not  altogether  impossible.  It  would  be  simpler  to 
connect  the  Kanels  with  Vi.'JLhnmibir*9*  Kunatas,  but  here  again  there  are  difficulties,  for  the  t in  ‘Kanfit ' is  dental,  not 
cerebral.  Such  changes  a?e,  however,  not  uncommon  in  the  • Pisficha  ’ languages. 

* A similar  but  fuller  list  is  also  given  in  Vaiiihamihira’s  Samasaiaihhitd,  in  which  the  Kho90S  are  classed  with  Daradas, 
AlbisSras  atri  Clinas. 

‘LXVlII,-'0. 


INTRODUCTION. 


7 


there  wore  KhaSas  also  in  the  Vitasta  valley  below  Varahamflla,  is  proved  by  the  reference  to  Viianaka  as 

‘ a sent  of  Khasas  * Of  this  locality  it  has  boon  shown  . . . that  it  was  situated  in  the  ancient 

DioSravatl,  the  present  Dvrarbidl,  a portion  of  the  Vitasta  valley  botween  Katliai  and  Muzaffarabad. 

lhe  position  hero  indicated  makes  it  highly  probable  that  the  h.hasas  aro  identical  with  tbo  modern 
Khakha  tribe,  to  which  most  of  the  petty  hill-chiefs  and  gentry  in  the  Vitasta  valley  below  Kashmir  belong. 
The  name  Khakha  (Pahaji ; in  Kashmiri  sing.  Kliolch",  plur.  K hatch')  is  the  direct  derivation  of  Khaia, 
Sanskrit  s being  pronounced  since  early  times  in  the  Panjab  and  the  neighbouring  bill-tracts  as  kh  or  h 
(compare  Kashmiri  Sanscrit  s). 

The  Khakha  chiefs  of  the  VitastiA  valley  retained  their  semi-independent  position  unti’  Sikh  times,  and, 
along  w*th  their  neighbours  of  tho  Bomba  dan,  have  ever  proved  troublesome  neighbours  tor  Kashmir. 

Wo  lmve  already  noted  that  another  name  for  the  Kliasas  was  KhaSiras.  Tiie  name 
Ka£mira  ( Kashmir)  is  hy  popular  tradition  associated  with  the  famous  legendary  saint 
JtaSyapa,  but  it  lias  been  suggested,  with  considerable  reason,  that  Kliasa  tind  Khasira 
are  more  probable  etymologies.  At  the  present  day,  the;  Kashmiri  word  l’or  ‘Kashmir’ 
is  ‘ kashh',’  a word  which  is  strongly  reminiscent  of  Khasira.1 2 

Turning  now  to  seo  what  information  we  can  gain  from  classical  writers,  we  may 
again  refer  to  Pliny’s  mention  of  the  cannibal  Casiri,  who,  from  the  position  assigned  to 
them,  must  be  the  same  as  the  Khasiras.  Atkinson  in  the  work  mentioned  in  the  list  of 
authorities  gives  an  extract  from  Pliny’s  account  of  India  (p.  35-1).  In  this  are  men- 
tioned the  Ccsi,  a mountain  race  between  the  Indus  and  the  Jumna,  who  are  evidently 
the  KlmSas.  Atkinson  (1.  c.)  quotes  Ptolemy’s  Acliasia  regio  as  indicating  the  same 
locality,  and  this  word  not  impossibly  also  represents  ‘Khaia’.  Perhaps  more  certain 
identifications  from  Ptolemy  are  the  Kao-ioi  Mountains  and  the  country  of  Kcuria.3 

In  other  places3  he  tells  us  that  the  land  of  the  ’OrropoKoppoL  (Uttarakurus)  and  the 
city  of  ’OrTopoKoppa  lay  along  the  Emodic  and  Seric  mountains  in  the  north,  to  the  east  of 
the  Kasia  mountains.  The  latter  therefore  represent  either  the  Hindu  Kush  or  the 
mountains  of  Kashgar  in  Central  Asia.* 

To  sum  up  the  preceding  information.  We  gather  that  according  to  the  most  an- 
cient Indian  authorities  in  the  extreme  north-west  of  India,  on  the  Hindu  Kush  and  the 
mountainous  tracts  to  the  south,  and  in  the  Western  Pan  jab  there  was  a group  of  tribes, 
one  of  which  was  called  Kha&a,  which  were  looked  upon  as  Kshatriyas  of  Aryan  origin. 
These  spoke  a language  closely  allied  to  Sanscrit,  but  with  a vocabulary  partly  agreeing 
with  that  of  the  Eranian  Avesta.  They  were  considered  to  have  lost  their  claim  to 
consideration  as  Aryans,  and  to  have  become  Mlechehhas,  or  barbarians,  owing  to  their 
non-observance  of  the  rules  for  eating  and  drinking  observed  by  the  Sanskritic  peoples 
of  India.  These  Kha&is  were  a Avar  like  tribe,  and  were  avcII  known  to  classical  Avriters, 
who  noted,  as  their  special  home,  the  Indian  Caucasus  of  Pliny.  They  had  relations 
with  Western  Tibet,  and  carried  the  gold  dust  found  in  that  country  into  India. 

It  is  probable  that  they  once  occupied  an  important  position  in  Central  Asia,  and  that 
countries,  places  and  rivers,  such  as  Kashmir,  Kashgar  in  Central  Asia,  and  the  Kashgar 

1 The  change  of  initial  kh  to  k h not  uncommon  in  Pi&ftcha  languages.  Thus,  the  Sanskrit  khara,  an  ass,  is  kur  in 
Bash  gall  Kafir,  and  in  Shina,  a language  very  closely  connected  with  Kashmiri,  the  root  of  the  verb  meaning  4 to  eat  ' is  ha, 
not  khd . 

2 Sericu  VI,  15,  16,  in  Lassen  I. A.  Is,  28. 

1 VI,  16,  2,  3,  5,  8 ; VIII,  21.  7,  in  Lassen  I.A.,  I3.  HUS. 

4 According  to  Lassen,  p.  lu20.  the  Kairta  \>pry  of  Ptolemy  arc  the  mountains  of  Kashgar,  it.  4 Kliasa-gairi  \ the 
mountain  of  tho  Khasaw.  See,  however,  Stein,  Ancient  Khotan , pp.  50  f.  The  same  name  re-appears  in  Cliitrul.  ‘outh  of  the 
Hindu  Kush,  where  tho  river  Khonar  is  also  called  tho  Khashgar.  For  further  specuLit ions  on  the  subject  the  reader  i8 
referred  to  St.-Martin.  Mdnit  de  I'Acad.des  Inscr . Sav.  Utrang . I serie  vi,  i.  pp.  261  ff.,  and  to  Atkinson  [op.  cit.),  p.  377. 


8 


pahArI. 


of  Ohitral  were  named  after  them.  They  were  closely  connected  with  the  group  of  tribes 
nicknamed  ‘ Fidelias  ’ or  ‘ cannibals  ’ by  Indian  writers,  and  before  the  sixth  century 
they  were  stated  to  speak  the  same  language  as  the  people  of  Balkli.  At  the  same  period 
they  had  apparently  penetrated  along  the  southern  slope  of  the  Himalaya  as  far  east  as 
Nepal,  and  in  the  twelfth  century  they  certainly  occupied  in  considerable  force  the  hills 
to  the  south,  south-west  and  south-east  of  Kashmir. 

At  the  present  day  their  descendants,  and  tribes  who  claim  descent  from  them, 
occupy  a much  wider  area.  The  Khakhas  of  the  Jelilam  valley  are  KliaSas,  and  so  are 
some  of  the  Kanets  of  the  hill-country  between  Kangrn  and  Garhwal.  The  Kanets  are 
the  low-caste  cultivating  class  of  all  the  Eastern  Himalaya  of  the  Panjab  and  the  hills  at 
their  base  as  far  west  as  Kulu,  and  of  the  eastern  portion  of  the  Kangra  district,  through- 
out which  tract  they  form  a very  large  proportion  of  the  total  population.  The  country 
they  inhabit  is  held  or  governed  by  Hill  Rajputs  of  pre-historic  ancestry,  the  greater  part 
of  Avhom  are  far  too  proud  to  cultivate  with  their  own  hands,  and  who  employ  the  Kanets 
as  husbandmen.  Like  the  ancient  Kha&is,  they  claim  to  be  of  impure  Rajput  (i.e. 
Kshatriya)  birth.  They  are  divided  into  two  great  tribes,  the  Khasia  and  the  Rao,  the 
distinction  between  whom  is  still  sufficiently  well-marked.  A Khasia  observes  the  period 
of  impurity  after  the  death  of  a relation  prescribed  for  a twice-born  man ; the  Rao  that 
prescribed  for  an  outcast.  The  Khasia  wears  the  sacred  thread,  while  the  Rao  does  not.1 * 
There  can  thus  be  no  doubt  about  the  Khasia  Kanets. 

Further  to  the  east,  in  Garhwal  and  Kumaon,  the  bulk  of  the  population  is  called 
Khasia,  and  these  people  are  universally  admitted  to  be  Kha&is  by  descent.  In  fact,  as 
we  shall  see,  the  principal  dialect  of  Kumaunl  is  known  as  Khasparjiya,  or  the  speech  of 
Khas  cultivators.  Further  east,  again,  in  Nepal,  the  ruling  caste  is  called  Khas.  In 
Nepal,  however,  the  tribe  is  much  mixed.  A great  number  of  so-called  Khas  are  really 
descended  from  the  intercourse  between  the  higli-caste  Aryan  immigrants  from  the  plains 
and  the  aboriginal  Tibeto-Burman  population.  But  that  there  is  a leaven  of  pure  Khas 
descent  also  in  the  tribe  is  not  denied.* 

In  this  way  we  see  that  the  great  mass  of  the  Aryan-speaking  population  of  the 
Lower  Himalaya  from  Kashmir  to  Darjeeling  is  inhabited  by  tribes  descended  from  the 
ancient  Klm4as  of  the  Mahabharata. 


While  Sanskrit  literature3  commencing  with  the  Mahabharata  contains  many  refer- 


The  Gurjaras. 


ences  to  the  Kha£as,  until  quite  late  times  it  is  silent  about 
the  Gurjaras.  They  are  not  mentioned  in  the  Mahabharata 


or  in  the  Vishnu,  Bhagavata,  or  Markandeya  Purana.  In  fact  the  earliest  known  refer- 
ence to  them  occurs  in  the  Sriharshacharita,  a work  of  the  early  part  of  the  7th  century 


of  our  era. 


1 Ibbetfion,  op.  oit.,  § 487.  Regarding  the  ltaos,  x’p  p.  18,  note a,  post. 
s Regarding  the  origin  of  the  ftepal  Klias,  mv  Hodgson  and  Sylvain  Ldvi,  op.  cit. 

1 Authorities  on  the  connexion  of  Rajput*  and  Gurjaras  or  < injurs  : — 

Tod,  .1 — Annuls  and  Antiquities  of  Raj ast'han,  London,  1829-82.  Introduction. 

- Elliot,  Sib  H.  M.,  K.C.B.,  — Memoirs  on  the  History,  Folklore  and  Distribution  of  the  Races  of  the  North* 
Western  Provinces  of  India.  Edited,  etc.,  by  .John  Beames.  London,  1869.  I.  99  ff.,  etc.  (see  Index). 
Ibbktson,  Sin  Utokil.  K.C.S.I.,-0«///V'>*  of  Punjab  Ethnography . Calcutta,  1888,  pp.  262  ff. 

[Jackson,  A.  M.  Gazetteer  of  the  Bombay  Presidency , Vol.  I,  Pt.  I.,  App.  III.  (by  A.  M.  T.  J.)t  Account 
of  BhinmSl,  esp.  pp.  463  ff. 


Smith,  Vincknt  A.,-  - The  Gurjaras  ofRajputana  and  Kanauj,  J.  R.  A.  8.,  1909,  pp.  63  ff. 

Bhandabkab,  1).  R.,  Foreign  dements  in  the  Hindu  Population.  Indian  Antiquary ,TL L (1911),  pp.  7 ff, 
asp.  pp.  21  ff. 


INTRODUCTION. 


9 


According  to  the  most  modern  theory,  which  has  not  yet  been  seriously  disputed  but 
which  has  nevertheless  not  been  accepted  by  all  scholars,  the  Gurjaras  entered  India, 
together  with  the  Hunas  and  other  marauding  tribes,  about  the  sixth  century  A.D.  They 
rapidly  rose  to  great  power,  and  founded  the  Rajput  tribes  of  Rajputana.1  The  Gurjaras 
wore  in  the  main  a pastoral  people,  but  had  their  chiefs  and  fighting  men.  When  the 
tribe  rose  to  power  in  India,  the  latter  were  treated  by  the  Brahmans  as  equivalent  to 
Kshatriyas  and  were  called  Rajputs,  and  some  were  even  admitted  to  the  equality  with 
Brahmans  themselves,  while  the  bulk  of  the  people  who  still  followed  their  pastoral 
avocations  remained  as  a subordinate  caste  under  the  title  of  Gurjaras,  <*,  in  modem 
language,  Gujars,  or,  in  the  Pan  jab,  Gujars. 

So  powerful  did  these  Gurjaras  or  Gujars  become  that  no  less  than  four  tracts  of 
India  received  their  name.  In  modern  geography  we  have  the  Gujrat  and  Gujranwala 
districts  of  the  Panjab,  and  the  Province  of  Gujarat  in  the  Bombay  Presidency.  The 
Gujrat  District  is  a Sub-Himalayan  tract  with  a large  proportion  of  Gujars.  It  is 
separated  by  the  river  China!)  from  the  Gujranwala  District,  in  which  Gujars  are  more 
few.  In  the  Province  of  Gujarat  there  are  now  no  members  of  the  Giijnr  caste,  as  a caste, 
but,  as  wc  shall  seo  later  on,  there  is  evidence  that  Gujars  have  become  absorbed  into 
the  general  population,  and  liavo  been  distributed  amongst  various  occupational  castes. 
In  addition  to  these  three  tracts  Al-BirunI  (A.D.  971-10>‘59)  mentions  a Guzarat  situated 
somewhere  in  Northern  Rajputana." 

In  ancient  times,  the  Gurjara  kingdom  of  the  Panjab  comprised  territory  on  both 
sides  of  the  Cliinab,  more  or  less  accurately  corresponding  with  the  existing  Districts  of 
Gujrat  and  Gujranwala.  It  was  conquered  temporarily  by  Sankara varmau  of  Kashmir 
in  the  ninth  century.3  The  powerful  Gurjara  kingdom  in  South-Western  Rajputana,  as 
described  by  tho  Chinese  pilgrim  Hiuen  Tsiang  in  the  seventh  century,  had  its  capital  at 
Bliinmal  or  Primal,  to  the  North-West  of  Mount  Abu,  now  in  the  Jodhpur  State,  and 
comprised  a considerable  amount  of  territory  at  present  reckoned  to  be  part  of  Gujarat, 
the  modern  frontier  between  that  Province  and  Rajputana  being  purely  artificial.  In 
addition  to  this  kingdom  of  Bliinmal,  a southern  and  smaller  Gurjara  kingdom  existed 
in  what  is  now  Gujarat  from  A.D.  589  to  755.  Its  capital  was  probably  at  or  near 
Bharoch.  Between  theso  two  Gurjara  States  intervened  the  kingdom  of  the  princes  of 
Valabhi,  and  these  princes  also  seem  to  have  belonged  either  to  the  Gurjaras  or  to  a 
closely  allied  tribe.4 

The  Gurjaras  who  established  the  kingdoms  at  Bliinmal  and  Bharoch  probably  came 
from  the  West,  as  Mr.  Bhandarkar  suggests.  Tho  founders  of  the  Panjab  Gurjara 
kingdom  which  existed  in  tho  ninth  century  presumably  reached  the  Indian  plains  by  o 
different  route.  There  is  no  indication  of  any  connexion  between  the  Gurjara  kingdom 
of  the  Panjab  and  the  two  kingdoms  of  the  widely  separated  Province  of  Gujarat.® 

1 See  Mr.  V.  Smith's  note  below. 

2 India  (Sachau's  translation,  I,  202).  Mr.  Bhandarkar  (l.c.,  p.  21)  locates  it  in  the  north-eastern  part  of  t lie  Jaipur 
territory  and  tho  south  of  tho  Alwar  State.  The  Gujnri  dialect  spoken  in  the  bills  of  the  North- West  Frontier  Province  is 
closely  connected  with  the  MSwfitl  spoken  in  Alwar  at  the  present  day.  On  the  other  hand,  as  stated  in  a private  communi- 
cation, Mr.  Vincent  Smith  considers  that  it  must  have  been  at  or  near  Ajmer,  about  180  milt?  to  the  North- Fast  of  the  ohi 
capital  Bhinmftl. 

* Rajatara  tig  ini,  v.  143-150,  and  Stein's  translation,  I,  90. 

4 Bombay  Gazetteer  (1896),  Vol.  I,  Part  1,  pp.  3,  i. 

4 The  above  account  of  tho  early  history  of  the  Gurjaras  is  based  on  in  formation  kindly  placed  at  my  disposal  by  Air.  V. 
Smith. 

VOL.  IX,  PAKT  IV. 


10 


paiiarI. 


As  may  be  expected,  the  G Cijar  herdsmen  (as  distinct  from  the  fighting  Gurjaras 
who  became  Kajl>uts)  are  found  in  greatest  numbers  in  the  north-west  of  India  from  the 
Indus  to  the  Ganges.  In  the  Panjab  they  are  mainly  settled  in  the  lower  ranges  and 
submontane  tracts,  though  they  arc  spread  along  the  Jamna  in  considerable  numbers. 
Gujrat  District  is  still  their  stronghold,  and  hero  they  form  13£  per  cent,  of  the  total 
population.  In  the  higher  mountains  they  are  almost  unknown. 

In  the  plains  tracts  of  the  Panjab  they  are  called  * Gujars  ’ or  * Gujjars  ’ (not 
Gujars),  and  they  have  nearly  all  abandoned  their  original  language  and  speak  the 
ordinary  Panjabi  of  their  neighbours. 

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  mountains  to  the  north-west  of  the  Panjab,  i.e.  throughout 
the  hill  country  of  Murree,  Jammu,  Chibal,  Hazara,  in  the  wild  territory  lying  to  the 
north  of  Peshawar  as  far  as  the  Swat  river,  and  also  in  the  hills  of  Kashmir,  there  are 
numerous  descendants  of  the  Gurjaras  still  following  their  pastoral  avocations.  Here 
they  are  called  ‘ G ujurs  ’ (not  ‘ Gujar  ’ or  * Gujar  ’)  and  tend  cows.  Closely  allied  to 
them,  and  speaking  the  same  language,  is  the  tribe  of  Ajars  who  tend  sheep. 

The  ordinary  language  of  the  countries  over  which  these  last  mentioned  people 
roam  is  generally  Pushto  or  Kashmiri,  though  there  arc  also  spoken  various  PiSacha 
dialects  of  the  Swat  and  neighbouring  territories.  In  fact,  in  the  latter  tract,  there  are 
numerous  tribes,  each  with  a Pisacha  dialect  of  its  own,  but  employing  Pushto  as  a 
lingua  franca.  The  Gujurs  are  no  exception  to  the  rule.  While  generally  able  to 
speak  the  language,  or  the  lingua  franca , of  the  country  they  occupy,  they  have  a 
distinct  language  of  tlicir  own,  called  Gujuri,  varying  but  little  from  place  to  place,  and 
closely  connected  with  the  Mewati  dialect  of  Rajasthani,  described  on  pp.  44  ff.  of  Vol. 
IX,  Pt.  II  of  this  Survey.  Of  course  their  vocabulary  is  freely  interlarded  with  words 
borrowed  from  Pushto,  Kashmiri,  and  what  not ; but  the  grammar  is  practically  identi- 
cal with  that  of  Mewati,  and  closely  allied  to  that  of  Mewurl. 

The  existence  of  a form  of  Mewati  or  Mewari  in  the  distant  country  of  Swat  is  a 
fact  which  has  given  rise  to  some  speculation.  One  sept  of  the  Gujurs  of  Swat  is 
known  as  ‘Chauhan,’  and  it  is  known  that  the  dominant  race  in  Mewar  belongs  to  the 
Chauhan  sept  of  Rajputs.  Two  explanations  are  possible.  One  is  that  the  Gujurs  of 
this  tract  arc  immigrants  from  Mcwat  (or  Alwar)  and  Mewar.  The  other  is  that  the 
Gurjaras  in  their  advance  with  the  Hunas  into  India,  left  some  of  their  number  in  the 
Swat  country,  who  still  retain  their  ancient  language,  and  that  this  same  language  was 
also  carried  by  other  members  of  the  same  tribe  into  Rajputana. 

The  former  explanation  is  that  adopted  by  Mr.  Vincent  Smith,  who  has  kindly 
supplied  the  following  note  on  the  point : — 

The  surprising  fact  that  the  pastoral,  semi-nomad  Gfljar  graziers  and  Ajap  shepherds,  who  roam  over 
tno  lower  Himalayan  ranges  from  tho  Afghan  frontier  to  Kumaon  and  Gaphw&l,  speak  a dialect  of  ‘ Hindi,’ 
quite  distinct  from  the  Pushto  and  other  languages  spoken  by  thoir  neighbours,  has  been  hong  familiar  to 
officers  serving  in  tho  Panjab  .and  on  the  North-Western  Frontier.!  In  1908  tho  Linguistic  Survey  made 
public  tho  more  precise  information  that  the  grammar  of  the  spocch  of  tho  still  more  remote  Gujuri  of  the 
Swat  Valley  is  almost  identical  with  that  of  the  Ha  jpf.ts  of  Msw&t  and  Mfiwap  in  Rajputani,  distant  some  600 
miles  in  a direct  line.*  In  ..ho  intervening  space  totally  different  languages  are  spoken.  Why,  then,  do  the 


Ibbetson,  Ouflinet  of  Pnnj i b Ethnnqraphy  (1888),  p 2C6 

ST?'*  *77’ IX'  FaitJl  (1908>>  !>•  «23-  G®  the  passage  quoted  from  Vol.  IX  of  this  Survey,  the  parti- 
culsr  Kajasthfini  dialect  was  Jaipur).  B A further  enquiry  has  shown  me  that  MSwfttl  and  M?wtrI  are  more  akin  to  Gujuri 
tlmn  is  Jnipmi.  This  is  a matter  of  small  importance.  Jaipur  lies  between  Mewat  and  Mewar.— G.  A.  0.] 


INTRODUCTION. 


It 


Muhammadan  Gujur  herdsmen  of  SwSt  use  a speech  essentially  the  same  as  that  of  the  aristocratic  Hindu 
RSjpttts  of  M8wap  P The  question  is  put  concerning  the  Gujurs  of  Swat,  because  they  are  the  most  remote 
tribe  at  present  known  to  speak  a tongue  closely  allied  to  the  Mewatl  and  Mgwarl  varieties  of  Eastern 
Rajasthani. 

But  dialects,  which  may  bo  described  as  corrupt  forms  of  Eastern  Rajasthani,  extend  along  the  lower  hills 
from  about  the’ longitude  of  Chambil  through  Gajhwiil  and  Kumaon  into  Western  Nepal,  so  that  the  problem 
may  bo  stated  in  wider  terms,  as:—  4 Why  do  certain  tribes  of  the  lower  Himalaya,  in  Swat,  and  also  from 
Chamba  to  Western  Nepal,  speak  dialects  allied  to  Eastern  Rajasthani,  and  especially  to  Mdwati,  although 
they  are  divided  from  Eastern  Rajputaua  by  hundreds  of  miles  in  which  distinct  languages  a-e  spoken  r ’ 

It  is  not  possible  to  give  a fully  satisfactory  solution  of  tho  problem,  but  recent  historical  and  archeologi- 
cal researches  throw  sonio  light  upon  it.  All  observers  are  agreed  that  no  distinction  of  race  can  be  drawn 
between  tlio  Gttjars  01 : Gujurs  and  the  Jats  or  Jatts,  two  castes  which  occupy  a very  prominent  position  in 
North-Western  India.  It  is  also  agreed  that  several  other  castes  in  tho  same  region,  such  as  Ajars,  Alilrs  and 
many  more,  are  racially  indistinguishable  from  the  Jatts  and  Gil  jars.  The  name  Gfljar  appears  in  Sanskrit 
inscriptions  as  Gurjara,  and  nobody  can  doubt  that  the  modern  Gujars  represent  the  ancient  Gurjaras.  Long 
ago  the  late  Sir  Denzil  Ibbetson  recognized  the  fact  that  in  tho  Panjab  it  is  impossible  to  draw  distinctions  in 
blood  between  Gil  jars  and  many  clans  of  Rajpflts,  or,  in  other  words,  local  enquiry  proves  that  persons  now 
known  as  Llajpflts  may  bo  descended  from  the  same  ancestors  as  are  other  persons  known  as  Gfljars.1  Mr. 
Baden  Powell  observed  that  4 there  is  no  donbt  that  a great  majority  of  the  clan-names  in  tho  Panjiib  belong 
both  to  the  44  Rajpfit”  and  the  “Jat**  sections.  And  this  indicates  that  when  the  numerous  Bala,  Indo- 
Scytliian,  Gfljar  and  Hflna  tribes  settled,  the  leading  military  and  princely  houses  were  accepted  as  41  Rajput,’* 
while  those  who  took  frankly  to  cultivation,  became  44  Jat  *\*  2 Mr.  D.  R.  Bhandarkar  lias  demonstrated 
recently  that  the  ancestors  of  the  lianas  of  Udaipur  (Mewap)  were  originally  classed  as  Brahmans,  and  were 
not  recognised  as  Rajputs  until  they  became  established  as  a ruling  family.3  In  fact,  there  is  abundant 
evidence  to  prove  that  the  term  4 Rajput*  signifies  an  occupational  group  of  castes,  which  made  it  their  prin- 
cipal business  to  rule  and  fight.  That  being  tlio  traditional  business  of  the  ancient  Rshatriyas,  castes  known 
as  Rajput  were  treated  by  the  Brahmans  as  equivalent  to  Kshatriyns,  and  superior  in  rank  ami  purity  to  castes 
engaged  in  agriculture.  We  may  tako  it  as  proved  that  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  a Rajput  being  descended 
from  a Br&hmaQ,  a Gfljar,  a Jatt,  or  in  fact  from  a man  of  any  decent  caste.  Consequently  tho  Gujur  herds- 
men and  Ajar  shepherds  of  Swat  may  well  be  the  poor  relations  of  the  Rajput  chivalry  of  Mflwar,  and  the 
present  divergence  in  social  status  may  bo  the  result  of  tho  difference  of  tho  occupations  to  which  their 
respective  ancestors  were  called  by  Providence. 

If  the  Swat.  Gujurs  and  the  Mewat  and  Mewiir  Rajputs  come  of  one  stock,  it  is  not  so  wonderful  that  they 
should  speak  a language  essentially  one.  Certainly  there  is  no  difficulty  in  believing  that  all  the  Himalayan 
tribes,  both  in  Swat  and  east  of  Chamba,  who  speak  forms  of  Rajasthani,  may  bo  largely  of  the  same  blood  as 
the  RajpUts  of  Eastern  Rajputana.  Of  course,  I do  not  mean  that  a pure  race  is  to  bo  found  anywhere  in 
India — almost  every  caste  is  of  very  much  mixed  blood. 

Not  only  are  the  Jaxtfs,  Gfljars,  Ajars,  etc.,  related  in  blood  to  the  Rajpflts,  but  wo  may  also  affirm  with 
confidence,  that  that  blood  is  in  large  measure  foreign,  introduced  by  swarms  of  immigrants  who  poured  into 
India  across  tho  north-western  passes  for  about  a century,  both  before  and  .after  500  A.D.  Tho  Gurjaras  are 
not  heard  of  until  tho  sixth  century,  but  from  that  time  on  they  are  closely  associated  with  the  Hunas  (Huns) 
aud  other  foreign  tubes,  which  then  settled  in  India  and  were  swallowed  up  by  the  octopus  of  Hinduism — 
tribes  insensibly,  but  quickly,  being  transformed  into  castes.  It  is  now  certain,  as  demonstrated  by  epigra- 
phical  evidence,  that  the  famous  Parihar  (Pratihara)  Rajputs  were  originally  Gurjaras  or  Gfljars;  or,  if  we 
prefer,  we  may  say  that  certain  Gurjaras  were  originally  Pratiharas ; and  it  is  practically  certain  that  the 
three  other  ‘fire-born*  Rajput  clans— Pa  war  (Praraar),  Solankl  (Cliaulukya),  and  Chauhan  . (Chfdmmaua)  — 
were  descended  like  the  Parihars,  from  ancestors  belonging  to  a Gurjara  or  cognate  foreign  tribe. 

We  are  not  able  to  identify  the  looality  beyond  the  passes  from  which  these  ancestors  came,  nor  do  we 
know  what  tribal  names  they  bore  before  they  entered  Tndia,  or  what  language  they  then  spoke.4  Further,  it 
is  not  possible  at  present  to  bo  certain  concerning  the  road  by  which  the  Gurjaras,  11  Anas,  etc.,  onto  red  India. 
Probably  they  came  by  many  roads.  But  tho  legend  locating  the  origin  of  the  fire-born  elans  at  Mount  Abil 


1 Ibbetson,  op*  cit,,  p.  265. 

a • Notes  on  . . . the  Rfijput  Clans*  (J.  2?.  A.  S .,  1899,  p.  584h 

s * Guhilots  * (J.  Proc .,  A . 5.  B .,  New  Ser.,  Yol.  V.  (1909),  pp.  1G7-187) ; 4 At  pur  li.^ription  of  SaktiUmais/  Iiul. 
Ant.,  Vol.  XXXIX  (1910,  p.  180).  [So,  in  Mahftbhtrata  VIII,  2076,  a Rahil; a Brfihmana  may,  if  he  clmose,  become  a 

Ksbatriya.— G.  A.  G.]  . . 

* I have  a suspicion  that  they  may  havo  been  Iranians,  perhaps  from  Sistan,  but  I cannot  pro  less  to  prote  that 

hypothesis. 

VOL.  IX,  PAST  IV.  0 i 


12  pahArI- 

:m<l  much  evidence  of  other  kinds  indicate  that  the  principal  settlements  of  the  foreigners  were  in  Rajput&nfi, 
which  became  the  great  centre  of  dispersion. 

Wo  know  that  .«s  early  as  tho  first  half  of  the  seventh  century,  Bliinmal  (&iimala)  to  the  north-west  of 
Mount  Abu,  was  the  capital  of  a kingdom  ruled  by  Vyaghramukha  Chapa.  The  Chapas  were  a subdivision 
of  the  Gurjaras.  A coin  of  Vyagbramukha  was  found  associated  with  numerous  slightly  earlier  Hftna  coins  of 
the  sixth  and  seventh  centuries  on  the  Manaswfil  Plateau  in  the  outer  Siw&lik  Hills,  Hoshiyarpur  District, 
Punjab,  which  at  that  period  undoubtedly  was  under  Ilitna-Gurjara  rule.  Early  in  the  eighth  century,  Naga- 
bhata  I,  a Gurjara,  who  had  then  hecomo  a Hindu,  established  a strong  monarchy  at  Bhinmal,  where 
Vyagbramukha  had  ruled  a hundred  years  earlier.  Nagabhata’s  son,  Vutsaraja,  greatly  extended  the 
dominions  of  his  house,  detent ing  oven  the  king  of  Eastern  Bengal.  In  or  about  810  A.D.,  Nagabhato,  II,  son 
and  successor  of  Vatsariija,  deposed  the  king  of  Kanauj  and  removed  the  soafc  of  his  own  government  to  that 
imperial  city.  For  more  than  a century,  and  especially  during  tho  reigns  of  Mihira-Bh&ja  and  his  sou  (840- 
908  A.H.),  the  Gurjara-Pratlhara  kingdom  of  Kanau  j was  the  paramount  power  of  Northern  India,  and 
included  Surashtra  (Kathiawar)  within  its  limits,  as  well  as  Karnal  now  under  tho  Government  of  tho  Panjab. 

T lake  it  that  the  Gurjaras  and  other  foreign  triboa  settled  in  Hajputanfi,  from  tho  sixth  century  onwards 
adopted  the  local  language,  an  early  form  of  Rajasthani,  with  great  rapidity.  They  brought,  1 imagine,  few 
women  with  them,  and  when  they  formed  unions  with  Ilitult!  women,  they  quickly  learned  tho  religion, 
customs,  and  language  of  their  wives.  I am  inclined  to  boliovo  that  during  the  period  of  Gurjara  rule,  and 
especially  during  the  ninth  and  tenth  centuries,  tho  Rajasthani  language  must  have  been  carried  over  a wido 
territory  far  more  extensive  than  that  now  occupied  by  it.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  Gujurs  and  Ajaps  of  Swat, 
and  the  similar  tribes  in  the  lower  Himalayas  to  tho  east  of  Cliamba,  should  be  regarded  as  survivals  of  a 
much  larger  population  which  once  spoke  Rajasthani,  (ho  language  of  the  court  and  capital.  For  one  reason 
or  other  the  neighbours  of  those  northern  Gujurs  and  Ajars  took  up  various  languages,  Pushtu,  Lalmda,  or 
whatever  it  might  be,  while  the  graziers  and  shepherds  clung  to  the  ancient  tongue  which  their  ancestors  had 
brought  from  Rajputana,  and  which  probably  was  spoken  for  a long  time  in  much  of  tho  country  intervening 
between  the  hills  and  MSwat.  If  this  theory  be  sound,  the  forms  of  tho  Himalayan  Rajasthani  should  bo 
more  archaic  than  those  of  modern  Mswati  or  the  other  dialects  of  Rajputana,  just  as  in  Quebec  French  is 
more  archaic  than  current  Parisian.1  I do  not  see  any  other  way  of  explaining  the  existence  of  tho  Raja- 
sthani ‘ outliers,’ if  I may  borrow  a convenient  term  from  tho  geologists.  Tho  historical  indications  do  not 
favour  the  notion  that  the  Gurjaras,  etc.,  came  eta  Kabul  and  thence  moved  southwards,  dropping  settlements 
in  tho  Lower  Himalayas;  they  rather  suggest  immigration  from  the  wost  by  the  Quetta  and  Kandahar  routes 
or  lines  of  march  still  further  south.  Settlements  dropped  among  tho  Himalayan  Hills  by  invaders  speaking 
a Central  Asian  language  could  not  possibly  have  picked  up  the  tongue  of  eastern  Rajputana.  Tho  ancestors 
of  the  Swat  Gujurs  must  have  spoken  Rajasthani  and  have  learned  it  in  a legion  where  it  was  tho  mother 
tongue.  The  far  northern  extensions  of  that  form  of  speech  must  apparently  be  attributed  to  the  time  when 
the  Gurjara  kingdom  attained  its  greatest  expansion.  Wo  know  from  inscriptions  that  the  dominions  of  both 
Mihira-Bhoja  and  his  son,  Mahendmpala  ( rir . 840-908  A.U.),  included  the  Kamfil  district  to  the  north-west 
of  Delhi. 

My  answer  to  the  problem  proposed  at  the  beginning  of  this  note,  therefore,  is  that  the  Gujurs,  etc.,  of 
the  lowor  Himalayas  who  now  speak  forms  of  Rajasthani  are  in  largo  measure  of  the  Bame  Btock  as  many 
Rajjifit  clans  in  Rajputana,  the  Panjab,  and  the  United  Provinces;  that  thoir  ancestors  emigrated  from 
Rajputana  afler  they  had  acquired  the  Rajasthani  speech  ; and  that,  the  most  likely  time  for  such  emigration  is 
the  ninth  century,  when  tho  Gurjara- Raj  put  power  dominated  all  northern  and  north-western  India,  with  its 
capital  at  Kanauj.3 

Turning  now  to  the  other  explanation,  we  may  premise  by  stating  that  the  Gurjaras 
may  possibly  have  entered  Itajputuna  from  two  directions.  They  invaded  the  Sindh 
Valley,  where  they  have  practically  disappeared  as  a distinct  caste,  the  Gakkhars, 

* [As  . matter  ot  fact  Gtijuri  it  more  archaic  in  its  form,  then  its  nearest  congener,  modern  MSwttl.  See  the  Gnjurl 
section  in  this  volume,  below. — G.  A.  G.] 

1 For  historical,  epigraplii.nl,  and  numismatic  details,  see  V.  A.  Smith — 

“ The  Gurjaras  of  Bfijputlna  and  Kanauj  " (J.  R.  A.  8.,  Jan.,  April,  1909) ; 

“ White  Hun  Coins  from  the  Punjab  ” (Ibid.,  Jan.  19u7) ; 

“ White  Hun  Coins  of  Vyaghramukha  ” (Ibid.,  Oct.  1907) ; 

“ The  History  of  the  City  of  Kanauj,  etc.”  (Ibid.,  July  1908). 

D.  R.  Blmndarkar — 

“ F. -reign  elements  in  the  Hlr.d  i Population  ” (Ind.  Ant.,  1911,  pp.  7—37).  Mr.  Bhandarkar  (p.  30)  thinks  that 
hastera  Kljaitl.ani  is  derived  from  PahSfl  Hindi ; but  1 do  not  think  he  can  be  right. 


INTRODUCTION. 


IB 


Janjaas,  and  Pathans  being  too  strong  for  them.1  But  their  progress  was  not  stopped, 
and  they  probably  have  entered  the  Gujarat  Province  and  Western  Rajputana  by  this 
route.  In  Gujarat  they  became  merged  into  the  general  population,  and  there  is  now 
in  that  province  no  Gujar  caste,  but  there  are  Gdjar  and  simple  Vanias  (traders),  Gujar 
and  simple  Sfutars  (carpenters),  Gujar  and  simple  Sonars  (goldsmiths),  Gujar  and  simple 
Kumbhars  (potters),  and  Gujar  and  simple  Salats  (masons).2 

Gujars,  as  distinct  from  Rajputs,  are  strong  in  Eastern  Rajputana,  their  greatest 
numbers  being  in  Alwar,  Jaipur,  Mewar,  and  the  neighbourhood.  Here  they  are  a 
distinct  and  recognised  class,  claiming  to  be  descended  from  Rajputs.3  These  must  have 
come  from  Sindii  along  the  other  supposed  line  of  advance  by  a more  northern  route. 
Several  Gujar-Rajput  tribes,  such  as  the  Chalukyas,  Chahamanas  (Chauhans),  and 
Sindas,  came  to  Bajputana  from  a mountainous  country  called  Sapadalaksha. 

Mr.  Bhandarkar*  has  shown  that  this  Sapadalaksha  included  the  hill-country  from 
Chamba  on  the  west,  to  Western  Nepal  on  the  east,  thus  almost  exactly  corresponding 
with  the  area  in  which  Western  and  Central  Paharl  are  now  spoken.  Now,  in 
tins  tract  at  the  present  day  it  may  bo  said  that  while  there  are  plenty  of  Rajputs  there 
are  no  Gujars.  The  main  populat  ion  is,  as  we  have  seen,  Khasa,  in  which  the  non- 
military Gujars  must  have  been  merged.®  The  Sapadalaksha  Gujar- Kajputs,  on  the 
other  hand,  have  provided  Mewar  with  its  Chauhans.  We  have  seen  that  one  of  the 
Swat  Gujur  septs  is  also  called  Chauhan,  and  the  second  of  the  two  explanations  for  the 
presence  of  the  Gujurs  in  their  present  seats  is  that  they  are  not  a backwash  of  immigra- 
tion from  Rajputana,  but  are  the  representatives  of  Gurjaras  who  were  then;  left  behind 
while  the  main  body  advanced  and  settled  in  Sapadalaksha.  Instead  of  taking  to  agri- 
culture and  becoming  merged  in  the  population,  they  retained  their  ancestral  pastoral 
habits  and  their  tribal  individuality.” 

We  have  seen  that  there  were  originally  many  Rajputs  in  Sapadalaksha.  In  the 
times  of  the  Musalman.  rule  of  India  many  more  Rajputs  from  the  plains  of  India  took 
refuge  amongst  their  Sapadalaksha  kin  and  there  founded  dynasties  which  still  survive. 
Particulars  regarding  these  will  bo  found  in  the  Introduction  to  the  three  Paliari  lan- 
guages and  need  not  be  repeated  here.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  it  is  plain  that  down  even 
to  the  days  of  late  Musalman  dominion  the  tie  between  Sapadalaksha  and  Rajputana 
was  never  broken.  And  this,  in  my  opinion,  satisfactorily  explains  the  fact  of  the  close 
connexion  between  the  Pahari  languages  and  Rajasthani. 

1 Ibbetson,  l.e.,  p.  263.  Mr.  Vincent  Smith  is  of  opinion  that  the  position  of  their  principal  settlement,  that  at  Bhin- 
mil,  North-West  of  Mount  Abu,  indicates  that  the  Gurjaras  came  from  the  West,  across  Sindh,  and  not  from  the  North  down 
the  Indus  Valley.  They  coul  1 have  entered  Sindh  either  <•/.»  Makr&n,  as  the  Arabs  did  later  in  the  end  of  the  seventh  century, 
or  through  Baluchistan  by  roads  further  north.  If  they  cam.*  from  Sistan  and  spoke  an  Iranian  languago,  they  would  soon 
have  picked  up  an  In  lian  tongue.  On  this  theory,  the  Gujars  of  the  Panjab  would  have  entered  that  province  from  the 
south,  proceeding  up  the  Indus  Valley.  Mr.  Smith  points  out  that  the  Punjab  Gurjaras  probably  are  a later  settlement.  Wo 
hear  of  them  first  in  the  Kashmir  chronicles  in  tho  ninth  century. 

8 Bhandarkar,  l.c.,  p.  22. 

8 In  1931,  the  total  nutnbor  of  Gdjars  in  Rajputana  was  162,739.  Of  these,  46,016  were  enumerated  in  Alwar,  181,494 
in  Jaipur,  and  60,574  in  Mewar.  Bharatpur,  adjoining  Alwar,  had  41,875. 

4 l.c.,  pp.  28  ff.  Sapadalaksha  becomes  in  modern  speech  sawd-ldkh , and  means  one  hundred  and  twenty- five 
'thousand,  a reference  to  the  supposed  number  of  hills  in  the  tract.  At  the  present  day  the  name  is  confined  to  the  ‘ Si w (ihk  ’ 
hills. 

4 We  see  traces  of  this  merging  in  tho  great  KanSt  caste  of  the  Simla  Hills.  It  has  two  divisions,  one  called  tv  basis 
and  the  other  lino  (Ibbetson,  l.c.,  p.  268).  The  former  represent  the  KhaSas,  and  it  is  difficult  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that 
the  Bios  are  Gijars  who  have  become  merged  into  the  geneml  population  and  who  have  adopted  a name  Kao,  indicating 
their  closer  connexion  with  the  Rajputs. 

4 The  writer’s  personal  opinion  upon  this  disputed  point  is  given  at  length  on  p«  15,  below. 


14 


PAHA?I. 


We  thus  arrive  at  the  following  general  results  regarding  the  Aryan-speaking 
General  results.  population  of  the  Paliari  tract. 

The  earliest  immigrants  of  whom  we  have  any  historical  information  were  the 
Kha4as,  a race  probably  hailing  from  Central  Asia  and  originally  speaking  an  Aryan,  but 
not  necessarily  an  Indo-Aryan,  language.  They  were  followed  by  the  Gurjaras,  a tribe 
who  invaded  India  about  the  sixth  century  A.D.  and  occupied  the  same  tract,  then  known 
as  Sapadalaksha.  At  that  time,  they  also  spoke  an  Aryan,  but  not  necessarily  an 
Indo-Aryan,  language.1  Of  these  Gurjaras  the  bulk  followed  pastoral  pursuits  and 
became  merged  in  and  identified  with  the  preceding  Khala  population.  Others  were 
fighting  men,  and  were  identified  by  the  Brahmans  with  Kshatriyas.  In  this  guise  they 
invaded  Eastern  Bajpntana  from  Sapadalaksha,  and,  possibly,  Western  Rajputana  from 
Sindh,  and  founded,  as  Rajputs,  the  great  Rajput  states  of  Rajputana.2 


Results  on  the  language. 


The  Khasas  were,  we  have  seen,  closely  connected  with  the  tribes  nicknamed 

‘ Pilachas  ’ or  cannibals,  of  North-Westorn  India.  I have 
elsewhere  contended,  and  I believe  proved,  that  the  wild 
tribes  of  the  extreme  North-West,  immediately  to  the  South  of  the  Hindu  Kush,  are 
modern  representatives  of  these  ancient  ‘ Pi&chas,’  and  I have  classed  the  languages 
now  spoken  by  them  and  also  Kashmiri,  as  belonging  to  the  ‘ Pi&Lcha  Group.’  This 
PiSacha  Group  of  languages  possesses  many  marked  peculiarities  strange  to  the  Aryan 
languages  of  the  Indian  Plains,  and  several  of  these  are  clearly  observable  in  the  various 
forms  of  Western  and  Central  Paliari, — strong  in  the  extreme  west,  but  becoming  weaker 
and  weaker  as  we  go  eastwards.  It  is  reasonable  to  infer  that  in  this  we  have  traces 
of  the  old  language  of  the  Klialas,  whom  Sanskrit  tradition  makes  to  be  related  to  the 
Pilachns.2  But  the  Pahari  languages,  although  with  this  Kha£a  basis,  arc  much  more 
closely  related  to  Rajasthani.  This  must  be  mainly  due  to  the  Gujar  influence.  We 
have  seen  that  the  Gujars  occupied  the  country,  and  became  absorbed  in  the  general 
population,  but  at  the  same  time  they  must  have  given  it  their  language.  Then  there 
was  a constant  reflux  of  emigration  on  the  part  of  the  Gujar-llajputs  from  Rajputana 
and  the  neighbouring  parts  of  India.  These  re-immigrants  became,  as  befitted  their 
Kshatriya  station,  the  rulers  of  tile  country  and  to-day  most  of  the  chiefs  and  princes 
of  the  old  Sapadalaksha  trace  their  descent  from  Rajputs  of  the  plains.  The  re- 
immigration  was  increased  by  the  oppression  of  the  Mughul  rule  in  India  proper,  and 
there  are  historical  notices  of  tribe  after  tribe,  and  leader  after  leader,  abandoning  their 


1 It  is  possible  that  the  Gurjaras,  at  the  time  that  they  first  entered  the  hills,  did  not  speak  an  Indo-Aryan  language. 
We  are  quite  ignorant  on  the  point.  But  this  must  noi  be  taken  as  suggesting  that  tho  languages  of  their  descendants,  the 
Rajputs  and  the  Gujurs,  is  not  Indo-Aryan.  It  is  now-a-days  certainly  Indo-Aryan,  and  belongs  to  the  Inner  Group  of  these 
languages. 

* It  is  interesting,  on  this  point,  to  note  that  the  Central  Pahari  of  Kumaun  and  Garhwal  (i.e.  of  Eastern  SapAdalftksha) 
agree  with  Eastern  Rajasthani  in  having  the  genitive  postposition  kd  and  tho  verb  substantive  derived  from  tho  +/achh,  while 
in  the  Western  Pahap  of  tho  Simla  Hills  (i.e.  Western  $api<lalaksha)  tho  termination  of  the  genitive  is  the  Western 
Rajasthani  ro,  while  one  of  the  verbs  Bubstantivo  (<»,  is)  is  probably  of  tho  same  origin  as  the  Western  Rftj&sthfini  hdi.  As  for 
GujarAti,  the  genitive  ends  ir  and  the  verb  substantive  belongs  to  the  <Sachh  group.  West  of  Western  Pahfip  we  have 
the  PothwAri  dialect  of  Lahndfl.  Here  also  the  genitive  termination  is  wo,  but  the  verb  substantive  differs  from  that  of 
GujarAti.  On  the  other  band  GujarAti  agrees  with  all  tho  L&hndA  dialects  in  one  very  remarkable  point,  viz*  the  formation 
of  the  future  by  mean?)  of  .i  sibilant.  We  thus  see  that  right  along  tho  lower  Himalaya,  from  tl  e Indus  to  Nepal,  there  arc 
three  groups  of  dialects  agreeing  in  striking  points  with,  in  order,  GujarAti,  Western  RAjasthflnl  and  Eastern  RajasthAnl. 

1 Alteui  ion  will  frequently  U called  these  KbaSa  traces  in  dealing  with  each  language  in  the  following  pages.  See* 
especially  the  section  devote  1 to  Western  Pah&fi. 


INTRODUCTION. 


16 


established  seats  in  Rajputana,  and  seeking  refuge  from  Musalman  oppression  in  the 
hills  from  which  they  had  originally  issued  to  conquer  the  Gangetic  Valley.1 

In  Sapadalaksha  proper  (the  hill-tract  with  Ghamba  for  its  western  and  Kumaon 
for  its  eastern  extremity)  the  Kha&is  and  the  Gujars  have  kept  themselves  comparatively 
pure  from  admixture  with  the  Tibeto-Burmans  who  overflowed  from  beyond  the  Hima- 
laya and  also  occupied  the  southern  slope  of  the  range.  Here  the  Aryans  succeeded  in 
arresting  their  Tibeto-Burman  competitors  in  the  race  for  possession.  On  the  other 
hand,  in  the  east,  in  Nepal,  the  Tibeto-Burmans  forestalled  the  Kha&t-Gujars,  and 
when  the  latter  entered  the  countxy  they  found  the  others  already  in  possession  of  the 
chief  valleys.  The  bulk  of  the  population  of  Nepal  is  Tibeto-Burman,  and  the  lvhas 
conquerors  have  ever  been  in  a minority.  The  result  has  been  a considerable  racial 
mixture,  which  is  well  described  by  Hodgson  and  Professor  Sylvain  Levi  in  the  works 
mentioned  on  p.  2.  Most  of  the  Kha&is  of  Nepal  arc  of  mixed  descent.  Here  it  is  unneces- 
sary to  do  more  than  record  the  fact,  and  to  refer  the  ethnologist  to  the  works  above 
mentioned  for  particulars.  What  concerns  us  now  is  the  language,  and  that  has 
followed  the  fate  of  the  Khas-Gujar  tribe.  While  still  distinctly  allied  to  Rajasthani, 
the  Aryan  language  of  Nepal  presents  a mixed  character.  Not  only  many  words,  but 
even  special  phases  of  the  Grammar,  such  as  the  use  of  the  Agent  ease  before  all  tenses 
of  the  transitive  verb,  and  the  employment  of  a complete  honorific  conjugation,  are 
plainly  borrowed  from  the  speech  of  the  surrounding  Tibeto-Burmans.  These  changes 
in  the  speech  arc  increasing  with  every  decade,  and  certain  Tibeto-Burman  peculiarities 
have  come  into  the  language  within  the  memory  of  men  alive  at  the  present  day.2 

The  question  of  the  language  spoken  by  the  Gujurs  of  Swat  is  different  and  more 
difficult.  Two  opposing  theories  have  been  given  in  the  preceding  pages,  and  the 
present  writer  will  now  attempt  to  give  his  own  views  on  the  subject.  It  must,  how- 
ever, be  observed  that  these  views  are  founded  on  imperfect  materials,  and  are  only  put 
forward  as  what  seems  to  him  to  be  the  best  explanation  till  further  materials  become 
available. 

We  do  not  know  what  language  was  spoken  by  the  Gurjaras  of  Sapadalaksha.  It 
has  been  stated  that  it  was  not  necessarily  Indo- Aryan.  This  is  true  merely  as  a con- 
fession of  ignorance.  Wc  simply  do  not  know.  All  that  we  can  say  is  that  in  some 
respects  (such  as  the  use  of  harnlo  as  a postposition  of  the  genitive,  the  form  cfihau, 
for  the  verb  substantive,  and  the  use  of  Id  to  form  the  future  tense)  its  modern  descend- 
ant, Rajasthani,  shows  points  of  agreement  with  the  PiSacha  languages  of  the  north-west. 

These  Sapadalaksha  Gurjaras  came  into  Eastern  Rajputana,  and  their  language 
there  developed  into  Modern  Rajasthani.  But  as  has  been  shown  in  the  part  of  the 
Survey  dealing  with  Rajasthani,  this  is  not  a pure  language.  The  Gurjaras  settled 
among  a people  speaking  an  Indo- Aryan  language  of  the  Inner  Group  akin  to  Western 
Hindi.  They  adopted  this  language,  retaining  at  the  same  time  many  forms  of  their 
own  speech.  The  result  was  Rajasthani,  a mixed  language  in  which,  as  has  been 
shown  elsewhere,  the  influence  of  the  Inner  Group  of  Indo- Aryan  languages  weakens 
as  we  go  westwards.  In  the  north-east  of  Rajputana,  in  Alwar  ana  Mcwat,  the  influence 
of  the  Inner  Group  is  strongest. 


1 For  details,  see  the  Introductions  to  each  of  the  three  Puliflyl  Grcups. 

2 See  p.  20. 


10 


PAHi?l. 


Now  the  Gujurs  of  Swat  speak  this  mixed  Mfiwati  Rajasthani,  and  not  the  language 
of  the  Sapadalaksha  Gurjaras,  whatever  that  was.  Of  this  there  can  be  no  doubt.  Swat 
Gujuri  therefore  must  be  a form  of  Mewati  Rajasthani,  and  we  cannot  describe  the 
latter  as  a form  of  Swat  Gujuri,  for  we  know  that  it  originally  came  from  Sapadalaksha, 
not  from  Swat. 

Mr.  Smith  has  described  how  the  Gujars  of  ltajputana  can  have  entered  the  Panjab, 
and,  whether  the  details  of  his  theory  are  correct  or  not  (and  the  present  writer,  for  one, 
secs  no  reason  for  doubting  them),  we  may  take  it,  that  the  main  point, — their  entry 
from  Rajputana,— is  proved. 

We  are  thus  able  to  conceive  the  following  course  of  events.  The  Mewat  Gujars  went 
up  the  Jamna  Valley,  and  settled  in  the  l’anjab  plains.  There  they  amalgamated  with 
the  rest  of  tho  population  and  lost  their  distinctive  language.  Some  of  them  settled  in 
the  submontane  districts  of  Gujrat,  Gujranwala,  Kangra,  and  the  neighbourhood.  Here 
they  partially  retained  their  old  language,  and  now  speak  a broken  mixture  of  it, 
Pailjab!,  and  Hindustani.1  The  use  of  Hindustani  forms  in  this  mongrel  submontane 
Gujari,  far  from  the  River  Jainna  on  the  banks  of  which  Hindustani  has  its  proper 
home,  is  most  suggestive. 

Finally,  other  Gujars,  more  enterprising  than  their  fellows,  went  on  further  into 
the  mountains,  beyond  the  submontane  tract,  and  are  now-a-days  represented  by  the 
Gujurs  of  Swat,  Kashmir,  and  the  neighbourhood. 

These  last  wander  free  over  the  mountains  of  their  new  home,  and  have  little 
intercourse  with  the  other  inhabitants  of  the  locality.  They  have  hence  retained  the 
original  language  which  they  brought  with  them  from  Mewat.  But  even  here  we  shall 
see  in  tho  specimens  sporadic  waifs  picked  up  on  their  journey—  stray  Hindustani  and 
Pafijabi  forms,  retained  like  solitary  flies  in  amber,  within  the  body  of  the  Gujur  speech. 


3 ?ce  the  section  on  (iujuri,  beJow. 


17 


Khas-kura  or  Naipalt. 

Khas-kura,  to  mention  one  of  the  names  by  which  it  is  called,  is  tlie  Aryan  language 

spoken  in  the  State  of  Nepal.  It,  is  not  the  vernacular  of 
Where  spoke  any  part  of  British  India,  but  is  spoken  by  many  coolies 

employed  in  the  tea-gardens  of  Darjeeling,  as  well  as  by  our  Gorkha  soldiers.  As  will 
be  seen  later  on,  it  was  imported  into  Nepal  from  India,  and  is  primarily  the  language 
of  the  Gorkha  rulers  of  the  country,  whilo  the  mass  of  the  population  still  uses  the 
various  indigenous  Tibeto-Burinan  tongues.1  Wo  have  no  accurate  knowledge  as  to 
the  extent  of  the  area  in  which  it  is  spoken.  According  to  Hodgson,  who  wrote  in  1828, 
it  was  then  * so  generally  diffused  that,  in  the  provinces  west  of  the  Kali  river  it  has 
nearly  eradicated  the  vernacular  tongues,  and,  though  less  prevalent  in  the  provinces 
east  of  that  river  it  has,  even  in  them,  as  far  as  the  Trisul  Ganga,  divided  the  empire 
of  speech  almost  equally  with  the  local  mother  tongues.’  No  further  information  has 
been  published  since  these  words  were  written  more  rliau  eighty  years  ago. 

Before  the  conquest  of  Nepal  by  immigrants  from  Itajputana,  there  was  already 
an  Aryan  colony  dwelling  amongst  the  Tibeto-Burman  population.  This  was  the  tribe 
of  the  Khavas,  the  Kaaioi  of  the  Greek  geographers.  Who  they  originally  were,  and 
how  they  entered  India  is  a question  which  has  been  more  than  once  discussed  without 
arriving  at  any  definite  answer,  and  the  subject  need  not  detain  us  here.2 * 4  Bor  our 
present  purposes  it  suffices  to  note  that  they  have  occupied  the  Lower  Himalaya  from 
the  Jchlam  to  Nepal  for  many  centuries.  They  are  mentioned  in  Puranic  literature, 
^nd  Kalhana’s  Bajatarangini  frequently  refers  to  the  Western  Ivhasas  as  a thorn  in 
the  side  of  the  rulers  of  Ka&mir.  Nothing  particular  is  known  about  their  language, 
and  it  appears  that  even  about  the  year  1650  (i.e.,  a century  before  the  Gorkhas 
conquered  Nepal)  the  court  language  of  Patan,  near  Kathmandu,  was  not  Khasa,  but 
was  closely  allied  to  the  Maithili  dialeot  of  Bihari  spokon  immediately  to  its  south.2 
Spcoimens  of  it  show  that  it  was  not  the  same  as  the  modern  Aryan  language  of 
Nepal.  At  any  rate,  whatever  was  the  original  language  of  the  Khasas,  they  have 
long  abandoned  it,  and  have  even  given  their  name  to  ‘ Khas-kura,*  the  modern 
representative  of  the  language  of  their  Rajput  conquerors.1 

The  account  of  this  Rajput  invasion  is  fully  given  in  Dr.  Wright’s  History  of 
Nepal.  Briefly  it  is  this  : — Certain  Rajputs  of  Udaipur,  boing  oppressed  by  the 
Musalmans,  fled  to  the  north,  and  in  the  early  part  of  the  16th  century  settled  in  the 
eountrv  of  the  Lower  Himalayas,  including  Garhwal,  Kumaun,  and  Western  Nepal. 
In  1559  A.D.  a party  of  these  conquered  the  town  ot‘  Gorkha  (say  70  miles  to  the 
north-west  of  Kathmandu).  In  1768  Prithvi  Narayana  Shah  of  Gorkha  made  himsell 


1 Thea»  are  deacribed  i'>  Voluino  [II.  I’ art,  !. 

t For  a summing  up  of  the  evidence  on  the  subject,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  Introduction  to  this  ai  • PJ*’  ' 
See  also  Chapter  IV  of  Volume  11  of  The  Himalayan  Districts  of  the  Worth-Western  Provinces  of  India,  orimnt. 
Volume  XI  of  the  Gazetteer  of  the  Jiorth- Western  Provinces,  by  E.  T.  Atkinson  ; Allahabad,  1R84., 

• A drama  in  the  language  of  those  days  t ailed  the  Hari&chandranfitya  is  still  in  existence,  and  lias  een 

Professor  A.  Conrady,  Leipzig,  1891.  ^ twelfth  cent urv* 

4 According  to  tradition  the  Khafas  came  into  Nepal  with  RajA  Mukunda  bena  in  thu  early  pai^t  of : t 

Wright,  History  of  Sepal,  p.  171,  and  Sylvain  Levi,  Le  Sepal,  Vol.  I,  pp.  261  ff.  Vol.  II,  PP-  • 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


18 


KHAS-KUBA  OB  naipAlI. 


master  of  the  whole  of  Nepal  and  founded  the  present  Gorkhali  dynasty.  It  will 
thus  be  seen  that  the  ruling  classes  of  Nepal  maintain  that  they  are  of  Rajput  origin,  and 
their  language  which  is  tho  lingua  franca  of  the  country,  is  still  closely  connected  with 
the  Me  waii- Mar  wan  dialeot  of  Rajasthani  spoken  in  the  Udaipur  which  they  claim  as 


their  original  home. 


The  language  passes  under  various  names,  Europeans  call  it  Nepali,  or  ‘Naipali, 

i.e.,  the  language  of  Nepal.  This  is  a misnomer,  for  it  is 
Name  of  language.  not  the  language  of  Nopal,  but  only  that  of  the  Aryan 

rulers  of  the  country.  Tho  inhabitants  of  Nopal  itself  give  this  name  (in  a slightly 
corrupted  form)  to  the  principal  Tibeto-Burman  language  of  the  country,  Newari, 
and  call  the  Aryan  language  ‘ Khas-kura,’  or  ‘ KhaSa-speech.’  In  other  words,  the  Khavas, 
who  hare  abandoned  their  own  Aryan  language,  and  adopted  that  of  their  Rajput 
conquerors,  have  given  the  adopted  language  their  own  name.  It  is  also  called 
‘Gorkhali,’  i.e.,  the  language  of  the  Gorkhas,  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  Rajput  rulers 
of  Nepal  came  immediately  from  the  town  of  Gorkha,  as  already  statod.  Another 
name  is  Parbatiya,  or  the  language  of  the  Mountaineers,  which  is  much  used  in  Nepal 
itself  by  those  who  speak  the  language.  The  term  ‘ Khas,’  as  descriptive  of  the  Nepalese 
Hill  races,  is  at  the  present  day  only  used  by  the  British,  in  distinguishing  tlio  Gorkha 
Clihafctris  and  Khattris  from  the  other  fighting  classes,  such  as  Magars,  Gurungs,  Raisa 
and  Limbus.  Another  uamo,  Pahari,  also  meaning  ‘ Mountaineers’  language,’  was 
given  by  Mr.  Baines  to  tho  whole  group  of  Aryan  languages  spoken  in  the  Lower 
Himalaya  from  Nepal  to  Chamba.  He  divided  these  Paharl  languages  into  three 
sub-groups,  Western  Pahari  of  the  Punjab  Himalaya,  Central  Paharl  of  Garhwal  and 
Kumaon,  and  Eastern  Paluiri  of  Nepal.  Eastern  Pahari  is  therefore  another  title  of 
the  language  now  dealt  with,  and  its  names  are,  in  order,  lvhas-kura,  Naipali,  Gorkhali, 
Parbatiya,  and  Eastern  Paliari.  I shall  as  a rule  myself  employ  the  name  Khas-kura 
in  the  following  pages,  this  being  the  name  employed  in  British  India  by  the  people 
who  speak  it. 


No  information  is  available  as  to  whether  Khas-kura  possesses  any  local  dialects  or 
Dialects  n°t.  The  probability  is  that,  in  such  a mountainous  country 

there  are  many,  and  that  the  language  gradually  shades 
olT  into  the  Iiumauni  spoken  immediately  to  the  West  of  Nopal.  In  tho  year  1827 
the  Seram  pore  Missionaries  published  a version  of  the  New  Testament  in  the  • Palpa  * 
language.  Palpa  is  a town  in  Nepal  about  a hundred  miles  west  of  Kathmandu,  and 
the  language  of  the  translation  is,  as  might  be  expected,  a form  of  Khas-kura,  with  a 
tendency  here  and  there  to  agree  with  Kumauni.  There  are  important  differences  be- 
tween tho  literary  and  the  colloquial  forms  of  Khas-kura.  The  latter  borrows  idioms 
from  the  Tibeto-Burman  languages  spoken  in  the  neighbourhood,  which  materially  affeot 
both  declension  and  conjugation.  Eor  instance,  in  the  colloquial  (and  to  a loss  extent 
in  the  literary)  language,  the  direct  and  oblique  forms  of  the  noun  are  confused,  and 
in  the  colloquial  (but  not  in  the  literary)  form  of  speech,  the  agent  case  is  employed 

before  all  tenses  of  a transitive  verb,  and  not  merely  before  those  derived  from  the 
past  participle. 

Certain  broken  tribes  of  the  Central  Himalaya  speak  a corrupt  Khas-kura.  In 
each  case  it  can  hardly  he  sam  that  they  employ  a genuine  dialeot.  All  that  they  do  is 


INTRODUCTION. 


19 


to  speak  bad  Khas-kura.  Other  broken  tribe  * retain  their  Tibeto-Burman  speech  in 
greater  purity,  and  the  dialects  spoken  by  them  will  be  found  fully  described  in 
V'olume  III,  Part  i,  of  this  survey.  The  tribes  which  have  adopted  this  incorrect  Khas- 
kura  are  three  in  numbor,  vis. : — Dahl,  Dndhi,  or  Darh! ; Denwiir  or  Don  war  ; and  Kuswar. 
In  the  case  of  the  last  named,  while  the  vocabulary  is  almost  entirely  Khas-kura,  the 
grammar  is  still  Tibeto-Burman.  In  the  case  of  the  other  two  the  whole  language  is  much 
more  Aryan  in  its  oharaoter.  Our  only  authority  on  these  three  dialects  is  Hodmon’s 
Essay  on  the  subject,  in  Volume  XXVI  of  the  Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Sooiety  of  Bengal, 
which  is  quoted  in  the  list  of  Authorities  on  page  5.0  below.  In  this  essay  lie  gives 
vocabularies  of  each  of  them. 

In  the  list  of  Khas-kura  words  and  sentences  appended  to  this  section  of  the  survey, 
I have  added,  as  far  as  was  possible,  the  corresponding  words  in  these  dialects,  taken  in 
each  case  from  Hodgson’s  Vocabularies. 

Khas-kura  is  a language  spoken  in  Nepal,  of  which  country  we  have  no  census.  We 

Number  of  speakers  arf » therefore,  quite  unable  to  state  how  many  persons  speak 

it  in  its  proper  home.1  The  following  Table  shows  the 
number  of  speakers  recorded  in  British  India  in  1891  and  1901 


— 

18111. 

1901. 

Andamans  and  Nicobars  ....... 

95 

2 

Assam  . 

23 

20,196 

Baluchistan 

14 

Bengal  (and  States)  . ....... 

5,037 

81,313 

Bombay  (and  States) 

2 

Burma 

5,463 

1 

Madras  . • 

4 

j 

North-West  Frontier  Province  . . . . . * ; 

3.983 

i 

Punjab  (and  States)  ...  . . 

7.641 

United  Provinces  of  Agra  and  Oudh  (and  States) 

19,107 

24,149 

Central  India  Agency 

1 

75 

Kashmir  . ....... 

1 

! 

S5»J 

Bajputana  Agency  ........ 

i 

23 

Total 

i" 

! 24,262 

1 

1 

1,43,721 

The  1891  figures  are  certainly  incorrect,  but  are  given  here,  as  the  survey  is 
throughout  based  on  the  census  of  that  year,  corrections  being  applied  where  possible. 
All  these  people  are  immigrants  from  Nepal  or  children  of  immigrants.  Many  ol 
them,  of  oourse,  are  Gorkha  soldiers.  

1 la  the  Bastern  Pargsiws  of  the  Aimers  District  of  the  United  Province*,  there  are  reported  to  be  12.185.  domiciled 
Nftiphlls,  who  speak  a corrupt  form  of  their  native  language  mixed  with  KumaunJ,  tho  language  of  the  district.  It  is 
looally  called  ‘ 86riylli  Gorkh&H  ’ from  ‘ Sor,’  the  name  of  tho  pargaun  in  whioh  they  ohiefly  reside.  Vide  p.  238. 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV.  D * 


20 


khas-kurA  OR  KAIPAIiI. 


I am  not  aware  of  the  existence  of  any  old  Khas-kura  literature.  Professor  Conrady 

has  published  the  HarMchandranfitya,  a drama  written  in 
Literature.  Aryan  language  of  Nepal  in  the  middle  of  the  17th 

century  ; but,  as  explained  above  (page  17)  tho  language  is  not  Khas-kura.  Of  Lite  years 
a number  of  works  in  Khas-kura  have  been  published  in  Benares  by  the  Oorklui  Bhd - 
ratjlwan  Bustakdlaya.  The  most  important,  of  those  is  a version  of  tho  Ramayaiia 
by  Bhanu  Bhakta,  who  was  born  in  tho  year  1812.  Amongst  books  which  I have 
seen  may  be  mentioned  the  Birsikkd  (an  anonymous  oollection  of  stories),  Gopinath 
liOhani’s  translation  of  the  story  of  Nala,  Motiram  BlutUa’s  translation  of  the  Aphorisms 
of  Chanakya,  an  abridged  version  of  the  well-known  Bait  Hi  Bachisi,  and  a translation 
of  the  tenth  book  of  the  Bhdgavata  Buraya  called  the  Bh agava dbhak ti  V ilusinl. 
The  last  two,  so  far  as  the  copies  in  my  possession  go,  are  anonymous.  They  are  ex- 
cellent examples  of  Khas-kura,  and  I have  employed  them  freely  in  drawing  up  the 
grammar  in  the  following  pages.  Mention  has  already  been  mado  of  the  Scrampore 
Missionaries’  version  of  the  New  Testament  in  the  Balpd  dialect.  Since  then  the  British 
and  Foreign  Bible  Society  has  issued  the  complete  Bible  in  standard  Khas-kura. 

AUTHORITIES. 

The  earliest  mention  of  Khas-kura  (if  it  is  Khas-kura,  and  not  the  old  language  of 
the  Rha&is)  whieh  I have  come  across  is  in  Amaduzzi’s  Preface  to  Beligatti's  Jlphabetum 
Brammhanictim  sen  Indostanum  Universitatis  Kasi  (Rome,  1771).  Amaduzzi  gives 
a list  of  those  vernaculars  of  India  of  which  the  names  were  known  to  him.  This  list 
runs  as  follows “Bengnlensis,  Tonrutiana  (i.e.  Mai  thill),  Nepaleuais , Marathica, 
Be  guana,  Singalaea,  Telugica,  Tamulica.  ” Roman  Catholic  Missions  had  connexion 
with  Nepal  from  a very  early  date.  The  Jesuits  Gruber  and  Donville  visited  Kath- 
mandu in  1661  and  obtained  liberty  to  preach.  Regular  Missions  of  the  Capuchins 
began  in  1707,  and  soon  established  hospices  and  churches  in  Kathmandu  and  the 
neighbourhood.  When  the  Gorkhas  conquered  Nepal,  they  expelled  these  missionaries, 
who  then  settled  in  Bettiah  and  Patna,  wlicre  there  were  already  branches  of  their 
community.  These  Missionaries  busied  the  n selves  both  in  translating  from  Sanskrit 
and  into  the  then  language  of  Nepal.  Sonic  of  their  writings  still  exist  in  MS.  in 
the  Library  of  the  Propaganda  in  Rome.  It  would  be  an  interosting  task  for  some 
Italian  scholar  to  examine  these  manuscripts  (which  are  said  to  be  in ‘Nepali’)  so 
as  to  ascertain  definitely-  in  wbat  language  they  were  composed. 

The  following  is  a list  of  all  the  works  which  I have  come  across  that  deal  with 
Khas-kura  as  a language.  Avton’s  Grammar  is  very  rarely  met  with,  rind  1 have  myself 
never  seen  a copy. 

Adelung,  Johann  Christoph,  Afithr- cln t >m  odcr  nllytmeine  Fprarlienkunde  mil  deni  Vuter  Unger  als 
Sprachprobe  in  bey  nalie  funfhuridert  Sprachen  unci  Mundarten.  Berlin.  1 806-181 7.  Vol.  I, 
p.  205  : Vol.  iv,  pp.  66,  488. 

AytOK,  J.  A., — A Grammar  of  the  Nepalese  Language.  Calcutta,  1820. 

Hodgson,  H.  H., — Ethnology  and  Geography  of  the  sub-Himalayas.  Journal  of  tho  Asiatic  Society  of 
Bengal,  Vol.  xvii  11848),  Pt.  I,  p.  544.  [Khas-kura  Vocabulary], 

Hodgson,  B.  H., — On  the  Mongolian  Affinities  of  the  Caucasians.  Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of 
Bengal,  Vol.  rxii  (1853).  Reprinted  in  Miscellaneous  E stay 8 relating  to  Indian  Subjeote, 
Y'ol.  ii,  See.  7.  liondf  % 1880  [K1  as-knra  Vocabulary], 


INTKODTJCTION. 


21 


Hodgson,  B,  H..- -Comparative  Vocabulary  of  the  Languages  of  the  Broken  Tribe s of  Nepal,  Journal 
of  tho  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  Vol.  xxvi  (1857),  pp.  317  ff.  "Reprinted  in  Miscellaneous  Essays 
relating  to  Indian  Subjects,  Vol.  i,  pp.  161  ff.  London.  1880.  [Vocabularies  of  Dahi,  Dadhi, 
or  Darlii,  of  Denwar,  and  of  KuBwar]. 

Campbell,  [Sir]  G., — The  Ethnology  of  India.  Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  Vol.  sxxt 
(l’8G6),  Pt.  II,  Special  No.  Appendix  C.  iB  a Comparative  Table  of  Northern  and  Aryan 
Words  (including) Khas  of  Nepal. 

Campbell,  [Sir]  G., — Specimens  of  the  Languages  of  India , including  those  of  the  Aboriginal  Tribes  of 
Bengal , the  Central  Provincesy  and  the  Eastern  Frontier.  Calcutta.  1874.  « Nepalese  Voca- 

balary, pp.  150  ff.) 

WRIGHT,  Daniel, — History  of  Nepal,  translated  from  the  Parbatiyd  by  Munsht  Shew  Shunkcr  Singh 
and  Pandit  Shri  Gundnand  : with  an  Introductory  Sketch  of  the  Country  and  Ptople  of  Nipll 
by  the  Editor.  Cambridge,  London,  1877.  [P.  300  a * Parbatiya ' Vocabulary.] 

Turnbull,  A., — A Nepali  Grammar  and  English- Nepali  and  Nepali- English  Vocabulary 

designed  for  the  use  of  Missionaries , Tea-planters , and  Military  Officers.  Darjeeling,  1887, 
Second  edition,  1904.  The  second  edition  is  practically  a new  work. 

Kellogg,  S.  H., — A Grammar  of  the  Hindi  Language , in  which  are  treated  the  High  Hindi  . 

etc .,  with  copious  Philological  Notes.  2nd  edn.  Revised  and  enlarged.  London,  1893.  [Con- 
tains a Khas-kura  Grammar  under  the  title  of  Naipali]. 

Dopping-Hepenbtal  and  Kusiial  Sing  Burathoki, — Khds  Gurkhdli  Grammar  and  Vocabulary.  Calcutta. 
1899. 


No  Khas-kura  works  have  been  edited  by  Europeans.  A number  of  texls  (including 
those  mentioned  above  on  page  20)  have  been  printed  in  Benares,  and  can  bo  bought 
in  most  large  bazaars  of  Northern  India. 

The  following  account  of  Khas-kura  Grammar  is  mainly  based  on  my  own  reading, 
Gr  ^ ^ and  represents  the  language  of  the  lih agar  a dbhaldi  VHd- 

sinf,  and  of  the  translation  of  the  Baital  Pa  chi  si,  which 
are  tlie  two  books  that  I have  studied  with  most  care.  I have  also  compared  every- 
thing that  I have  written  with  tho  second  edition  of  Mr.  Turnbull's  Grammar,  and  have 
tilled  up  lacuna}  from  that  work.  For  further  particulars,  the  student  is  referred  to 
that  excellent,  work.  It  should,  however,  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  language  described 
in  it  is  rather  tho  form  of  Khas-kura  spoken  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Darjeeling,  than 
that  of  Kathmandu. 


The  alphabet  employed  is  the  well-known  Nagari.  The  only  peculiarity  which 

occurs  is  the  occasional  use  of  two  dots,  thus  **  instead  of",  as 
Alphabet  the  sign  of  An undsika  or  nasalization.  Thus,  hand  is  some- 

times written  utiftt,  not  vtfw-  In  printing  the  specimens,  I have  followed  the  usual 
Indian  custom  and  have  given  not  **. 

The  phonetic  system  of  Khas-kura,  is  the  same  as  in  other  Indo- Aryan  languages. 

Its  sounds  are,  as  a rule,  well  represented  by  the  ordinary 
Nagari  alphabet.  In  most  of  the  modern  Indian  verna- 
culars a iinal  a is  silent.  Thus  tho  word  WTO  bhdga , a share,  is  pronounced  hhdg. 
This  is  not  the  case  in  Khas-kura,  in  which  this  final  short  a is  pronounced,  and  WTO 
would  he  pronounced  bhdga . If  a word  ends  in  a silent  consonant  the  fact  must,  in  the 
Nagari  character,  be  indicated  by  the  sign  x or  drama.  Thus,  bhd't  (singA,  a share. 


Pronunciation. 


must  he  written  WTO,  and  mdnis,  a man,  must  be  written  wif*TO-  If  the  drama  were 
omitted  wtOto  would  have  to  he  pronounced  mdnisa.  It  is,  however,  fair  to  point  out. 
that  just  us  we  are  careless  in  dotting  our  t’s  and  crossing  our  t’ s,  so  Naipalis  are  very 
careless  in  the  use  of  this  drama,  and  frequently  omit  it  when  it  should  he  written. 


22 


KHAS-KURA  OK  NAIFALl. 


Nai  pails,  like  other  Indians,  are  very  careless  in  distinguishing  in  writing  between 
long  and  short  *,  and  between  long  and  short  n,  long  * being  quite  commonly  written 
instoad  of  short  i and  short  u instead  of  long  «.  Thus  they  generally  write  sift  instead 
of  irft  for  gari,  having  dono,  and  instead  of  ^ for  ghue,  a bribe. 

As  in  many  other  Indian  vernaculars  there  is  a short  e,  sounded  like  the  e in  ‘ net,’ 
as  well  as  the  long  e ; and  a short  o (like  the  first  o in  * promote  ’)  beside  the  long  o. 
Natives  make  no  distinction  between  these  short  and  these  long  letters.  As  has  been 
done  in  the  easo  of  Bihar!,1  the  following  characters  will  bo  employed  in  this  work  : — 


Initial. 


Non-initial. 


V 


s 


e 

$ 

o 

d 


At  the  same  time  the  reader  must  be  warned  that  my  knowledge  of  Khas-kuru  is 
derived  from  native  books  in  which  this  distinction  is  not  made,  and  that  I have  only 
written  the  short  e when  I have  beon  quite  certain  of  its  existence.  Hence  many  <?’s 
which  I have  written  long  are  possibly  short. 

In  pronouncing  the  letters  e and  e,  a y is  often  put  before  them.  "When  they 
follow  a vowel  the  y must  be  inserted,  but  after  a consonant  it  is  optional.  Thus,  bhae, 
they  became,  always  becomes  bhaye,  while  gave,  they  did,  may  optionally  become  garye 
There  is  a tendenoy  for  the  short  e to  become  a,  .so  that  tea- kb,  of  him,  may  be  pro- 
nounced tea-kd,  tyes-ko,  tas-kd,  or  tyas-kd.  All  these  forms  occur  in  writing,  tyes-ko 
boing  probably  the  most  usual  pronunciation.  Similarly,  yak  or  ek,  one • yas-kd  or 
yes-ko,  of  this ; yeotd  or  yota,  one ; while  the  plural  termination  ^ haru,  is  often 
written  ^ for  heru. 

Just  as  we  havo  seen  that  the  short  e of  tes-ko,  sometimes  appears  as  ya  in  tyas-kd , 
so  the  long  e,  especially  when  final,  very  often  appears  in  writing  as  yd.  Thus,  gave  or 
garye,  they  did,  is  often  written  garyd.  So  absolutely  interchangeable  are  these  two  spell- 
ings that  in  a copy  of  the  Parable  received  from  the  Nepal  Darbar,  the  word  for  * dead  * is 
once  written  maryb-kb>  and  once  written  mare-ko,  while  in  a duplicate  copy  written  by 
the  same  scribe,  the  former  is  written  mare-kd,  arid  the  second  marya-kd.  Similarly 
thiyd,  or  thiyd,  they  were;  sarhyd  or  sdfh(y)e,  hulls;  and  gayd  or  gaye,  they  went.  The 
explanation  of  these  variations  is  that  in  former  times  the  pronunciation  was  garya, 
marya,  thiyd,  sarhyd,  gayd,  and  so  on ; hut  this  pronunciation  is  now  obsolete,  ye  or  e 
being  sounded  instead  of  yd.  The  spellings,  with  yd  are  therefore  survivals  from  the 
obsolete  pronunciation.  In  the  following  pages  the  modem  spelling  with  e will  be 
adopted  as  much  as  possible. 

The  short  o is  very  similarly  often  represented  by  wa,  as  in  ifYfr  hos  or  haicas, 

thou  art. 


1 See  Yol.  V,  Part  II,  p.  22. 


INTRODUCTION. 


23 


Nouns  which  in  Hindi  end  in  a long  i,  often  shorten  it  in  Khas-kura.  Thus  the 
Khas-kura  word  corresponding  to  the  Hindi  wrcfr  ndn  is  srrfy  ndri  or  wit)  ndrl.  Tho 
shortening  of  a final  * is  especially  common  in  poetry. 

Vowels  arc  very  frequently  nasalized  by  the  addition  of  anmidsika.  This,  again,  is 
quite  optional.  Thus,  md  or  md,  in  ; hand  or  htimi,  we ; chhu  or  chhu,  I am.  When  a 
word  ends  in  a nasalized  short  i,  it  is  usually  written  ui.  Thus,  tapdi,  Your  Honour,  is 
written  ffxnfsr  tapdni.  Similarly,  a g preceded  by  anundsika  is  often  written  & n. 
Thus,  *Nr  saga  or  ^ Sana,  with.  Lastly,  a nasalized  final  vowed  is  often  incorrectly 
indicated  by  v »,  instead  of  by  anundsika.  Thus,  hou,  I may  he,  is  written  either 
Tfl#  hou  or  (incorrectly)  houn. 

Article. — The  numeral  ok,  or  yak,  one,  is  commonly  employed  as  an  indefinite 
article.  Thus,  yak  jam  saharhdsi  minis  saga,  literally,  with  one  person  city -dwelling 
man,  *.<?.,  with  a citizen.  Mr.  Turnbull  mentions  the  word  tyo,  that,  as  being 
employed  in  the  sense  of  a definite  article.  The  word  chat,  chdhi  or  chnht  appended  to  a 
word  has  the  same  foroe.  Tints,  the  Nepal  Darbar  version  of  the  Parable  bas  tl  madhyb 
kdiichhd-chdhi-le  bdbu  saga  bhandn,  on  the  younger  of  them  saying  to  his  father;  tes-ko 
jetha-chahi  clihord  (Bible  Society’s  version, — tyes-kb  jethb  chat  chhbrb),  the  cider  son 
of  him  (was  in  the  field) ; bdbu-chdhi-le  blianyb,  the  father  said. 

Declension:  Gender. — There  are  two  genders,  masculine  and  feminine.  Nouns 
indicating  females,  and  these  only,  are  feminine.  All  others  are  masculine.  It  thus 
follows  that  the  distinction  of  gender  is  purely  sexual.  The  so-called  grammatical 
gender  does  not  occur,  and  lienee  many  nouns  which  are  feminine  in  ITindi  are 
masouline  in  Khas-kura.  For  instance  ‘ your  order  ’ would  bo  tnmhdrl  dgyd  in  Hindi, 
but  is  timro  (not  limri)  dgyd  in  Klias-kurii.  This  method  of  expressing  gender  is  no 
doubt  due  to  the  influence  of  the  surrounding  Tibeto-Burman  languages  of  Nepal. 

Number. — There  are  two  numbers,  singular  and  plural.  The  plural  is  formed  by 
adding  haru  (sometimes  written  hern)  before  which  nouns  ending  in  o,  change  o to 
d.  Thus,  chdkar-harn,  servants ; he  to,  a boy  : ketd-haru,  boys.  This  haru  is  not 
usually  employed  with  nouns  signifying  inanimate  things.  Thus,  in  tho  Parable,  wo 
have  gbrd-ma,  not  gord-haru-ma,  on  the  feet.  The  termination  haru  is  the  same  as  the 
Malvi  Rajasthani  plural  termination  hbr,  horo,  or  Jib  no,  and  as  the  hwdr  which  was 
employed  with  a similar  force  in  the  Kanauji  dialect  of  Western  Hindi  at  the  beginning 
of  the  last  century.1  It  is  also  connected  with  tho  termination  har,  used  in  the 
Chhattisgarhi  dialeet  of  Eastern  Hindi  to  give  definiteness  to  a noun.2  The  plural  is 
also  sometimes  formed  by  doubling  the  word,  as  in  ghar  ghar,  houses  ; sahar  sahar-ma> 
in  cities. 

Case, — As  in  other  Indo-Aryan  languages,  cases  are  generally  formed  by 
means  of  postpositions.  Certain  nouns  are  put  into  an  oblique  form  before  these  are 
added. 

In  the  case  of  nouns  in  b and  u,  the  oblique  form  singular  ends  optionally  in  d,  and 
the  oblique  form  plural  is  tho  same  as  the  nominative  plural.  Thus,  chhorb,  a son  ; obi. 
sing,  chhorb  or  chhbri  ; nom.  and  obi.  plur.  chhbrd-haru.  Nouns  ending  in  consonants 
remain  unchanged  in  the  singular,  hut  optionally  take  a in  the  oblique  plural.  Thus, 

* Sec  Vol.  IX,  Part  I,  p.  83,  and  Part  II,  p.  55. 

« See  Vol.  VI,  p.  28. 


24 


KHAS-KUBA  OK  NAlPAlii. 


hat,  a band ; obi.  sing,  and  nom!  plur.  hat ; obi.  plur.  hat  or  hat  a.  Nouns  ending  in  it 
preceded  by  a vowel,  change  u to  ioa  in  the  oblique  plural.  Thus,  nau,  a name ; obi. 
plur.  natca.  This  ^-termination  of  the  obliquo  singular  is  undoubtedly  the  original  onS, 
having  been  brought  from  ltajputana ; and  the  oblique  form  in  6 or  u ( i.e.,  the  same 
as  the  nominative)  is  due  to  tho  influence  of  the  surrounding  Tibeto-Burmau  languages 
which  do  not  employ  an  oblique  form.  Indeed,  the  influence  of  Tibeto-Burmnn 
languages  has  resulted  in  the  complete  confusion  of  the  oblique  and  of  the  direct  form, 
the  direct  form  being  often  used  for  the  oblique,  and,  vice  versa,  the  oblique  form  being 
continually  employed  for  the  nominative.  Thus,  the  regular  oblique  form  of  chhoro, 
a son,  is  chhora,  as  in  chhord-kb,  of  a son,  but  chlwrb  may  be  used  instead,  as  in  chhoro - 
kb,  of  a son.  Ou  the  other  hand,  the  proper  direct  form  is  chhoro  as  in  (Bible  Society 
version)  tyee-ko  jethb  chat  chhoro  khet-ma  thiyb , his  elder  son  was  in  the  Sold,  while  the 
Nepal  Darbar  version  has  tes-kb  jetha-chdhi  chhora  khet-ma  thiyb.  In  fact  the  Bible 
Society  aod  Mr.  Turnbull  employ  chfybro  throughout;  while  the  Nepal  Darbar  always 
lias  chhora.  If  it  is  suggested  that  this  is  because  the  former  two  are  mistaken,  it  can 
be  shown  that  this  is  not.  the  fact,  for  other  Nepal  writers  employ  chhbt'b.  Thus  the 
seventeenth  story  of  the  Khas-kura  version  of  the  Baitdl  Bachlsi  commences  ekd 
TJj jay  ant  nivdsi  (lot j -kb  chhoro  Gvndkar  thiyb,  Gunakar  was  the  son  of  a Brahman 
who  dwelt  in  Ujjain.  There  is  just  the  same  confusion  with  words  ending  in  u.  Take, 
for  instance,  the  word  baba,  a father.  In  the  third  specimen,  taken  from  the  Khas-kura 
version  of  the  10th  book  of  the  Bhagavata  purdna,  we  have  the  following  instances  of 
its  oblique  form,  some  ending  in  a and  some  in  d oocurring  within  a few  lines  of  each 
other : — 

Bhagawdn-le  dtnd-babu-ldi  gydn-prdpta  bhayekojdni,  Bhagawfin,  knowing  that 
his  mother  and  his  father  had  attained  to  knowledge,  (determined  that,  etc.). 

bdbu-kd  ghar,  in  the  house  of  a father. 

jo  putr  a dhan-le  sarir-le  samartha  bhai  dnui-babd-ldi  dnanda  dulai-na,  tho  son 
who,  being  capable,  does  not  give  joy  to  his  mother  and  his  father  with  his 
wealth  and  with  his  body. 

In  the  case  of  other  nouns,  the  difficulty  does  not  arise,  as  in  their  case  the  oblique 
form  is  usually  the  same  as  the  nominative. 

The  oblique  form,  without  any  postposition  may  be  used  for  any  oblique  case 
especially  for  the  genitive  and  for  the  locative.  This  most  usually  occurs  in  the  case  of 
verbal  nouns  (or  infinitives)  and  participles,  but  wo  have  just  seen  ghar  (the  oblique 
form  of  ghar,  a house)  employed  to  mean  ‘ in  the  house.’  The  following  examples  occur 
in  Specimens  II  and  III : bhandd  (nom.  bhando),  on  saying ; tarhd  (nom.  tarhb) 
pardes  gai,  having  gone  to  a far  country  ; pardu,  in  (i.e.  while)  happening;  pugda , 
on  arriving ; sodhdd,  on  asking : (Specimen  III)  chhadd,  on  (i.e.  while)  being,  while 
Specimen  II  has  chhada-md  in  exactly  the  same  sense.  Very  often,  when  an  oblique 
form  is  employed  in  this  way  it  ends  in  e or  ai  instead  of  in  d,  and  this  e or  ai,  aa 
explained  above  uuder  the  head  of  pronunciation,  is  frequently  written  yd.  Thus  we 
have  (Specimen  1)  sungur-haru-le  khadai  garyeka  kbsd-le,  by  the  husks  (which  were)' 
made  in-eating  by  the  swine,  i.e . which  were  being  eaten  by  them ; (Speoimen  II) 
farakai,  at  a distance,  far ; (Specimen  II)  aune  (nom.  ditnu),  on  coming.  So  (Luke 
ii,  33)  na  roil  khadai  na  dakh-ra « piudat  dyb%  he  came  neither  eating  bread  nor 


INTEODTJ  CTION . 


25 


drinking  wino  (here  khadai  is  literally  * on-eating,’  or  • an-eating,’  so  piudai,  a- drink- 
ing) ; (Luke  xvii,  14)  tin-hem  jadai,  as  they  wore  going,  literally,  they  on  going. 

The  above  oblique  terminations  in  at  must  be  distinguished  from  the  emphatic 
particle  ai  in  words  like  sab-ai,  quite  all  | dher-ai , very  ; kas-ui-lc,  anyone; 
jast-ai,  exactly  like ; sadh-ai,  even  always  ; ter-ai,  oertainly  thine ; all  of 
which  occur  in  the  second  speoimen.  I have  given  a full  account  of  the 
formation  of  these  oblique  forms  beoause  1 have  ventured  to  dilTor  consider- 
ably, on  essential  points,  from  Mr.  Turnbull’s  grammar.  According  to  that 
gentleman  nouns  in  6 and  u do  not  form  a singular  oblique  form  in  d. 
Thus,  according  to  him  the  oblique  form  singular  of  ketb,  a servant-boy,  is 
always  ketb,  and  never  keld.  I cannot  find  that  this  statement  is  borne  out  by 
my  reading.  In  further  proof  of  this  question,  I give,  in  an  appendix  to  this 
grammatical  sketch,  a list  of  all  the  oblique  forms  in  u and  d occurring  in  the 
second  and  third  specimens,  both  of  which  are  written  by  natives  of  Nopal. 

We  may  enumerate  the  cases  as  follows  : — Nominative,  Agent,  Accusative,  Instru- 
mental, Dative,  Ablative,  Genitive,  Locative,  and  Vocative;  and  taking  chhbro  (or 
chhord),  a son,  we  may  give  the  declension  as  follows : — 

Sing.  Plur. 

Nom.  chhord  (chhord),  a son.  Nom.  chhbrd-haru,  sons. 

Ag.  chhord-le  ( chhbrb-le ),  a son.  Ag.  chhord-haru-le,  sons, 

Ace.  chhbrd-ldi  ( chhbro-ldi ),  a son.  Acc.  chhbrd-harn-ldi,  sons. 

Inst,  chhord-le  (chhorb-le),  by  a son.  Inst,  chhord-haru-le , hysons. 

Dat.  chhbrd-ldi  (chhbro-ldi),  to  a son.  Dat.  chhbrd-harn-ldi,  to  sons. 

Abl.  chhord-bata  (chhbrb-bata),  from  a son.  Abl.  chhbrd-hara-bbta,  from  sons. 

Gen.  chhbrd-ko  (chhbro-kb),  of  a son.  Gen.  chhbrd-ham-kb,  of  sons. 

Loe.  chhord-nid  (chhorb-md),  in  a son.  Loc.  chhbrd-haru-md,\n  sons. 

Voc.  he  chhord  ho  (he  chhbro  hb),  O son.  Voe.  he  chhbrd-haru  hb,  O sons. 

Similarly  may  be  declined  any  other  noun  in  b or  n.  Thus,  bdbd-kb  (bdbtt-kb),  of 
a father. 

In  the  case  of  other  nouns,  the  oblique  form  is  usually  the  same  as  the  nominative ; 
thus,  chhori,  a daughter ; c/ihbri-ib,  of  a daughter ; chhori-haru,  daughters : ghar,  a 
house,  ghar-kb,  of  a house. 

Nouns  ending  in  a consonant  may  take  the  termination  a in  the  oblique  plural. 
Thus,  ghara-md,  in  houses ; khet-ma , in  t lie  field ; kheta-ma,  in  the  fields. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  nouns  signifying  inanimate  tilings  usually  drop  tho 
termination  ham  in  the  plural.  Hence  we  have  ghar,  not  ghar-haru.  Moreover  these 
nouns  usually  drop  the  termination  lai  of  the  accusative  (hut  not  the  Idi  of  the  dative). 
Thus,  ansa  (not  ausa-ldi)  diyo,  he  gave  the  share ; dliaii  batuli,  having  collected  wealth. 
On  tho  other  hand,  lai  is  always  used  with  animate  nouns,  as  in  dmd-bdbu-ldi  jani, 
knowing  the  mother  and  the  father.  When  there  can  be  no  mistake  about  the  number 
ham  is  dropped  even  in  tbe  case  of  animato  nouns,  as  in  did  chhCrd  thiye,  there  were 
two  sons. 

Tbe  Nominative  iathe  case  used  for  the  subject  of  all  intransitive  verbs;  as  in 
(Luke  xvii,  20)  iStcar-ko  raj  kaile  auda  chha  ? Ihoar-ko  raj  riip  dekhtne  gari  audai-na, 

von.  IX,  vaxt  iv.  E 


26 


KHAS'KUBA  OR  NAIPlLl. 


when  will  the  Kingdom  of  God  come  ? The  Kingdom  of  God  oomoth  not  by  its  form 
being  seen ; kati  chdkar-haru  tliiye,  how  ninny  servants  were  there  ? 

The  Agent  case  is  employod,  as  in  Hindustani,  for  the  subject  of  transitive  verbs  in 
a tense  formed  from  the  past  participle.  There  is,  however,  this  difference  that  the  verb 
does  not  agree  with  the  object,  as  in  that  language.  It  agrees  in  gender,  number  and 
person  with  the  subject.  Thus,  habu-le  ansa  diyd , the  father  gave  the  share ; bdbu-le, 
dekhi,  dayd  gari,  danri  gai,  tes  kb  gar  dan-nut  ankamdl  gari , mtcdi  Jchdyd,  tho  fatbor, 
seeing,  making  compassion,  going  running,  making  an  embraoe  on  his  neck,  ate  a kiss  ; 
timrd  habu-le  yak  bhoj  g/tre,  vour  father  made  a feast  (here  gave  is  plural,  in  an 
honorific  sense) ; (Luke  viii,  43)  yeull  strl-le  pachhdri-batb  chheu  dye-ra  as-ko  hastra-ko 
jhimkd  chhbi,  a woman,  having  come  towards  behind  ,Him,  touched  the  hem  of  His 
garment.  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  tense  of  a finite  verb  is  not  formed  from  the 
past  participle,  le  is  not  used.  Thus  (from  the  Specimen  IV)  tyb  rakh-wald  rajya-ko 
khabardari  gar-thyo,  that  watcher  was  guarding  the  city.  So,  for  the  future,  ma,  uthi 

dphnd  bdbu  chheu  gai  . . . . . bhanuld,  I,  avising,  going  near  my  father will  say, 

and  for  the  present,  ma  timi-ldi  kal-dekhi  bachauchhu,  I am  saving  you  from  death 
(Specimen  IV).  When  the  present  participlo  of  a transitive  verb  is  used  absolutely  in 
the  oblique  form  its  subject  is  also  put  into  the  agent  case,  as  in  chdkar-le  bhandd  tyb 
risdi  bhitra  gayest,  on  tho  servant  saying  (lit.  on  the  saying  by  the  servant)  (this), 
being  angry  lie  did  not  go  inside.  So,  also,  it  is.  sued  before  the  Gerundive,  or  Futuro 
Passive  .participle  of  transitive  verbs,  which  has  a passive  signification,  as  in  mai-le 
panne  ausa-bhdg,  by-mo  tho-to-be*got  share,  i.e.,  the  share  which  I shall  get ; sugnr-le 
khdne  dhuto,  the  husks  which  the  swine  did  eat,  lit.  by-the-swine  to-be-eaten  husk. 

The  above  is  the  construction  which  I have  gathered  from  a somewhat  minute 
analysis  of  books  written  by  natives  of  Nepal,  and  may  be  accepted  as  the 
idiom  of  the  literary  language.  In  the  fact  that  the  verb  is  not  changed 
by  the  object,  we  see  the  influence  of  Tibeto-Burman  languages.  The 
influence  is  still  plainer  in  the  colloquial  language,  which  in  this  respect 
differs  markedly  from  the  literary  stylo.  In  the  colloquial  language,  the 
agent  case  may  optionally  be  employed  before  anytenso  of  a transitive 
verb  whether  derived  from  the  past  partioiple  or  not,  iu  fact  it  is  more 
customary  to  employ  it  than  to  employ  the  nominativo.  My  authority 
on  this  point  is  Captain  Austaman  Singh,  orderly  officer  to  the  Besident  in 
Nepal.  The  point  was  specially  referred  to  him,  and  he  has  been  kind 
enough  to*  explain  that  for  ‘ he  will  strike  ’ both  tyb  (nominativo)  kuf-ld 
and  tes-lc  (agent)  kut-ld  are  correct.  Ho  adds  that  lyo  kut-ld,  though 
correct,  is  out  of  use,  and  that  \tes-le  kut-ld  is  more  idiomatic  and  emphatic.' 
The  same  idiom  is,  he  says,  used  in  the  present,  the  past,  and  in  the  future 
tenses. 

The  above  is  very  nearly  the  same  as  what  Mr.  Turnbull  says  on  page  98  of  the 
second  edition  of  his  grammar.  Mr.  Turnbull,  however,  excepts  the  pronoun 
of  tfie  first  person,  which  he  says  is  not  used  in  the  agent  case  before  tho  present 
and  future  tenses,  but  only  before  the  past  tenses.  In  this  ho  is  not  borne  out 
by  Captain  Austaman  Singh,  who  distinctly  says  that  ma  (nominative) 
kutu-ld  and  mai  ls  (agent;  kutu-ld  are  both  in  use  for  * I shall  strike.' 


INTRODUCTION. 


27 


This  idiom  of  using  tho  agent  caso  before  all  tenses  of  a transitive  verb  is  exactly 
the  same  as  that  of  Tibeto-Burman  languages,  and  the  fact  that  it  has  not 
yet  become  customary  in  the  literary  form  of  speech  shows  that  its  adop- 
tion into  the  colloquial  language  must  be  of  recent  origin.  The  follow- 
ing examples  of  this  idiom  arc  taken  from  the  Naipali  New  Testament,  the 
language  of  which  follows  Mr.  Turnbull’s  rule.  As  already  explained,  I have 
not  come  across  any  in  books  formally  written  by  natives. 

Present  tense, — tts-le  kas-kb  bikhay-ma  bhanda-chha,  about  whom  is  this 
(person)  speaking  (John  xiii,  22)  ? 

Future  tense, — timiharu-ma-kb  ek-jand-le  ma-ldi.  pakarai  dinchha,  one  of  among 
you  will  betray  mS  (John  xiii,  21).  With  regard  to  this  passage  Captain 
Austaman  Singh  remarks  that  the  kb  is  superfluous.  If  it  remains,  it 
should  be  separated  from  timiharn-ma , and  the  whole  sentence  would  mean 
‘ (I  do  not  know)  which  one  of  you  will  betray  me.' 

The  most  common  Ablative  postposition  is  bdta  or  hath,  from.  Others  arc  dekhi, 
from;  se,  sita,  saga,  or  tana,  with,  from.  Examples  arc  rin  bdta,  from  the  debt.; 
yatikd-barkha-dekhi,  from  so  many  years;  Bach  an  Iswar-sita  thiyo,  the  Word  was  with 
God  (John  i,  1) ; yak-jand  tatiarbdsi-mdnis  say  a,  with  a citizen  (but  this  is  hardly  an 
ablative).  Dekhi,  it  may  be  observed,  is  employed  in  the  same  sense  in  Bhil  dialects.1 

The  Genitive  postposition  is  kb.  Which,  as  in  Hindustani,  is  an  adjective.  Agreeing 
with  a feminine  noun  it  becomes’ ki,  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  only  animate  beings 
can  bo  fominine  in  Khas-kurS ; when  agreeing  with  a masculine  noun  in  the  nominative 
singular  it  is  ko,  but  when  the  noun  is  in  any  other  singular  case  or  in  the  plural,  it 
becomes  kd,  for  which,  as  in  the  case  of  nouns  in  o,  ko  is  often  substituted.  When 
governed  by  another  postposition  it  is,  in  the  same  way,  sometimes  kd  and  sometimes  kb. 
Examples  are  bhdg-kb  sampati,  the  goods  of  the  share ; brahman-ki  kanyd , the 
daughter  of  the  Brahman;  bdbu-kd  ghar,  in  the  house  of  the  father;  sketed  bhanme  elc 
jand  yahudi-kd  sat  bhdi  chhbrdliaru  thiye , there  were  seven  brothers,  sons  of  one 
Scova,  a Jew  (Acts  xix,  14) ; tes-des-kd  manis  saga , with  a man  of  that  country  ; 
tapdui-haru-kd  najlk,  near  Your  Honours;  mdtd-pitd-ko  najik,  uear  the  mother  and  the 


father. 

Tho  genitivo  postposition  is  often  added  to  an  adjective  without  affecting  its  mean- 
ing. It  is,  in  this  way,  very  frequently  added  to  the  past  participle,  which,  as  should, 
properly  he  the  ease,  is  then  put  into  the  oblique  form.  Thus,  bhayb,  bhaye-kb  (or 
bhayd-kd),  been,  become ; garyo,  garye-kb  (or  gare-kb,  garyd-ko ),  done ; Dharanagar 
ndm  gare-kb  yek  Sahar,  a city  Dharanagar  name-made,  ie-,  named  Dharanagar, 
Sankha  ndm  gare-kd  (plural  of  respect)  rdjd,  a king  named  Sahkha;  jogl  rukh-md 
jhnndiye-kb,  an  ascetic  suspended  on  a tree.  It  will  be  observed  that  when  kb  is  thus 
added  to  a participle,  it  generally  gives  the  force  of  an  adjective.  _ 

This  genitive  suffix  ko  must  be  distinguished  from  another  ko  meaning  ‘ at  al , an 
used  in  negative  sentences.  This  is  a pure  Rajasthani  form  which  has  sunned  in 
Nepal.  Examples  are  ma  timrb  chhord  bhannn  ybgya  kb  aba  bhat-ita,  now  I became  no 
at  all  fit  to  be  called  your  son ; similarly,  layak  kb  chhai-na,  a little  lower  i owu  in  ie 


Parable.  _ 

* See  Vol.  IX,  Part  III,  p.  110. 


VOL.  IX,  FART  IV. 


28 


khas-kurA  or  naipAlI. 


The  usual  postposition  of  tho  Locative  is  mo,  md  or  ma,  in.  Others  are  mat  hi, 
upon ; samma,  up  to.  Md  means  not  only  ‘ in/  but  also  * on/  as  in  khit-md,  in  the 
field ; gardan-md , on  the  neck. 

There  are  numerous  interjections  employed  to  form  the  VoO&tivCt  which  are 
prefixed  or  suffixed  to  the  oblique  form. 

Adjectives.— Most  adjectives  are  immutablo,  the  only  ones  which  ohange  are  those 
that  end  in  o or  in  a.  These  ohange  the  termination  to  i or  l when  agreeing  with  a 
feminine  noun,  and  to  a when  agreeing  with  a masoulinc  noun  in  the  oblique  case  singular 
or  in  the  plural.  As  in  the  case  of  nouns  in  o and  in  u,  the  oblique  form  singular  as 
often  as  not  ends  in  o instead  of  a.  Thus,  rdtnro  chhoro,  a beautiful  son,  rdmrl  ohliorl,  a 
beautiful  daughter,  rctmrd  (or  rdmrb)  rhhbrd-ko  (or  chhorb-kb),  of  a beautiful  son  ; rdmrd 
chhbrd’harti,  beautiful  sons ; rdmrl  chhbrl-haru,  beautiful  daughters.  So,  kahchhd 
chhord-le,  (by)  the  younger  son ; tdrhd  pardes  gai,  going  to  a distant  land ; dphnd 
bhdg-kb,  of  his  own  share;  fkd  dvij-ke,  of  a Brahman  ; hut  also,  dphnu  kheta-md,  (he  put 
him)  in  his  fields ; barb  naanratdi-lS,  with  great  humility. 

The  comparative  is  forrfted  by  adding  bhandd,  than  (lit.  in  saying)  to  the  noun 
compared,  as  in  let  to  bhandd  keti  rdmrl,  the  girl  is  more  beautiful  than  tho  boy,  literally, 
in  mentioning  tho  boy,  the  girl  is  beautiful.  * * 

The  superlative  is  formed  with  sab  bhandd,  than  all,  or  sabai  bhandd,  than  even  all, 
as  in  sabai  ketd-harn  bhandd  Bdmldl  rdmrb , Jtam  Lai  js  the  most  beautiful  boy,  literally, 
in  mentioning  even  all  boys,  Ram  Lai  is  beautiful ; so, -w  sabai  bhandd  sdno  chha,  he  is 
shortest  of  oven  all.  Dekhi  may  be  used  instead  of  bhandd. 

The  earlier  numerals  are  given  in  the  list  of  words.  It  is  usual  (as  in  Tibeto-Bur- 
man  languages)  to  add  a defining  word  to  a numeral.  In  the  ca.se  of  men  this  is  jands, 
a person,  as  in  yak-jana  mduis-ko,  of  one-person  man,  i.e.,  of  a certain  man.  For  things 
tlio  sutfix  is  wata  or  otd,  which  with  ek,  one,  becomes  ck-icatd,  yeotd,  yotd , or  yeufd. 
Similarly,  kati-watd,  how  many  (things)  ? Ycutd  is  also  used  for  persons  ; an  example 
will  he  found  in  Specimen  I. 

Pronouns. — In  the  pronouns,  the  plural  is  commonly  used  instead  of  the  singular. 
In  this  respect,  the  singular  is  familiar  or  disrespectful,  while  $lie  plural  is  formal  or 
respectful. 

The  first  two  personal  pronouns  are  declined  as  follows - 


Sing.  Nom.  ma,  I. 

ta,  thou. 

Ag.  tiiai-le,  I. 

tai-le,  thou. 

Obi.  ma,  mai,  me. 

ta,  tai,  thee. 

Oen.  mero,  my. 

tero,  thy. 

Plur.  Nom.  hami,  we. 

timi,  ye. 

Ag.  hami-le,  we.  *■ 

timi-le,  ye. 

Obi.  hami,  us. 

timi,  you. 

Gen.  hdmrb,  our. 

timro,  your. 

I 


There  are  several  varieties  of  these  forms.  In  the  first  place,  all,  except  those  of  the 
plural  of  the  second  person,  are  very  commonly  nasalized.  So  that  we  have  ma,  mat-li 
m$rb  hami,  hamro,  to,  tat,  tSib, 


INTRODUCTION. 


29 


Mr.  Turnbull  gives  m8  for  ‘ 1/  which  is  used  colloquially  in  Darjeeling.  It  is 
-evidently  a by -form  of  ma. 

In  the  plural  haru  is  often  added,  as  hami-haru,  timi-haru. 

After  the. oblique  forms  the  usual  postpositions  are  employed,  as  in  ma-ldi,  me,  to 
me ; timi-bdta,  from  you.  The  genitives  are  treated  exactly  like  a substantive  geni- 
tive in  Jed.  Thus,  mero  bdbti,  my  father ; merd  bdbu-ko , of  my  father ; timro  atjya , your 
Command ; timrd  bdbu-le  yak  bhoj  gare,  your  father  made  a feast ; hdmnl  nimitta,  for 
our  sake. 

The  respectful  pronouns  of  the  second  person  are  dphu,  Your  Honour,  and  lapdt  or 
tapdni , Your  Honour.  Both  are  declined  rogularly  like  substantives.  They  are  con- 
strued with  the  impersonal  honorific  forms  of  the  verb  (see  pago  41)  as  in  dphu  h'unu 
hunchha , Your  Honour  is ; tapdni-le  rdkhnu  bho,  Your  Honour  kept  (us).  Tapafti 
may  also  be  followed  by  the  second  person  plural,  as  in  tapdiii  cbhau.  Your  Honour  is. 

The  Demonstrative  Pronouns  tyb  and  n are  employed  as  pronouns  of  the  third  person. 

In  order  to  emphasize  personal  pronouns,  the  syllable  nai  is  suffixed,  as  in  ma-nai,  I ; 
ta-nai,  thou  ; hami-nai , we  ; tt-nai,  he ; hdmi-haru-nai,  we,  and  so  on.  Other  emphatic 
forms  of  tho  singular  are  mai,  I ; tai  or  tani,  thou  ; and  ui,  he.  The  oblique  form  of 
u is  us,  and  its  emphatic  form  is  us-ai,  not  us  nai.  So  also  in  the  ease  of  other  similar 
forms  ending  in  s.  The  oblique  plural  is  una,  and  its  emphatic  forms  uni.  So  also  with 
other  similar  forms  in  n.  ,» 

The  Reflexive  pronoun  is  dphu  or  (emphatic)  dphai,  which  is  deolined  regularly 
like  a noun,  except  that  its  genitive  singular  is  dp hnu  (obi.  sing,  dphnd,  or  aphnn , plur. 
aphid).  Equivalent  to  Hindi  dpas-me,  we  have  dpasta-md,  or  apus-md,  amongst  them- 
selvos,  mutually.  Equivalent  to  Hindi  apne  dp,  of  one’s  own  aocord,  is  dphu  dphai.  An 
emphatic  form  of  dphnu  is  dphnai,  as  in  dphnai  mdsu,  his  very  own  flesh.  It  cor- 
responds to  the  English  “ my  own,”  “ your  own,”  “ his  own,”  etc.,  while  dphnu,  as  in 
Hindi,  is  rathor  equivalent  to  the  possessive  case  of  the  subject  of  the  sentence,  “ my,” 
“ your,”  “ his,”  etc.  Aphnn  is  not  so  strictly  used  as  in  Hindi,  sometimes  referring 
to  the  object,  instead  of  the  subject  of  the  verb,  as  in  Kfishna-le  dphnd  ghara-md  sabai- 
Idi  basdlnu-bho,  Krishna  settled  them  all  in  their  own  houses. 

The  regular  Demonstrative  pronouns  are  yo,  this,  and  u,  that,  or  he.  They  are 
thus  deolined : — 

Sing.  Nom.  yo,  this  u,  that.,  he 

Obi.  yes  or  yas  us 

Plur.  Nom.  iua,  ini,  in  una,  uni,  tin 

Obi.  ina,  ini,  in  una,  uni,  tin 

In  tlie  plural  we  often  meet  yina,  yini ; touna,  xouni ; and  haru  may  be  added. 

Examples  in  the  specimens  are  yd  mero  chhdrd,  this  my  son ; yas-ldi  de,  give  to 
this  one ; yd  timro  chhord,  this  thy  son ; yd  tero  ohdl,  this  thy  brother ; yo  gydn  diua 
fhik  ohhai-na , it  is  not  right  to  permit  this  knowledge. 

In  the  version  of  the  Parable  reoeived  from  the  Nepal  Darbar  we  have  nij 
used  as  a demonstrative  pronoun,  as  in  nij  kdnchhd  chhord-le , that  younger  son ; 
nij-ldi  pdyS-ko-le,  because  he  had  got  him.  So  (in  the  translation  of  tho  J]  hag  a vat  a 
Purdna)  ntf  daitya-kd  pet  chiri  hernu  bho,  (Krishna),  splitting  open  the  belly  of  that 
demon,  looked  (inside). 


30 


khas-kurA  or  naipAli. 


The  Rolativo  pronoun  is  jo,  who,  its  correlative  demonstrative  being  tyd  or  aor 
which  is  also  employed  as  an  ordinary  demonstrative  and  as  a pronoun  of  the  third 
person.  They  are  thus  deolinod  : — 

Sing.  Nom.  jo,  jun  tyd,  90 

Obi.  jes,  jas,  jun  tes,  tci8 

Plur.  Nom.  jun  ti,  ti,  tini-harn 

Obi.  jun  tl,  ti,  tint,  tine,  tina,  tin 

Examples  of  the  use  of  these  pronouns  are 

jas-le  ..Jarir  utpanna  garyo,  who  produced  a body  ; jo  aukh  bdlakh-ldi  hunch  ha,  so 
hdmi-le  pdye-nau. , what  happiness  becomes  to  (i.e.  is  obtained  by)  a child,  that  wo  did  not 
obtain  ; tyd  amrit  phal  rdjd-le  ranl-ldi  diye,  that  ambrosia-fruit  tho  king  gave  to  the 
queen  ; tyd  risdi  bhitra,  gayena,  he,  being  angry,  wont  nbt  inside ; tes-le  bdbu-ldi  jabdb 
diyo,  ho  gave  answer  to  his  father;  tes  thdd-md,  in  that  place  ; but  (Specimen  IV)  jo  tyd 
jogi-ldi  ndhd  Iduld,  he  who  will  bring  here  that  ascetic;  ti  hrdhman-ldi  dha n-daulath 
di,  having  given  wealth  and  riches  to  that  Brahman  (here  ti  is  used  honorifically  in  the 
plural ; so  in  tina-kd  char  rani  ch A a chhord  bhae,  of  him  there  were  four  queens  and 
six  sons).  Proper  plurals  are  ti-madhye,  among  them  (the  younger  said  to  his  father) ; 
tini-harn-ld  dnanda  mdnye , they  experienced  rejoicing.  The  agont  singular  of  jo  is 
sometimes  jalle.  I have  not  come  across  any  corresponding  form  such  as  talle,  but  from 
ko,  we  have  kalle. 

The  Interrogative  Pronouns  are  ko,  who  ? and  ke,  what  ? (neuter). 

Sing.  Nom.  kb  ke 

Obi.  has  kaa,  ke,  kun 

Plur.  Nom.  kun 

Obi.  kun  * 

n * 

The  plural  of  ke  is  the  same  as  the  singular. 

As  usual,  ke  is  often  written  kye  or  kyd.  Examples  of  tho  use  of  these  pronouns 
are: — kas-kb  keto,  whose  servant-boy  ? tyb  timi-lc  kassaha  kinyau,  from  whom  did  you 
buy  that  ? timro  nan  ke  (or  kyd ) ho,  what  is  your  name?  kyd  ho  ? what  is  it  ? timi  kun 
paltan-ma  chhau,  what  regiment  are  you  in  ? The  Agent  singular  of  kb  is  kas-le  or  kalle. 

Koi,  kbhi  or  kohl,  is  ‘ any  one,  some  one  ’ ; with  an  oblique  form  singular  kasai.  Kei, 
kye,  kehi,  kdhi,  kaihi,  or  kbhi,  is  ‘ anything,  something,’  its  oblique  form  being  the  same 
as  the  nominative.  Examples  of  the  use  of  these  pronouns  are  : — kasai- le  kehi  diyena, 
anyone  did  not  give  him  anything;  kehi  din  pachhi,  after  some  days  ; (Specimen  IV) 
kdhi  bakhat-md,  at  a certain  time ; am  kaihi  hbina  (Bhagavata  Purana,  X,  page  153),  it 
is  not  anything  else ; kail  he  kdhi  K fish  n a hdmildi  td  saiij hanchhan,  docs  Krishna  ever 
remember  us  at  all  (ib.  page  155). 

Yati  (plur.)  means  ‘ these  many,’  and  kati,  * how  many  ? ’ 

With  kd  suffixed,  we  have  kati-ka , meaning  ‘ many.’ 

A.  General. 

Conjugation.- -The  Khas-kurA,  verb  has  borrowed  some  of  its  formations  from  the 
surrounding  Tibeto-Burman  languages,  amongst  which  the  most  noteworthy  aro  the 
Aorist  tense,  and  tho  impersonal  honorilio  conjugation. 

1 ho  honoiific  conjugation  will  be  dealt  with  subsequently.  The  simple  conjuga- 
tion may  be  either  positive  or  nogative.  The  negative  conjugation  is  confined  to- 


INTRODUCTION. 


31 


certain  tenses.  Note  that  throughout  the  simple  positive  conjugation,  the  1st  person 
plural  always  ends  either  in  au  or  in  §.  Tho  rule  is  that  after  a vowel  or  y we  have  u, 
hut  after  a consonant  au.  Thus,  thiytt,  we  were  ; chhau,  we  are. 

Before  coming  to  the  simple  conjugation,  we  shall  first  consider  the  Verbs  Sub- 
stantive, which  are  also  employed  as  Auxiliary  verbs. 

B.  Auxiliary  Verbs  and  Verbs  Substantive. 

There  are  two  verbs  substantive  in  the  present  tense,  one  formed  from  the  base 
chha  and  the  other  from  the  base  ho.  Tho  former  base  is  troated  as  a participle,  and, 
hence,  in  some  persons  it  has  speoial  forms  for  the  feminine.  When  such  forms  are  not 
given  in  the  paradigms  it  is  to  be  assumed  that  the  feminine  is  the  same  as  the  mascu- 
line.1 Tho  present'  is  thus  conjugated : — 


« ^ ! 

Singular. 

ritual. 

Person. 

Mast*. 

Fem. 

i 

? i 

Masc.  j 

1 

Fern. 

1 

chhu , ehhu}  I am 

. 1 

i 

i chhau 

i 

2 

chhas 

clillCS 

chhau 

chheu 

3 

chha 

chhc 

chhau 

chhin 

The  negative  conjugation  is  : — 

Singular. 

i 

Plural. 

Pcnon. 

Masc. 

Pem. 

Masc. 

Fern. 

i 

chhaina , chhuTna , or 

chhuTna , I am  not 

chhainau , ehhauna 

2 

chhainas 

chhinas 

chhainau , ehhauna 

chheuna 

3 

chhaina 

chhina 

chhainan 

chhina  n 

Emphatic  forms  are  rhechhu,  I am  indeed,  and  rahenaclihu , 1 am  not  indeed,  both 
being  conjugated  like  chli n,  above.  In  Darjeeling  the  corresponding  forms  are,  according 
to  Mr.  Turnbull,  rficlihu  and  rainachhu. 

The  second  form  of  the  present  tense  of  the  verb  substantive  is  principally  employed 
in  asking  questions.  It  is  thus  conjugated 

Person. 

Singular. 

i Plural. 

i 

i ' 

/iff,  I am 

hau 

2 

has,  hawa .t 

j ha  u 

3 

h$ 

j him 

1 Philologists  should  uoto  thst  this  verb  is  also  treated  as  a participle  iu  Klimiri,  and  also  m Kamanin  and  GarhirMi. 


32 


KlIAS'KtmA  OR  NAIPAlI. 


The  Negative  form  is  : — 


Person. 

Singular. 

Plural. 

j 

1 

| 

hdina  or  huTna,  I am 

hdinau , liauna , huna 

i 

not 

2 I 

1 

hd  wa i na  s,  hdinas 

hdinau , hauna 

i 

3 ! 

1 

hdina 

hdina  n 

The  Past  Tense  of  the  Verb  Substantive  is  thus  conjugated.  Like  chha,  the  tense  is- 
treated  participially,  and  there  are  feminine  forms. 

j Singular. 

Plural. 

Person. 

I 

Masc. 

Fein. 

Masc. 

Fein. 

i 

thiyd  or  thiyd 

thiyu 

2 

thiis 

thiyan 

i 

i 

i 

8 

thiyd 

tliii 

thiyo,  thiyd 

i 

thiln 

This  is  often  contracted,  so  that  we  also  hare 

- 

| * Singular. 

j Plural. 

Person. 

1 

Mb  sc. 

Fcm. 

Masc. 

1 

Fern. 

1 

th8$  thyff , thyd 

thya 

2 

this 



thyau 

3 

j 

thya 

tu 

tht,  thy thya 

thin 

The  Negative  forjns  arc  : - 

- ' 

Person. 

Singular.  1 

. i 

Plural. 

I 

Masc. 

Fein. 

Masc. 

Few, 

i 

thiyana,  Ihiyrna , thiina  ! 



thi^anaut  thiyenau , thiy~ 
auna 

••• *•« 

2 

thinaSf  thilnas 

thiyanau , thiyenau , thiy~ 
auna 

3 

i 

thiyana*  thiyena  . 

thiina 

thiyanan,  thiyenan 

thilnan 

JKTUODL'CTIOX. 


33 


Examples  of  the  use  of  these  forms  occurring  in  the  specimens  are  : — 

ma  marda  chhu,  I am  a-dying. 

ma  timro  chhord  bhamid  lit  yak  kb  chhaina,  1 am  not  at  all  wortliv  to  be  called 
y.our  son. 

ta  sadhai  mai-sdga  chhas,  thou  art  always  with  me. 

merb  jo  chha,  (that)  which  is  mine. 

yb  ft y fin  dim  thik  chhaina,  it  is  not  proper  to  allow  this  knowledge. 

kyd  ho,  what  is  it  ? 

terai  ho,  it  is  even  thine  (here  the  verb  is  not  employed  interrogatively). 

jet hd-chdhi  chhord  khet-md  thiyb,  the  older  son  was  in  the  field. 

dui  chhord  thiye,  there  were  two  sons. 

talid-kd  raja  Gandharoasen  thiye,  of  there  the  king  was  (plural  of  respect) 
Gandharva-sena. 

yb  rdjya-md  C hand  roman  raja  thiye,  in  this  kingdom  Chandrabhanu  was 
(plural  of  respect)  kin?. 

yek  se  yek  jdnkdr  thiyo,  each  was  (plural  of  respect)  more  learned  than 
the  other. 

Chhu,  I am,  has  a present  participle  chhddb,  being.  Its  locative  chhadd-md  or 
chhadai,  or  its  oblique  form  chhadd  or  clihada,  in  being,  is  very  often  used  as  an  adverb 
meaning  ‘ while.*  Thus: — ti-chhbrd  dhe-rai  fardkai  chhadd-md,  while  that  son  was  a. 
long  way  off ; barb  namratdi-lc  prasannu  gardune  bhaye-kd  chhadd,  while,  with  great 
humility,  they  became  contented-makers,  i.e.  while  with  great  humility  they  made  them 
content. 


C.  The  Simple  Positive  Verb. 

(a)  Roots  ending  in  a consonant. 

The  conjugation  of  these  verbs  is  carried  out  as  follows  : — 

The  Infinitive  find  the  Future  Passive  Participle  are  the  same  in  form,  both 
being  made  by  suffixing  nn  to  the  root.  Thus,  garnn,  to  do,  or  it  is  to  he  done.  When 
tho  root  ends  in  a vowel  it  may  optionally  bo  nasalized,  as  in  dinu,  or  dlnu,  to  give ; 
khdnu  or  khanu,  to  eat.  The  infinitive  is  properly  a verbal  noun  with  the  sense  of  the 
action  of  the  verb.  Thus,  garnn  (infinitive)  is  literally  * the  act  of  doing.*  The 
Infinitive  and  Future  Passive  Participle  have  an  oblique  form  ending  in  wa  or  m, 
whioh  is  more  commonly  employed  in  the  sense  of  the  infinitive,  hut  the  direct  and 
oblique  forms  are  frequently  confused.  Thus  in  Specimen  II  we  have  both  : — 

Ma  timro  chhord  bhanna  ybgya  kb  aba  bhaina,  I became  not  at  all  worthy  to-be- 
said  your  son,  and 

Ma  timro  chhord  bhanna  hi  yak  kb  chhaina,  I am  not  at  all  worthy  to-be-said  thy 
son,  in  which  both  bhannu  and  bhanna  represent  direct  forms  of  the  future  passive  par- 
ticiple. The  state  of  affairs  is,  in  fact,  exactly  the  same  as  in  tho  ease  of  nouus  in  b and 
u (see  page  24  ante). 

As  example  of  tho  proper  direct  infinitive  or  verbal  noun,  we  have : — 
hdmi-le  harkha  garnn 1 mnndsib  chha,  by  us  joy  to  make  is  proper. 
ananda  hdmi-bata  pdunu  bhayena,  the  getting  of  joy  from  us  did  not  occur. 

1 This  may  alto  bo  construed  a*  a Future  Pusaive  Participlo  ‘ by  us  joy  to  bo  made  is  proper.’ 

VOt..  IX,  PAST  IV. 


» 


34 


KHAS-KURA  OR  NAIPALI. 


On  the  other  hand,  we  have  the  direct  form  in  na  in : — 

yd  gydn  dim  (hlk  clihaina,  to  allow  this  knowledge  is  not  right.  Here, 
according  to  Captain  Austaman  Singh,  dinu  would  be  equally  correct. 

When  the  senso  is  oblique,  as  in  an  infinitive  of  purpose,  I have  only  met  the  infini- 
tive in  na  or  nd  in  literature,  but  Mr.  Turnbull’s  grammar  gives  only  the  direct  infinitive 
in  nu,  and  the  Bible  Society’s  version  of  the  New  Testament  follows  his  authority. 
Thus : — • 

majd  garna-ldi  yotd  path  a diyenan,  you  did  not  give  one  kid  to  make  rejoicing. 
tirtha-jdtrd  garna  gaye , he  (plural  of  respect)  went  to  make  pilgrimage. 
Bhagawan-ko  dariau  garnd-le,  from  seeing  Bhagawan  (Bliagavata  Purana,  X, 
page  160). 

dorian  garna  aula , I will  come  to  see  (infinitive  of  purpose)  (ib.) 
d baptismd  hunu-ldi  dyu,  lie  came  to  he  baptized  (Matt,  iii,  13.) 

In  compound  verbs,  such  as  potentials,  inccpfcives,  per  missives,  or  aequisitives,  the 
termination  na  is  usually  employed  in  literature,  but  Mr.  Turnbull  (p.  91)  always  gives 
the  direct  infinitive  in  mi.  Thus  : — 

prasasta  rdti  khdna  na  saki,  not  boing  able  to  eat  ample  bread. 
rin-chnkti  kuna  saktaina,  there  cannot  be  payment  of  the  debt. 
chetiye-pachhi  hhanna  lagyo,  after  coming  to  his  senses,  he  began  to  say. 
dphmt  pet  bharna  pdyena,  he  did  not  get  (permission)  to  fill  his  own  belly. 
ubarna  pani  pdune,  getters  (of  permission),  on  the  other  hand,  to  leave  over  and 
above. 

tapani-haru-kd  najik  basna  paycnau,  we  did  not  get  (permission)  to  dwell 
near  Your  Honours. 

Wc  sometimes  come  across  the  locative  of  the  infinitive,  in  ne,  as  in  : — 
yd  timrb  chhord  dune,  on  this  your  son  coming. 

Bhagatoan-kd  yastdbae.han  swine,  bittikai  ‘ jo  agyd  ’ bhani,  Jamaraj-le  bdlakh 
hajir  gar-diye,  on  hearing  such  words  of  Bhagawan,  Yamaraja,  saying  at 
once  ‘that  which  is  your  order  (shall  he  obeyed)’,  produced  the  lad 
(translation  of  Bhdgavata  Bur  ana,  X,  page  153). 
p ran  jane  beld-md,  at  the  time  of  one’s  life  departing  (ib.,  pago  156). 

Somet  imes  this  infinitive  in  e is  employed  even  as  an  ordinary  oblique  infinitive, 
before  a postposition,  as  in-Basudev  gdi  dinv-kd  ichchhd  garye-ko  thiye,  Yasudeva  had 
made  a wish  (i.e.  an  intention)  of  giving  cows  (Bhdgavata  Buraya,  X,  page  150),  in 
which,  according  to  Captain  Austaman  Singh,  dina-ko  would  bo  more  oorrect. 

The  future  passive  participle  is  frequently  employed  in  the  sense  of  a respectful 
imperative.  Thus,  garnu,  it  is  to  be  done,  means  * please  do '?  In  this  sense  it  is  the 
basis  of  the  whole  respectful  conjugation  which  will  bo  described  lator  on.  A good 
example  of  this  use  of  the  participle  is  in  Specimen  IV. 

Hajur-le  tyai  jogbldi  nidrnn,  by  Your  Honour  with  regard  to  that  very  ascetic  he 
is  to  be  killed,  i.e.,  Your  Honour,  please  kill  that  ascetic. 

In  the  Bhdgavata  Burcna,  X,  page  151,  we  have i dui  bhdi-ldi  parhnuke  thiyof 
khdh  sunnn  tkiyb , what  was  necessary  for  these  two  brothers  to  be  studied  ? It  was 
only  necessary  to  be  heard  (once) . 


INTRODUCTION. 


35 


When  the  Future  Passive  Participle  is  employed  as  an  adjeotive,  it  often  takes  the 
termination  ne  (or  nyd),  probably  a confusion  with  the  noun  of  agency.  (See  below.) 
Examples  art! : — 

mai-le  pdune  ama-bhdg,  the  share  to  be  got  by  me. 

8ugur-le  khdne  dhutd-le,  with  the  husk  to  be  eaten  by  the  swine. 

The  same  in  form  as  this  locative  of  the  Infinitive  or  Future  Passive  Participle  in 
ne  or  nyd  is  the  Noun  of  Agency,  which  is  very  common,  as  in  game , garnye,  or 
gar  nyd,  a doer,  or  one  who  is  about  to  do.  Examples  are : — 

sngur  chardune  kdm-md,  in  the  business  (of)  a feeder  (of)  swine. 

ubarna  pani  pdune,  getters  (of  permission),  on  the  other  hand,  to  leave  over  and 
above. 

timro  sampdti  khdi  dine,  one  who  has  eaten  up  your  property. 

prasanna  gardune , (men)  who  caused  them  to  become  satisfied. 

chdrai  purushdrtha  dine,  givers  of  the  four  objects  of  human  (desire). 

The  Present  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  do  to  (he  root.  Thus,  gardo,  doing. 
If  the  root  ends  in  a vowel,  it  is  nasalized  before  the  do;  e.g.  from  the  root  di,  give,  we 
have,  dido,  and  from  the  root  hu,  become,  hudo.  So  also  the  root  rah,  remain,  takes  a 
nasal  in  this  participle.  Thus,  rdhdo.  After  a hard  consonant  tho  termination  is  to, 
not  do;  thus,  saktb,  being  able.  This  participle  is  an  adjective.  Its  oblique  form 
ends  in  d (thus,  gardd).  As  usual  its  feminine  is  gardi,  and  the  masculine  plural 
gardd.  A locative  in  a,  ai  or  e is  also  not  uncommon.  Tims,  garda , gardai  or  garde: 
in  doing.  We  can  also,  of  course,  have  ganld-md. 

I have  not  come  across  any  instances  in  the  specimens  of  the  direct  form  singular  of 
this  participle.  For  the  direct  plural  we  have  (Specimen  TV)  rdjddhirdj  JJikramdjit 
rahdd  bhaye,  he  became  remaining  (plural  of  respect)  (i-e.  he  became  and  remained) 
Vikramaditya,  the  king  of  kings. 

Several  examples  of  tho  oblique  form  of  this  participle  have  been  given  above  on 
page  24.  It  will  be  sufficient  to  give  a list  of  them  here  : — 
bhandd,  on  saying. 
pardd,  on  happening. 
pugdd,  on  arriving. 
sbdlidd,  on  asking. 
chhadd , chhddd-md,  while  being. 
khadai,  on  eating,  an-eating. 
piudai,  on  drinking,  a-drinking. 
jadai,  jadd,  while  going. 

As  will  be  seen  from  the  above,  this  method  of  employing  the  oblique  or  locative 
form  of  the  present  participle  is  very  common. 

To  this  oblique  present  participle  kheri  (which  seems  to  mean  * while  ’ or  ‘ during ' ) 
is  often  added,  as  in  garda  kheri  or  gardai  kheri,  while  doing.  This  group  of  forms  is 
so  important  that  we  may  conveniently  give  it  a name  of  its  own  and  call  garda,  garda, 
garda-md,  gardai,  garda  kheri  or  gardai  kheri,  tho  Adverbial  Participle. 

The  Past  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  yd  to  the  root.  Thus,  garyd,  did.  In 
Khas-kura  the  past  participles  of  transitive  verbs  have  lost  their  original  passive  meaning. 

VOL.  IX,  part  tv.  p " 


3G 


KHAS-KURA  Oil  NAII'AlI. 


Thus,  gar  yd  does  not  mean  ‘done’  but  'ono  who  has  done.*  ‘Done*  would  be  expressed 
by  the  past-participle  of  the  passive  voice,  gariyb,  which  will  be  dealt  with  further  on. 

This  participle  is  an  adjective  and  lias  a feminine  gar'/,  and  a masculine  singular 
oblique  form  and  a masculine  plural  form,  both  of  which  are  gave.  As  explained  above 
on  page  22  wherever  gave  occurs,  we  may  have  gorge  or  garyd  instead.  Thus : — 
kharcho  gari  sake  pachhi,  aftor  having  completed  doing  expenditure. 

When  employed  as  an  adjective  this  participlo  is  usually  put  into  the  oblique  form 
and  ho  is  added,  so  that  we  have  gare-kb , which  looks  like  a genitive.  This  gare-ko 
is  itself  liable,  as  usual,  to  be  declined.  Thus,  fern,  gare-kl,  obi.  masc.  sirig.  gare-kd, 
and  so  on.  Of  course  garc-ko  most  often  appears  as  gar  ye -kb  or  gar  yd- kb.  Examples 
are  : — 

maryd-kb  thiyb,  he  was  dead. 
hardfye-kb  thiyb,  he  was  lost. 

kusaldnamla-sahit  vij-ldi  paye-kb-le,  by  having  got  him  safe  and  sound  (i.e. 

because  he  had  got). 
marc- kb  thiyb , he  was  dead. 


Specimen  III : — 

dnid-bdhu-lai  gydn  prdpta  hhaye-kb  (for  lhaye-kd)  jdni,  knowing  the  father 
and  mother  (were)  become  knowledge-obtainers.  II ere  Aw  is,  as  explained 
on  page  27,  used  for  the  plural  kd. 
bdbu-kd  ghara  base-lib , one  who  has  dwelt  in  the  house  of  his  father. 

Specimen  IV  : — 

Dharanagar  ndma  gare-kb  yck  so  liar,  a city  (which)  made  the  name 
Dharanagar,  i.e.,  which  was  named  Dharanagar. 

Sahkha  na m gare-kd  rdijd,  a king  named  Sahklia  (plural  of  respect). 
yek  jbgi  rukh-md  jhundlye-kb,  an  ascetic  lmnged  on  a tree.  Here  jhundlye-kb 
is  the  past  participle  of  the  passive  of  the  root  jhntul.  The  active  past 
participle  would  be  / hnnde-kb. 


The  Conjunctive  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  i to  the  root.  Thus,  gari, 
having  done;  batuli,  Mving  collected;  dekhi,  having  seen;  klidi,  having  eaten ; basi, 
having  dwelt,  and  many  others  in  the  .specimens.  To  this  kana  is  often  added  as  in 
gari  kana,  having  done.  Often  the  oblique  or  plural  form  of  the  past  participle  gave, 
garye,  or  garyd  with  rn,  and,  added,  thus,  gare-ra,  is  employed  instead.  Gare-ra  means 
they  (or  he)  ‘did  and, ’^equivalent  to  ‘having  done.’  Thus  in  the  fourth  specimen,  we 
have  vnitni-le  chhbrd  kddh-md  bbke-ra  tirlha-jdlrd  garna  gage,  the  saint,  put  tlio  son  on 
(his)  shoulder  and  went  to  make  a pilgrimage;  which  may  also  he  translated  ‘ putting 
tho  son  on  his  shoulder,  he  went,  etc.’  * ° 


The  Old  Present,  now  generally  employed  as  a Present  Subjunctive  or  as  an 
Imperative,  occurs  in  all  Indo- Aryan  languages  in  much  the  same  form.  It  is  made 
by  adding  the  personal  terminations  to  the  root  direct.  Thus,  yard,  I do,  I may  do. 

Examples  of  tho  use  of  this  tense  are  dherai  kahd-tak  hinti  garu,  how  far  may  (i.e. 
need)  I make  a long  representation  ; hami  khdi  pii  majd  gar  am,  let  us,  having  eaten  and 
drunk  make  rejoicing;  yek  kathd  sun,  hear  a story;  tes-le  bdbu-ldi  jabdb  diyo,  ‘ hera,'  he 
answered  his  lather  (saying),  ‘see  ’ (plural  of  respect) ; say  barkha-samma  texed  gari,  if 
he  do  service  for  a hundred  years. 


INTRODUCTION. 


37 


The  Future  is  formed  by  adding  the  syllable  Id  to  the  Old  Present,  as  in  Rajasthani 
(Marwarl),  and  somewhat  as  in  Bihar!  (Bliojpuri).  As  in  the  latter  there  are  some 
irregularities  owing  to  certain  of  the  terminations  being  added  to  the  Id,  instead  of  to 
the  root.  In  the  third  person  plural  lan  becomes  nan . The  only  example  of  this 
tense  occurring 'with  a consonantal  verb  in  the  specimens  is  bhanuld , I will  say  (to  ray 
father).  It  will  be  seen  below  that  the  Aorist  tense  is  quite  commonly  employed  as  a 
future. 

The  Fast  tense  is  formed  by  adding  the  personal  terminations  to  the  past  participle. 
In  the  third  person  singular  masculine  and  feminine,  and  in  the  third  person  plural 
masculine  no  terminations  are  added.  Thus,  garyb,  he  did ; gave  (garyb,  or  garya, 
see  page  22),  I did.  The  past  tense  of  a neuter  verb  is  exactly  the  same  as  that  of  a 
transitivo  verb,  and  both  agree  with  the  subject,  and  not  with  the  object  as  in  the  case 
of  Hindi  transitive  verbs.  The  only  difference  in  idiom  is  that  the  subject  of  transitive 
verbs  in  the  past  tenses  is  put  in  tbe  case  of  the  agent,  as  explained  on  page  26.  This 
does  not  affect  the  form  of  tbe  verb  in  any  way.  Thus : — 

mai-le  pap  garb,  I did  sin. 

dherai  sukh-hhbg  garyau,  you  made  much  pleasure  (and)  happiness. 

chhurd-lc  bdbu-ldi  bhanyu,  tbe  son  said  to  the  father. 

kumdlc-le  telbldi  mdryb,  the  potter  killed  the  oilman. 

yek  din  besyd-le  bhatu,  one  day  the  courtesan  said. 

timrd  bdbu-le  yak  bhoj  gave,  your  father  made  (plural  of  respect)  a feast. 

tini-harn‘le  ananda  mdne,  they  celebrated  rejoicing. 

Bikramdjit-le  rdjya  gave,  Vikramaditya  did  (plural  of  respect)  ruling,  i.e.  he 
ruled. 

Rdjd-lc  ti  bmhman-ldi  bidd  gare,  the  king  made  (plural  of  respect)  leave  to 
depart  to  the  Brahman  (i.e.  dismissed  him). 
yak-jand  saharbasi  mdnis-sdga  gai  basyo,  going  with  a citizen,  he  dwelt. 
merb  chhbrd  maryd-kb  thiyb  pheri  hachyb,  ray  stp  was  dead,  again  escaped  (i.e. 
came  to  life).  ft  ; , 

The  Aorist  tense  is  formed  by  suffixing  the  present  tense  of  the, auxiliary  verb  to 
the  root.  The  latter  remains  unchanged,  but  the  former  is  conjugated  throughout,  and 
any  optional  form  may  be  used.  Thus,  gar-chhu,  I do.  This  tense  is  formed  on 
the  analogy  of  the  Present  tense  of  the  adjoining  Tibcto-Burman  languages  sj>oken 
in  Nepal.  Thus  in  Magari1  the  present  tense  is  formed  in  the  same  way,  and  a slightly 
different  form  is  used  for  an  aorist  tense,  used  indifferently  for  present,  past,  or  future 
time.  It  may  be  noticed  that  the  same  indefiniteness  is  observable  in  other  Tibeto- 
Burman  languages  of  Nepal,  such  as  Newfirl  or  Sunwari.  Mr.  Beamcs,  in  bis  Magari 
grammar  calls  this  tense  the  aorist.  In  Khas-kura  Mr.  Turnbull  treats  it  as  a future 
indefinite,  and  Mr.  Dopping-Hcpenstal  calls  it  the  present.  I prefer  to  follow 
Mr.  Beanies’  nomenclature,  and  to  call  it  the  aorist,  as  this  well  illustrates  tho  indefinite 
nature  of  the  tense,  for  in  Khas-kura  also  it  may  be  used  as  a past,  or  as  a present,  or  as 
a future. 

In  tho  translation  of  the  10th  hook  of  the  Blulgavata-Bu rd na  it  is  regularly  used  as 
the  past  tense  of  narration,  as  in  (Specimen  III)  Sri  Sukadeo  dgyd  garmt  hunehha 


•SeeVol.  Ill,  Part  I,  p.  209. 


38 


KHAS-KT7BA  OB  NAIPAlI. 


the  Holy  ^ukadeva  said  (this  is  an  instance  of  the  impersonal  honorific  conjugation 
which  will  he  explained  later  on).  As  a present,  we  have  in  the  same  specimen  yd  aukh 
bdlakh-lai  hmchha,  the  happiness  which  becomes  to  a child  (i.e.,  which  a child  obtains) ; 
and  in  the  Baital  Pachisi  (Specimen  IV)  ad  hajur-ldi  mama  khojchha,  he  is  seeking 
to  kill  Your  Honour.  Asa  future  we  have  (Specimen  IV)  dui-lai  jo  mdrchha 8d  chakra 
ball  hmchha , he  who  will  kill  the  two  will  become  a universal  king.  The  future  sense 
is  very  common. 

It  may  here  he  added  that  all  verbs,  the  roots  of  which  end  in  a vowel,  add  n to  the 
root  before  the  auxiliary,  so  that  from  the  root  hu , become,  we  get  hunchha  (as  above), 
and  from  the  root  jd,  go,  we  get  jdnchhu,  I go.  Some  write  this  as  nnunasika.  Thus, 
jachhu , I go,  or  klnoduclihan,  they  cause  to  cat.  Now  and  then  tho  n is  also  employed 
with  verbs  whose  roots  end  in  a consonant  as  in  (translation  of  the  10th  hook  of  the 
Bhdgavata-Purdna,  page  155)  Krishna  hdmi-ldi  saujlianchhan  (for  sahjhchhan),  does 
Krishna  (ever)  think  of  us  ? ma  sabai  kdtn  birsunchliu  (from  birasnu,  to  forgot), 
I forget  all  (my)  business. 

What  may  be  called  a Past  Aorisfc  is  made  in  a similar  way  by  suffixing  tho  past 
tense  of  the  Auxiliary  verb  to  the  root.  This  tense  seems  to  imply  continuous  action. 
Two  specimens  of  it  occur  in  Specimen  IV,  viz.,  tyd  rakh-ttidld  rdjya-kd  khabarddri 
garthyd,  that  guardian  kept  watch  over  the  kingdom ; Bhartrihari  niti-purbak  rdjya 
garthe,  Bhartrihari  continued  to  rule  with  prudence.  So,  gopini-haru  asal  lugd-ra 
gahand  lai  Kriahna-ko  charitra  gduthe , while  the  herd  maidens,  wearing  beautiful 
clothes  and  ornaments,  kept  singing  Krishna’s  deeds  ( Bhdgarata  Parana , X,  page  154). 
Hero,  however,  the  (or  tliiye)  is  not  a finite  tense  lmt  is  an  oblique  past  participle.  The 
whole  is  thus  thrown  into  a kind  of  eontinuative  past  participle. 

This  tenso  is  used  much  like  the  Hindi  kartd,  which  means  ‘he  used  to  do,'  and 
also  ‘ (if)  he  had  done.’  Similarly,  according  to  Mr.  Dopping-IIepcnstal,  garthi  means 
‘ (if)  I did.’ 

The  Present  Definite  i9  formed  by  conjugating  the  present  tense  of  the  auxiliary 
verb  with  the  locative  of  the  present  participle.  Thus,  garda-chhu, or  gardai-chhu,  lam 
doing,  literally,  ‘I  arm  on  doing,’  like  the  old  English  ‘I  am  a-doing.’  Examples  of  the 
use  of  this  tense  are  : — 

bhok-le  niarda-chhu,  I am  dying. 

timro  tahal  garda-chhu,  I am  doing  thy  service. 

ma  kutdai-chhu,  I am  beating. 

Sometimes  the  oblique  form  in  da  of  the  participle  is  used,  as  in  (both  on  page  156 
of  the  translation  of  the  B hag  a vat  a Purdna,  X)  Kristi  na-kb  darktn  pdudd-hu,  we  are 
obtaining  a sight  of  Krishna ; in-ldi  kasari  mdnld-hun,  he  (honorific)  is  killing  these  easily. 

The  Imperfect  is  similarly  formed  with  the  past  tense  of  the  auxiliary.  Thus, 
garda-thiye  (or  the,  etc.),  I was  making.  No  oxamples  of  this  tense  occur  in  tli£ 
specimens.  In  Luke  ii,  18,  wc  have  tero  bdhu-ra  ma  bilapl  bhai  ta-lai  khojda-thiyu , we, 
thy  father  and  I,  were  seeking  Thee  sorrowing.  In  the  List  of  Words  (No.  192)  we  have 
ma  kutdai-thige,  X vas  striking.  In  the  translation  of  the  Bhiigavata  Purdna,  we  have 
Bhagawun-ka  mukh-kamal-kd  amrit-pan  garda-the,  they  were  drinking  tho  ucctar 
of  tho  lotus- face  of  Bhagawan. 

The  Perfect  k formed  by  conjugating  the  past  participle  with  tho  present  tense  of 
the  auxiliary  verb.  Usually  the  long  form  of  the  participle  (gare-ko)  is  employed.  In 


INTRODUCTION. 


39 


three  instances,  however,  in  the  specimens  the  oblique  form  ( rahe  for  rah  yd,  obi.  of 
rahyo)  without  kb  is  employed.  Tho  long  form  of  the  participle  (gare-ko)  agrees  with 
the  subject  in  gender  and  number,  as  well  as  in  person.  The  examples  are  : — 

(List  No.  228)  tee-ko  chhord-ldi  mai-le  kuteko-chhu , I have  beaten  his  son. 

( Bhagavata- Parana , page  153,  ho  instead  of  chha)  \-teaai-le  lagyb-hu,  he 
verily  has  taken  (the  child)  away. 

So  (Luke  vi,  3)  timi-haru-le  yei  pani  parye-Jcd  chhau-na , but  have  ye  not 
read  this  ? 

Speoimen  IV : — 

parlksd  gare-lcb  rahe- chha,  she  has  remained,  having  made  a test.  Here  gare-ko 
is  an  ordinary  past  participle,  used  as  an  adjective.  The  perfcot  is  rahe-chhao. 

tin-jana-ko  janma  bhai  rahe-chha,  the  birth  of  three  persons  having  occurred 
has  remained;  i.e.  has  taken  place. 

jbgl-kb  rup  li  rahe-chha,  having  taken  the  form  of  an  ascetic,  he  has  remained  ; 
he  has  assumed  the  form  of  an  ascetic. 

The  Pluperfect  is  formed  exactly  like  the  perfect,  the  past  tense  of  the  auxiliary 
verb  being  substituted  for  the  present. . Thus,  garyd-kb  thiye  ( thyb , thiya,  thyfi,  the), 
I had  done.  This  tense  is  often  employed  to  indicate  something  which  has  occurred  a 
longtime  ago,  as  in  (Luke  vi,  3)  Ddud-le  jaba  tyo-ra  tyes-kd  sdtlii-haru-le  bhbkdye-kd 
thiye,  (what  did)  David  and  they  that  were  with  him  when  (a  long  time  ago)  they 
were  hungered.  More  properly  a pluperfect  is  ( Bhdgavnta  Parana,  p.  150)  Basudev-le 
gdi  dine-ko  ichchhd  gare-kb  thiye,  Vasudeva  had  made  the  wish  of  giving  cows. 

Sometimes  the  past  tense  itself  is  employed  instead  of  the  past  participle,  as  in 
‘ pani  ma  aula,'  bhani,  pathdye  thye,  I sent  (long  ago),  saying, ‘I  will  come  again.’ 
(Bhdgavata  Parana,  page  154). 

The  Future  Perfect  is  formed  in  the  same  way,  substituting  hula,  the  future  of 
the  auxiliary  verb  hu.  Thus,  gare-ko  hula,  I shall  have  done, 

A periphrastic  Present  Subjunctive  is  formed  by  conjugating  the  auxiliary  verb, 
hu,  1 am,  with  the  oblique  present  participle.  Thus,  garda-hu,  (if)  I do. 

Other  rarer  tenses  will  be  found  in  Mr,  Turnbull’s  Grammar. 

(b)  Roots  ending  in  a vowel. 

All  verbs  whoso  roots  end  in  a vowel  may  optionally  nasalize  that  vowel  before  any 
consonant  except  y.  In  the  Aorist  tense,  before  chhu,  etc.,  the  nasal  becomes  n.  Thus, 
from  the  root  di,  give,  we  havo  the  following  forms  (see  also  page  44). 

Infinitive,  dinu  or  dtnu,  to  give. 

Present  Participle,  didb  or  dido,  giving. 

Past  Participle,  diye-ko,  one  who  gave. 

Conjunctive  Participle,  dl,  dii  or  diyi  (y  inserted  for  the  sake  of  euphony), 
having  given. 

Aorist,  dinchhu,  I give,  I shall  give,  I gave. 

Similarly  the  root  li,  take ; khd,  eat,  and  others,  including  all  Passives.  The  root, 
rah,  remain,  is  similarly  treated.  Thus,  Infin.  rahnu  or  rdhnn ; Pres.  Part,  rahdb  or 
rahdo  ; Aorist  1 sing,  rahnchhu,  and  so  on. 


40 


KHAS'KtTSA  OK  NAJPAl!. 


Many  verbs  have  bases  ending  in  du.  Most  of  4hem  are#  causals.  These  verba 
drop  the  u before  y and  i,1  and  goncrallv  have  anundaika  ( " ),  not  n in  the  aorist. 
Thus : — 

Infinitive,  gardunn  or  gardunu,  to  cause  to  do. 

Pres.  Participle,  gardudo  or  gardudo,  causing  to  do. 

Fast  Participle,  gardye-ko,  one  who  caused  to  do. 

Conjunctive  Part.,  gardi,  having  caused  to  do. 

Aorist,  garduchhu  (not  gardunchhn ),  T oauso,  shall  cause,  or  caused  to  make. 

An  example  in  Specimen  III  is  tea-id i paralok-md  dphnai  mdati  khtoduchhatt,  they 
will  cause  him  to  eat  his  very  own  llesh  in  the  other  world. 


D.  Simple  Negative  Conjugation. 


■When  the  negative  is  employed  with  a verb  it  is  sometimes  prefixed  as  a separate 
word,  as  is  the  case  in  Hindi,  and  sometimes  suffixed  to  the  verb  as  an  enclitic,  in  some 
instances  even  coming  between  the  stem  and  the  personal  termination.  This  gives  rise 
to  various  irregularities.  * 

The  Infinitive  and  Participles  present  no  difficulties,  the  nogative  being  simply 
prefixed.  As  regards  the  various  tenses  : — 

In  the  Old  Present,  Present  Subjunctive,  and  Imperative,  m is  simply 
prefixed,  as  in  na  gat'u,  let  mo  not  do ; na  gar,  do  not  do.  A 

For  the  Future  there  are  no  negative  forms.  The  corresponding  forms  of  the 
Present  Definite  arc  employed  instead.  Thus,  gardina  or  garnna,  I shall  not  do. 

The  Past  tense  lias  a regular  negative  conjugation.  In  most  persons  the  negative 
comes  between  the  participle  and  the  termination. 

The  Aorist  tense  is  not  employed  in  the  negative  form,  the  Present.  Definite  being 
suostituted  for  it. 

The  Pr686Ut  Definite  has  a regular  negative  conjugation,  agrocipg  in  principle 
with  that  of  the  Past.  In  the  negative  conjugation  this  tense  is  also  employed  for  the 
Future  and  for  the  Aorist.  A few  verbs,  such  as  garnu,  to  do,  ami  every  verb  whose 
root  ends  in  a vowel,  have  an  optional  contracted  form  for  this  tense,  as  follows: — 

Sing.  IMur. 


1 garnna 

2 gamma 

3 _ garnna 


garnna u 
garnau 
gar  nan. 


The  Imperfect  is  formed  bv  taking  the  third  person  singular  of  the  negative 
Present  Definite  ( gardaina ),  and  suffixing  to  it  the  various  persons  of  the  positive  form 
of  the  past  tense  of  the  Auxiliary  verb  ( thiye ).  In  the  first  person  singular  there  is  an 
optional  form,  based  on  tho  first  person  singular  oft  bo  negative  Present  Dofinite  ( gardina 

thiyd). 

The  Perfect  is  made  by  conjugating  the  negative  form  of  the  present  tense  of  the 
Auxiliary  verb  with  the  Past  Partieiplo. 

The  Pluperfect  and  the  Future  Perfect  are  similarly  made  with  the  nogative 
forms  of  the  Past  and  the  Future  of  the  Auxiliary  Verb. 


They  al«o  drop  tbe  u before  tho  » or  % of  the  passive  voice,  ‘oeo  p.  15  poU. 


INTRODUCTION. 


41 


The  Periphrastic  Present  Subjunctive  does  not  ohangp.  The  negative  is 
simply  prefixed. 

As  examples  of  the  negative  conjugation  occurring  in  the  specimens,  we  may- 
quote  : — 

timro  dgyd  ndghi-na,  I do  not  disobey  your  orders. 
yotd  pdthd  diyenau,  you%did  not  give  a kid. 
kasai-le  kehi  diyena , no  one  gave  anything. 

dphnu  pet  bharna  pdyena,  lie  did.  not  get  (permission)  to  fill  his  own  belly. 
bhitra  gayena , he  went  not  inside. 

hdmi-bdta  paunn  bhayena,  the  getting  from  us  did  not  take  place. 
mn  timro  chhord  bhannu  ybgyit  kb  aba  bhaina , now  1 did  not.  become  at  all 
worthy  to  be  called  your  son. 

hdmi  abhdgi-le  tapdni-ha  ru-kd  uajik  basna  pdyenau,  we  unfortunate  ones  did 
not  get  (permission)  to  dwell  near  Your  Honours. 
rin-chukti  hunt § saktaim,  there  cannot  be  payment  of  the  debt. 
jo  putvii  dmd-bdbd-ldi  tinanda  didainc,  the  son  who  does  not  give  joy  to  his 
mother. 


E.  The  Impersonal  Honorific  Conjugation. 


All.  Indo* Aryan  languages  have  honorific  forms  of  the  verb,  but.  Klias-kura  (in  this 
again  oopying  Tibeto-Bunnan  languages)  lias  an  entire  honorific  conjugation.  When  a 
person  speaking  Klias-kura  wishes  to  say  politely  * lie  did  ’ lie  says  tes-le  garni*  bho,  lit., 
‘by  him  doing  became.'  Similarly  * you  did  * would  be  tapaht-le  garni i bhb,  by  Your 
Honour  doing  became.  It  will  thus  be  seen  that  whatever  the  subject  is  (first,  second 
or  third,  singular  or  plural,  nufsculine  or  feminine)  the  verb  itself,  in  the  form  of  the 
honorific  conjugation,  is  always  in  the  third  person  singular  masculine. 

This  forn^of  the  honorific  conjugation  is  made  by  conjugating  the  direct  infinitive 
with  the  appropriate  tense  of  the  verb  hum*,  to  become.  This  verb  will  be  found  fully 


dealt  with  on  page  44  post.  . 

According  to  the  explanation  given  above  wc  should  expect  the  subject  to  be 
always  in  the  Agent  case,  but  this  is  not  the  fact.  All  memory  of  the  real  origin  of  the 
form  is  lost,  and  the  honorific  conjugation  is  now  treated  like  an  ordinary  “ 

the  literary  language1  tho  subject  is  in  the  nominative  except  when  it  is  the  subject  of 
a transitive  verb  in  a tens®  formed  with  the  past  participle  of  the  auxiliary  I e 
following  examples  of  the  honorific  conjugation  have  been  mostly  taken  from  the  tran- 
slation of  the  10th  hook  of  the  Bhdgavata  Parana.  Only  a few,  which  will  be  readily 

recognised,  occur  in  the  specimens.  . , 

We  shall  first  take  the  tfoun  of  Agency,  ganm-hnne,  doer,  one  w io  ls  a iou  o ( o. 
Bhagatodn  hdha  di , tapahi-haru-ldi  prasanna  garnn-hune  chha,  (tu.  icun 
Bhagawan,  having  come  here,  is  about  to  (i.e.,  will)  make  Yom  Honouis  1 
purtia  garnu-hune  chha,  (the  revered  Krishna)  will  fulfil  his  promise.  . 
tapani  Krishna- lai  chdrai  dekhnu-hunc  chha , Your  Honouis  wi  fiu 
Krishna.  Note  here  that,  as  pointed  out,  tho  auxiliary  verb  chha  is  m >c 
person,  although  the  subject  is  in  the  second  person.  __ 


1 Vide  antet  pp.  18  and  2G* 


VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


42 


khas-kurA  or  naipAlI. 


It  may  bo  noted  that  this  formation,  with  the  noon  of  agency,  ia  the  usual  method 
of  making  the  honorific  future. 

Imperative. — ansa-bhdg  rna-ldi  dinu-hos,  please  give  the  share  to  me. 

dphnd  darmdhdddr  ndkar  jastai  gamu-hatoas,  please  make  me  like 
one  of  your  own  wage-earning  servants. 
hdmi-ldi  dgyd  gamu-hatoas,  pleas*  give  the  order  to  us. 
hajur  raj  garnn-hos,  let  Your  Honour  do  ruling. 
aba  Braj-ma  pdlnu-hatoas,  how  please  proceed  to  Braj. 
guru-da kshitid  magnu-hos,  please  ask  for  a teacher’s  fee. 
so  bdlalch  dinu-hos,  please  give  that  boy. 
tapdiii  Braj-ma  jdnu-hos,  Your  Honour,  please  go  to  Braj. 
ti-haru-ldi  sanjhdi  dinu-hatoas,  ploase  console  them. 
tapdni  snrtd  na  garnu-hawas,  let  not  Your  Honour  do  grieving. 

Note,  as  before,  that  hatcas  or  hos  is  in  the  third  person  singular. 

I have  not  come  across  any  instances  of  the  Old  Present  in  this  honorific  form. 
The  honorific  future,  as  explained  above,  is  made  from  the  honorific  verbal  noun.  The 
following  examples  occur  of  the  Past  Tense.  The  contracted  form  bho  is  generally 
employed  for  bhayo,  the  past  tense  of  huau.' 

Paramefaar-Bhagatodn-le  tgb  ggdn  birsai-dinu  bho,  Parameovar-Bkagawan 
caused  (them)  to  forget  that  knowledge. 
dui  bhdi  bhanna  Idgnu  bho,  tho  two  brothers  began  to  say. 
ananda  hdmi-bdta  pdunn  bhayena,  (Your  Honours)  from  us  did  not  obtain 
pleasure. 

Krishna-le  TJgrasena-ldi  Mathurd-ko  rdjya  dintt  bho,  Krishna  gave  the  king- 
dom of  Mathura  to  Ugrasena. 

dphnd  ghara-md  basalnu  bho,  (Krishna)  settled  them  in  their  own  houses. 
tapdfti-le  sneh-kd  sdtha  rakhnn  bho,  Your  Honour  lias  kept  (us)  with  affection. 
/Sri- Krishna-le  Nanda-ko  satkdr  garnu  bho,  the  revered  Krishna  treated  Nanda 
with  consideration. 

dui  bhdi  brdhman-sita  parhna  janu  bho,  the  two  brothers  went  to  learn  from 
a Brahman. 

sewdgarna  Idgnu  bho,  they  began  to  do  service. 
chausatfhl  leald  siknu  bho,  they  learnt  tho  sixty-four  arts. 
guru-sita  prdrthand  garnu  bho,  they  made  supplication  to  (lit.  from)  their  pre- 
ceptor. 

Prabhds-md  gai  ksan-bhar  basnu  bho,  having  gone  to  Prabh&sa,  they  sat 
there  for  a few  moments. 

Bhagawdn-le  bhannu  bho,  Bhagawan  said. 

nij  daitya-kb  pet  chiri  heron  bho,  splitting  open  the  belly  of  that  demon,  he 
looked  (inside). 

Yamardj-kd  iahar-md  jdnu  bho,  he  went  into  the  city  of  Yamaraja. 
rath-ma.  bast  Mathura  dunu  bho,  having  sat  down  in  a chariot,  they  came  to 
Mathura. 

Nanda- ji  mdhydnna  Idgnu  bho,  Nanda-ji  began  to  ask. 


INTRODUCTION. 


43 


Aorist. — In.  the  translation  of  the  Bhdgavata  Parana  this  tense,  in  the  honorific 
form,  is  continually  employed  in  tho  sense  of  a historical  past,  as  in  the  first  and  last  of 
the  following  examples  : — 

Srt-Sukadev  dgyd  garnu  hunchha,  the  revered  Sukadova  made  the  order,  i.e.,  said 
(Hindustani  farmayd). 

so  kshamd-garna  yogya  hunu  hunchha , (that)  fact  that  Your  Honours  were  not 
served  by  us  (is  worthy  of  pardoning). 

tapahi-haru  sarhaima  yogya  hunu  hunchha , Your  Honours  are  worthy  of  praise. 

rachnd  garnu,  pdlnu,  samhdr  garnu , ityddi  garnu  hunchha,  He  creates,  protects, 
destroys,  etc. 

je  je  tapdhi,  sdnu  thulo,  dekhnu  hunchha , sttnnu  hunchha,  whatever,  be  it  small  or 
great,  Your  Honours  see  or  hear. 

Sri  Sukadev  hhannu  hunchha,  the  revered  Sukadfiva  says  (i.e.  said). 

Past  Aorist. — tapdhi  hdmra-nimitta  sdrhai  khed-md  hunu  hunthyo.  Your  Honours 
were,  for  our  sakes,  in  hard  affliction.  < 

I have  not  come  across  instances  of  the  Definite  Present1  or  Imperfect—  the 
Aorist  and  Fast  Aorist,  respectively,  being  used  for  these  tenses  as  in  the  above 
examples.  For  the  Perfect,  we  have  : — 

tapdhi-le  flaha  lydunu  bhaye-ko  chha,  Your  Honour  has  brought  (the  prccoptor’s 
son)  here. 

8abai'kd  hriday-md  rahmt  bhaye-ko  chha,  he  (Krishna)  has  remained  in  the  hearts 
of  all. 

Pluperfect.— pratigyd  garnu  bhaye-ko  thyo,  the  promise  which  they  had  made. 


F.  Personal  Honorific  Conjugation. 

Another  form  of  the  honorific  conjugation  is  more  Aryan  in  its  construction.  In- 
stead of  saying  ‘ by  him  doing  became,'  they  sometimes  employ  tho  noun  of  agency  with 
the  verb  hunu,  to  beoome,  conjugated  as  a personal  verb.  Thus,  tyo  game  bhayo,  ho 
became  a doer. 

Thus,  asu-kd  dhdrd-le  abhishek  game  bhaye-kd,  (Vasudeva  and  Devaki  having) 
beoome  doers  of  sprinkling  with  a stream  of  tears,  i.e.,  having  sprinkled  him  with  their 
tears. 


praeanna  gardune  bhaye-kd  chhadd,  while  being  become  satisfied-makers,  i.e.,  while 
they  mado  (them)  satisfied. 

G.  Irregular  Verbs. 

The  following  verbs  are  irregular : — 


hunu,  to  become. 
janu,  to  go. 
dunu,  to  come. 
dtnu,  to  give. 


I mu,  to  take. 
runu,  to  weep. 
chhunu,  to  touch. 
laijanu,  to  take  away. 


In  all  the  above  the  nasal  in  the  first  syllable  is  optional  before  a consonant  (which 
is  not  y),  and  is  not  used  before  a vowel,  as  explained  on  page  39  ante. 

All  these  verbs  can  employ  the  optional  contracted  form  of  the  negative  present 
definite  (including  future  and  aorist)  described  on  p.  40  ante.  Thus,  hunna,  I do  not 
become,  I shall  not  become,  etc. ; janna,  dunna,  dint) a,  and  so  on. 


lOn  p.  14  of  Mr.  Turnbull's  Grammar,  there  is,  however,  dphu  hunu  huda  chh thou  art. 
VOL.  IX,  PAKT  IV. 


0 2 


44 


khas-kurA  or  naipAlI. 


Hunu,  to  become,  is  irregular  in  its  past  participle,  which  is  bhayo  or  bho.  Similarly, 


jam,  to  go.  has  gayo  or  gyo  for  its  past  partioiple. 

We  thus  get  the  following  forms:  — 

Infinitive. 

hunu 

janu 

Pres.  Part. 

hudb 

jado 

Past  Part. 

bhayo,  bho 

gayo 

Fut.  Pass.  Part. 

hunu 

janu 

Adverbial  Part. 

liuda , etc. 

jadd,  etc. 

Conjunctive  Part. 

hoi  or  bhai 

gai 

1 Sing.  Old  Present. 

hbii 

jau  or  jau 

1 Sing.  Future. 

hould 

jduld 

1 Sing.  Past. 

hhnye,  etc. 

gay?,  etc. 

1 Sing.  Aorist. 

hafichh n 

jdnchhu 

Tho  other  tenses  offer  no  difficulty, 
is  irregular,  and  is  as  following : — 

The  conjugation  of  the  Old  Present  and  Imperative 

Sing.  1.  hbn 

jau  Jau 

2.  kb 

ja 

3.  batons,  hos 

jdwas 

Plur.  1.  hoU 

• - ^ 
yin 

2.  hawa,  hau 

jdwa , jau 

3.  hbnn 

• 

jdun 

Neg.  1 Sing,  hunna 

jdnna 

In  the  above,  liau  and  jdn  are  employed  in  addressing  one  person  respectfully  in 


the  plural,  while  hawa  and  jdwa  are  employed  in  addressing  more  than  one. 

The  verb  hunu  has  a rare  stronger  form  hoknn.  Thus  wo  have  hokos  far  hot,  in 
the  following  passage  from  the  translation  of  the  Bliagavata  Parana,  page  153  ; ghar 
jail u hbkos,  please  go  home  (honorific  impersonal  imperative). 

The  verb  dunu,  to  ootnc,  is  conjugated  nearly  like  janu,  except  that  its  past  parti- 
ciple is  regular.  Thus  : — 

Pres.  Part,  dudb 

Past  Part,  dyb 

Conj.  Part,  di 

1.  Old  Pres,  and  Impel*,  du 

2.  Sing.  „ „ d 

2.  Plur.  „ „ atoa,  an  (as  above) 

The  conjunctive  participle  of  this  verb  is  often  compounded  with  janu.  Thus,  di 
janu,  to  arrive. 

The  conjugation  of  dmu  and  linn  has  been  already  referred  to  on  page  39.  In 
addition  wc  may  note  that  the  Old  Present  and  Imperative  is  slightly  irregular. 

Thus,  from  dmu,  to  give — 


Sing. 

Plur. 

diit 

diii 

de 

detoa,  dcu  (as  above) 

dewas 

diun 

Similarly,  ITnu,  to  take.  The  conjunctive  participles  of  these  verbs  are  usually  di 
or  dai,  and  li  or  lai.  Thus : — 

(Specimen  IV)  rdjyr  di  &phn  jangal-ma  gaye,  having  given  the  kingdom,  he  him- 
self  went  into  the  forest. 


INTRODUCTION. 


45 


tyb  phal  li  dphai  khdye,  taking  that  fruit,  he  ate  it  himself.  Compare  lai  janu, 
having  taken  to  go,  to  take  away,  below. 

Bunu,  to  weep,  dhunu , to  wash,  and  chhunu,  to  touch,  change  u to  b in  the  Simple 
Present  and  Imperative.  Thus  : — 

Sing.  Plur. 

1.  rou  rou 

2.  ro  rowa , rou  (as  above) 

3.  rbas,  rotcas  roun 

similarly,  dhunu  and  chhunu.  We  also  sometimes  have  o in  the  past,  as  in  chho'i , she 
touched. 

The  compound  verb  lai  janu,  to  take  away,  has,  for  its  past  participle,  lagyb  (to  he 
distinguished  ham  ' lagyo,  begun).  Thus  (Bhagavata  Purana,  page  153) : — tesai-le 
lagyb-ho,  he  verily  has  taken  (the  child)  away. 

H.  Passive  Voice. 

As  in  Marwarl  Rajasthani,  Khas-kura  has  a regular  passive  voice.  In  Marwari  it  is 
formed  by  adding  ij  to  the  root,  and  in  Khas-kura  by  adding  i (often  written  i or  it/).1 
Thus  from  the  root  gar,  make,  wo  have  the  passive  root  gari,  bo  made,  which  is 
conjugated  like  any  other  verb  ending  in  a vowel.  The  only  irregularity  is  that  the 
2nd  person  plural  of  the  Old  Present  and  Imperative  is  gariyau  not  garia  as  we  might 
expect.  The  following  are  examples  of  the  use  of  the  passive  voice. 

Past  Participle: — Krishna- kd  bdhu-lc  rakshd-garlyc-kd  Yddav-karu,  the 
Yadavas  who  had  been  protected  (lit.  protection-made)  by  the  arm  of  Krishna. 

snehrlc  bhariye-kd  bandhuoary-kb  charan-kd  darsan  garna  aula,  I will  come  to 
see  (lit.  to  make  the  sight  of)  the  feet  of  the  relations  whoaro  tilled  with  affection. 

dphnd  karma  bandha-le  badhiye-kd  gurn-putra-lai  tapdiii-le  naha  lydunu  bhaye-ko 
chha,  Your  Honour  has  brought  (impersonal  honorific  perfect)  here  the  preceptor’s  sou 
bound  by  the  bonds  of  his  own  fate. 

yek  jbgi  rukh-md  jlmndiye-kb,  an  ascetic  hanged  on  a tree. 

Old  Present  and  Imperative:  tapdfti-haru-ko  kirti  chdrai  tarplia  phailiyos, 
may  Your  Honour’s  glory  be  spread  in  the  four  ( i.e . in  all)  directions. 

Past: — hardiye-ko  thiyo,  pheri  pdlyb,  he  was  lost  (and)  again  was  (or  is)  found. 

dhuld-le  Uddhav-jl-ko  rath  bilkul  dhdktyb,  Uddhava-ji’s  chariot  was  entirely 
hidden  by  the  dust. 

sddhe-kd  dakrdhath-le  rath-kb  said  a pani  suniyena,  moreover,  owing  to  the  bel- 
lowing of  the  hulls,  the  sound  of  the  chariot  was  not  heard  (negative  past). 

Aorist: — -jo  dphu-ldi  patch  ha-pbschha , nhi  bdbu  kahinchha,  the  man  who  cherishes 
and  nourishes  his  own  children  (lit.  himself),  lie  it  is  who  is  called  a father. 

anek  tarah-kd  deh-md  prabes  gari  bhinna  dekhinchha,  making  cntranco  into  bodies 
of  various  kinds,  (God)  appears  (lit.  is  seen)  in  various  forms. 

Present  Definite : — <***«  kehi  bar  chdhidaina,  no  other  boon  is  wished  for  (nega- 
tive present  definite  passive). 

It  will  be  remembered  that  verbs  whose  roots  end  in  du  (see  page  10),  including 
causals,  drop  the  u before  «.  This  applies  to  the  i or  I of  the  passive,  so  that  the 
passive  of  gardiinu,  to  cause  to  make,  is  yardinu  or  gardtnu,  to  bo  caused  to  make. 

1 So  also  the  Pasaive  wai  formed  in  Mshftr&tditri  Prakrit  by  adding  ijja  and  in  Snuras€n!  and  Magadhj  Prakiit  by 
adding  I «• 


46 


KHAS-KUBA  OB  NAIPALl  SKELETON  GBAMMAB. 

The  following  is  therefore  a complete  conspectus  of  the  conjugation  of  the  Finite  Verb- 
in  Khas-kura : — 

ACTIVE  VOICE. 

A.  Positive  Conjugation. 

Infinitive,  garnu  / obi.  garna ; loc.  garnyi,  garni,  gamy 3 ; the  aot  of  doing. 

Present  Participle,  gardd  ; obi.  gardd  ; loc.  gardai , garda  / doing. 

Past  Participle,  garyo,  gari-kb,  garyikb,  gar  yd- Jed  ; obi.  gari,  gari-kd , oto. ; one  who  did. 

Future  Passive  Participle,  garnu,  etc.,  as  Infinitive  ; about  to  bo  done,  necessary  to  bo  done. 

Adverbial  Participle,  garda,  gardd,  garda-md,  gardai,  gardd  khirt,  or  gardai  khiri  ; while  doing. 

Conjunctive  Participle,  gari , gari  kana,  (gari-ra,  eto.) ; having  done. 

Noun  of  Ageucy,  garni,  garnyi,  garnyd  ; a door,  ono  who  is  about  to  do  ; Ini  personal  honorific  form  garnu  huni • 


Old  Pbesent,  Pbesent  Subjunctive, 

AND  ImPKKATIVE. 


I do,  I may  do,  let  me  do. 


Future. 
I shall  do. 


Singular. 

1/v 

. garu 
2.  gar,  gares 
8.  garos,  gari 


Plural. 


Singular. 


Plural. 
gamut  d 


garuld  garauld 

gar  elds,  garlds  garauld 

gardd,  garld  garlan,  < 


I did. 

Singular.  j Plural. 

gari,  garyi,  garya  j garyS 
gari  9 garyau 


garlan,  garnan  garyi  (fem.  garyi,  ‘ gari,  garyi,  gar  yd, 
gari)  j (fem.  garyin , 

; garln) 


Impersonal  Honorific. 
garnu  hos . 

Aofiisr. 

I do,  I shall  Jo,  I did. 


Impersonal  Honorific. 
garnu  huni  chha. 


Past  Aobist. 

I did  (continuously). 


Pbesent  Definite. 
1 am  doing. 


Impersonal  Honorific. 
garnu  bhb . 

Imperfect. 

f was  doing. 


Singular 

Plural. 

Singular. 

Plural. 

! Singular. 

i 

Plural. 

^Singular. 

Plural. 

1. 

gar-chhu 1 

i 

gar-chhau 

I 

gar-thyP 

gar-thyu 

garda-chhu l,2 

garda-chhau 

garda- th  yd 

garda -thyu 

3. 

| gar-chhas 

' gar-chhau 

gar-this 

gar-thyau 

qardu-chhas 

garda-chhau 

garda-this 

garda-thyau 

3. 

gar-chha 

: gar-chhan 

i 

gar-thyb 

gar- thyi 

\ garda-chha 

1 

garda-chhan 

garda-thyb 

garda-thyi 

Impersonal  Honorific.  | Imj 

garnu  hunchha . j 

| 


Pebfhct. 


I have  done. 

Singular.  Plural. 

1.  gari-kb  chhu 3 gari-kd  chhau 


Impersonal  Honorific. 
garnu  hunthyo. 


Impersonal  Honorific. 
garnu  huda-chha . 


Plupebfect.  I 


1 had  done,  I did.  j 


! Impersonal  Honorific. 
garnu  huda-thyb. 


Futubb  Pxbfbct. 


I shall  have  done. 


Singular. 


Plural. 


Singular. 


Plural. 


1.  gari-kb  chhu 3 j gari-kd  chhau  | garl-kb  thyP  gari-kd  thyu  gari-kb  hild  gari-kd  hauld 

I j 'K 

2.  gari-kb  chha s \ gari-kd  chhau  j gari-kb  this  gari-Ukihyau  * gari-kb  hblds  garbl'd  hauld 

3.  gari-kd  chha  q art -kd  chha n 1 gari-kd  thy b gari-kd  thyi  gari-kd  hild  gari-kd  hunan 


Impersonal  Honorific. 
garnu  bhayi-kb  chha . 


Impersonal  Honorific. 
garnu  bhayi-kb  fhyb. 


Impersonal  Honorific. 
garnu  bhayi-kb  hbld» 


1 Any  optional  form  of  the  'miliary  may  be  employed.  With  feminine  subjects  feminine  forms  of  the  auxiliary  am  used. 

4 Gardai  may  be  substituted  fo  garda  throughout. 

* Any  optional  forms  of  the  auxiliary  may  be  employed.  In  all  the  above,  feminine  forms  are  used  with  feminine  subjects. 


47 


l. 


2. 


3. 


Pbesbnt  Subjunctive  Pbbiphbistic. 


in  (If)  I do. 


Singular. 


garda-hvt 

garda-ho $ 
garda-hb 


Plural. 


garda-hau 

garda-hau 

gardarhun 


Impersonal  Hon&ific. 
garnu  hvda-hti. 


Verbs  with  roots  ending  in  vowels  vary  slightly  from  the  above,  see 
page  39. 

For  irregular  verbs,  see  page  43. 


B.  Negative  Conjugation. 

Infinitive,  na  garnu , etc.,  not  to  do. 

Present  Participle,  na  gardd,  etc.,  not  doing. 

Past  Participle,  na  garyb , na  gari-kd,  etc.,  one  who. did  not. 

Future  Passive  Participle,  na  garnu , etc.,  not  about  to  do. 

Adverbial  Participle,  na  gardd,  na  gardai , etc.,  while  not  doing. 

Conjunctive  Participle,  na  gari  (na  gart-ra ),  etc.,  not  having  done. 

Noun  of  Agency,  nagarnA,  etc.,  not  a doer.  Honorific  Form,  na  garnu  hunt. 


Old  Pbesbnt,  Pbebbnt  Subjunctive, 

AND  IMFBBATIVB. 

Futcbb. 

Past. 

I do  not,  I may  not  do,  let  me  not  do. 

I did  not. 

Singular. 

Plural. 

I shall  not  do. 

Singular. 

Plural. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

na  garu 

na  gar,  na  gares 

na  garos , nagari 

na  garau 

na  gara 

na  garun , na  garnan 

Not  used.  The  Present 
Definite  is  employed 
instead. 

garxna 

gartnas 

gar(g)ena,  garyana 

garyauna , gar(y)enaul 

garyauna,  gar(y)enau9 

gar(y)enan,  garyanan 

Impersonal  Honorific. 

Impersonal  Honorific. 

Impersonal  Honorific. 

na  garnu  hos. 

na  garnu  hunt  chha. 

garnu  hhayena. 

1 Or  garyuna,  gar(y)enu, 

2 Or  garyanau . 


Aobibt. 

Pbesbnt  Definite. 

Impebfsct. 

I do  not,  etc. 

I do  not,  I shall  not  do. 

1 was  not  doing. 

Singular. 

Plural. 

Singular. 

Plural. 

1. 

| Not  used.  The  Pro-1 

gardtna,  gardaina 4 

gardauna , gardainau 1 

gardtna9  thye* 

gardaina  thyu 

gardaina  thyau 

2. 

Y sent  Definite  is 

gardai n as 

gardauna , gardainau 

gardaina  this 

J employed  instead. 

gardaina  thyt 

8. 

gardaina  ' 

gardainau 

gardaina  thyl 

Impersonal  Honorific.  | 

Impersonal  Honorific. 

garnu  hud  aim.  v 

garnu  hudaina  thyt 

1 Or  garduna,  gardainu  • 

5 Or  gardai  na . 

1 Any  optional  form  of  the  auxiliary  may  be  used.  With  feminine  subjects,  feminine  forms  of  the  auxiliary  arc  used. 

4 This  particular  verb  and  a few  others,  including  all  those  whose  roots  end  in  vowels,  may  also  have  the  contracted  form  of  this 
tense  (gamna,  etc.)  as  described  on  p.  40. 


49 


Peifeot. 


PtUPEBFKCT. 


I have  not  done. 

I had  not  done,  I did  not. 

. » i 

Singular. 

. i 

Plural. 

Singular.  : 

Plural. 

1. 

garbkb  chhuina 1 

i 

garbkd  chhauna 

gare-kb  thiyena 1 

gari-kd  thiyaund 

2. 

garbko  chhainas 

garbkd  chhauna 

garbko  things  * ~ * 

garbled  thiyauna 

3. 

gar§*kft  elihaina 

garS  - kd  chha i n an 

garbkb  thiyena  j 

garf-kd  thiyenan 

• a '■ 

Impersonal  Honorific*. 
garnu  hhaybkb  chhaina . 


Impersonal  Honorific. 
garnu  bhayi-kd  thiyena. 


Futfbh  Pbbfbct. 


V t 


I shall  not  hare  done. 


Singular. 

Plural. 

1. 

gat'2-ko  hun na" 

gare-kd  hudauna 

2. 

garbkb  hit  (lain  as 

garbl'd  hudauna 

3.  ! 

1 gare-ko  hudaina 

gar8-kd  hudaina n 

The  Impersonal  Honorific  Future  Perfect  is 
garnu  bhayi-kb  hudaina. 


PASSIVE  VOICE.3 

C.  Positive  Conjugation. 

Infinitive^  gartmi , etc.,  to  be  done. 

Present  Partioiple,  garido , eto.f  being  done. 

Past  Participle,  gariyb}  gariye-kd,  eto.,  been  done. 

Adverbial  Participle,  garidd , etc.,  while  being  done. 

Conjunctive  Participle,  garii,  etc.,  having  been  done. 

Nonn  of  Agency,  garxnyl , etc.,  one  who  is  done. 

Old  Present,  Present  Subjunctive,  and  Imperative,  gariu , I am  done,  I may  be  done,  let  me  be  done,  etc.  Second  person  plural 
gartyav. 

Futuro,  gariuld,  I shall  be  done. 

Past,  gariye , I was  done. 

Aorist,  garinchhu  (see  pp.  38,  39),  I am  being  done,  T shall  be  done,  I was  done. 

Past  Aorist,  garithye,  I was  done  (continuously). 

Present  Definite,  garida-chhu,  I am  being  done. 

Imperfect,  garxda-thye , I was  being  done. 

Perfect,  gariye-kb  chhu,  I have  been  done. 

Plnperfeot,  gariybko  thye , I bad  been  done,  1 was  done  (a  long  time  ago). 

Future  Perfect,  gariybko  huldt  I shall  have  been  done. 

Present  Subjunctive  (Periphrastic),  garxdadtu,  (If)  I bo  done. 

D.  Negative  Conjugation.  * 

The  Passive  Negative  Conjugation  presents  no  difficulties,  being  formed  |>o  the  model  of  the  Active  Negativo  Conjugation. 
Thus,  na  yarlnu , not  to  be  done  ; garinna,  let  mo  not  be  done  ; gariina,  I was  not  done  ; garxdxna , I am  not  being  done,  and  sa 
on  for  the  other  forms. 

1 In  both  the  Perfect  and  the  Pluperfect  any  optional  forms  of  the  participle  or  of  the  Auxiliary  Verb  may  he  used  through- 
out. With  feminine  subjects,  feminine  forms  or  tlm  participle  an&of  the  Auxiliary  Verb  are  used. 

2 Any  optional  forms  of  the  Participle  and  of  the  Auxiliary  may  bo  used  throughout.  With  feminine  subjects,  feminine  forms 
of  the  Participle  are  used. 

3 Throughout  the  Passive  Voice,  the  typical  % is  often  written  i or,  before  vowels,  *>.  Thus,  garinu  or  garxnu,  to  be  done; 

gariuld  or  gariuld,  or  qariyuld,  I shall  be  done.  As  explained  on  page  39,  under  the  head  of  yocalio  Roots,  the  for  » may 
be,  and  usually  is,  nasalized  before  any  consonant  except  y . * 


INTRODUCTION* 


49 


I.  Causal  Verbs. 

Khas-kura  usually  forms  its  causal  verbs  by  the  addition  of  du  to  tbc  root,  which  is 
then  conjugated  as  shown  on  page  40.  There  do  not  seem  to  be  any  examples  of  the 
double  causals,  made  with  wdu,  with  which  we  are  familiar  in  other  Indian  languages. 
Examples  of  the  formation  of  Causal  verbs  are : — 
garnu,  to  do,  garaunu,  to  cause  to  be  done. 
bannu,  to  become,  bandunu,  to  cause  to  become. 
charhnu,  to  ascttift,  dhetfhdunu,  to  cause  to  ascend. 

Idgnu,  to  bo  applied,  lagdunu , to  cause  to  be  applied. 

It  will  be  observed  from  the  Inst  example  that  the  root  vowel,  when  long,  is  liable 
to  be  shortened  as  iu  other  Indian  Languages* 

Note  that  the  causal  of  a transitive  verb  has  the  meaning  of  the  causal  of  the 
passive;  garaunu  does  not  mean  ‘ to  cause  to  do,’  but ‘to  cause  to  be  done.’  If  we 
wish  to  make  a causal  of  the  active  we  must  use  a periphrasis. 

Mr.  Turnbull  gives  the  following  examples  : — 

garnu , to  do,  garnu  Idunu  or  game  garaunu,  to  cause  to  make.  So,  from 
intransitive  verbs. 

bannu,  to  become,  bannu  Idunu,  or  banne  garaunu , to  cause  to  make. 
charhnu,  to  ascend,  charhnu  Idunu  or  charhne  garaunu,  to  cause  to  send  up. 
Idgnu , to  be  applied,  Idgnu  Idunu  or  Idgne  garaunu,  to  cause  to  apply. 

The  verb  Idunu  in  tins  above  means  ‘ to  apply,’  and  is  a contracted  form  of  lagdnnn. 
It  should  bo  distinguished  from  lydunn  (Hindi  le-dnft),  to  bring. 

There  are  no  doubt  several  irregular  causals.  I have  noted  khwaunu,  to  give  to 
eat,  from  khdnu , to  eat,  and  basdlnn,  to  seat,  from  bannu,  to  sit.  i 

J.  Compound  Verbs. 

There  are  the  usual  classes  of  compound  verbs. 

(1)  Formed  with  tho  Conjunctive  Participle  in  i arc: — 

(а)  Intensive*,  as  in  birsdunu  or  birsdi  (linn,  to  cause  to  forget : Idunu  or  hit 
dinu,  to  put  ou  (clothes).  Judging  from  the  specimens  and  the  literature 
which  I have  road,  these  are  not  so  common  as  in  nindi. 

(б)  Completive*.  These  are  formed  with  the  verb  saknu,  which  with  the 

conjunctive  participle  indicates  completion,  but  with  the  infinitive  (see 
below)  indicates  potentiality.  Examples  of  Completive  compounds  are  : — 
ma  khdi  sake- kb  chhu,  I have  finished  eating. 
ma  dii  takclihn,  I shall  finish  giving. 

Similarly  in  Specimen  II  we  have  : — 

sampati  kharcha  gari  sake  pkchhi,  after  having  completely  expended  his  fortune. 

(2)  With  the  direct  or  oblfque  infinitive  ; — 

(a)  Potentials,  made  either  with  the  direct  (sd  Mr.  Turnbull)  or  with  the  oblique 
infinitive  (so  my  examples).  Tlfu*:-*- 
ma  dim  sakchhu,  I will  be  able  to  give  (Turnbull). 

prasasta  rofi  khdna  na-saki,  not  being  able  to  eat  ample  bread  (Specimen  II), 
rin  chukii  kuna  saktaina,  there  oannot  be  payment  of  the  debt  (Specimen  III). 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


50 


KIIAS-KURA  OB  NAIPALl. 


( b ) Inceptive 8,  with  the  oblique  infinitive  and  lagnu,  to  be  applied.  Thus 
chetiye  (obi.  past  part,  pass.)  pachhi  bhanna  lagyb,  after  coming  to  his  senses, 

he  began  to  say  (Specimen  II). 
bhanna  lagnu  bho,  they  began  to  say  (Speoimen  III). 

raja  dphnd  darbar-md  aye-ra  bhanna  Idge,  the  king  oame  into  his  court  and 
began  to  say  (Specimen  IV). 

jogi-ldi  halmcd  chat, anna  Idgi,  she  began  to  cause  the  sweetmeat  to  be  tasted 
by  the  ascetic  ( ib .). 

jdgl  chain  garna  Idge,  the  ascetic  began  to  make  himself  at  ease  (ib.). 

Mr.  Turnbull  says  tbat  the  direct  infinitive  (blipnnu  Idgyo ) is  used  in  this  idiom, 
but  I have  not  found  it  in  any  of  my  authorities. 

(c)  Permissives  (with  dinu)  and  Acquisitives  (with  pdunu),  are  similarly  found 

* with  the  oblique  infinitive. 

Mr.  Turnbull  gives  the  direct  infinitive,  but  I have  not  come  across  any  instances 
of  this : — 

us-lai  jdna  deu,  let  him  go. 

dphnn  pet  bharna  pdyena,  he  did  not  get  leave  to  fill  his  belly  (Speci- 
men II). 

tapdhi-haru-kd  najik  basna  payenau,  we  did  not  get  permission  to  dwell  near 
Your  Honours. 

(d)  Desideratives.  Mr.  Turnbull  gives  mai-le  garnu  khojye , I wished  to  do.  In 
Specimen  I we  have  bhitrajana  mdnena , he  did  not  wish  to  go  inside.  I have  not  noted 
any  other  examples.  Equivalent  to  the  Hindi  chdhiye,  it  is  necessary,  we  have  chdhiye 
chha,  chdhiyo,  or  chdhinchha,  and  to  chdhiye  thd , chain  thyo  and  chahidai  thyo.  It  will 
be  observed  that  all  these  are  passives.  Mr.  Dopping-Hopenstal  gives  the  following 
examples : — 

ma-ldi  pdni  chdhinchha , I want  some  water. 

timi-lai  bhbli  bhydna  jdnti  chdhinchha , you  must  go  to-morrow  morning. 

A more  idiomatic  form  of  the  second  sentenco  would  be  timi-ldi  bhbli  byahdna 
jdnu  parne-chha. 

(e)  Freqnentatives  are  made,  according  to  Mr.  Turnbull,  with  a form  which  appears 
to  be  the  locative  of  the  infinitive.  Thus 

game  garnu,  to  do  habitliallv. 
maile  jane  yard,  I went  habitually. 

From  Nepal,  itself,  we  have : — 
jdndai  garnu , to  be  in  the  habit  of  going. 
ma  us-lai  khane  garchhu,  I am  in  the  habit  of  eating  that. 

(3)  With  the  Adverbial  Participle. 

These  are  Statical « and  Continuativee.  Examples  of  each  are : — 
ma  rudai  gaye,  I went  away  crying. 
ma  gar  dm  rahe  chhu,  I continue  doing. 

I have  not  noted  any  other  examples  of  these  compounds. 


INTRODUCTION1. 


51 


Indeclinables. 

Conjunctive  participles  in  i are  often  employed  as  adverbs  or  prepositions.  Thus, 
phSri,  having  turned,  again ; Idgi,  for  (lit.  having  been  applied) ; dekhi,  from  (lit. 
having  seen). 

Bhani,  having  said  or  ‘ saying,’  the  conjunctive  participle  of  bhannu,  to  say,  is 
regularly  employed  after  quoting  the  words  of  a person,  exactly  like  the  Sanskrit  word, 
iti.  Thus,  ‘ kya  haV  bhani  sodhdd,  ‘what  is  it  ? ’ having  said,  on  asking,  i.e.,  on  his 
asking  ‘ what  is  it  ? ’ It  will  be  seon  that  the  bhani  has  to  be  left  untranslated  in  English. 
So,  again,  * mai-le  pdune  ama-bhdg  ma-ldi  dinu-hoa  * bhani,  bhandd,  on  saying  ( bhandd ) 
‘please  give  to  me  the  share  to  bo  got  by  me’  saying.  In  the  following  example  wo 
have  two  quotations,  one  inside  the  other,  each  with  bhani : — 

‘ ma  uthi  aphnd-bdbu  cliheu  gai , “ he  bdbd.  Is  war- r a tapdiii-mdthi  mai-le  pdp 
gave,  ma  tapdni-lco  chhord  bhannu  ybgya  led  aba  bhaina ; ma-ldi  aphnd-darmdhdddr- 
ndkar-jaatai  garnu-hawaa,*’  bhani ( 1)  bhanu-ld,'  bhani  (2),  uthi  dplind-bdbu-cKheu  gay 6 ; 
* arising,  going  near  my  father,  I shall  say,  “ 0 father,  I have  sinned  against  heaven 
and  thee,  I am  not  at  all  now  worthy  to  bo  called  thy  son  ; please  make  mo  as  one  of 
thy  hired  servants,”  saying  (1),’  saying  (2),  arising,  ho  went  near  his  father. 

Another  form  of  the  verb  bhannu,  viz.,  bhane  or  bhanye,  which  is  probably  the 
locative  of  tho  past  participle,  blianyb,  having  said,  or  else  its  oblique  form,  is  employed 
in  various  manners. 

Thus,  bhane,  on  having  said,  or  bhanS  dekhi,  from  having  said,  is  the  regular  formula 
for  * if.’  It  may  be  explained  that  * if  ’ does  not  occur  so  often  as  in  English,  the  idea 
being  usually  represented  by  a periphrasis.  Thus,  jo  putra  dhan-le,  sarir-le , aamartlia 
bhai,  amd-bdbd-ldi  dnanda  dulaina,  tlio  son  who,  if  he  is  able  (lit.  being  able),  does 
not  give  joy  to  his  parents  with  his  wealth  and  with  his  body.  If,  however,  * if  ’ must 
be  used,  it  is  represented  by  bhane  or  bhane  dekhi  placed  at  the  end  of  the  sentence  to 
which  it  refers.  Thus,  devatd-haru  pant  dphai-dphn  najrdnd  arpan  game  chhan  bhane, 
aru  rdjd-kd  td  ke  knrd,  if  (lit.  on  having  said)  the  gods,  also,  of  themselves  will  offer 
tribute,  then  (td)  what  talk  we  of  other  kings  (doing  so)  (Bhdgacata  Parana,  p.  150) : 
manushya-le  prdn  jane  beld-md,  suddha-man-le  ksan-mdtrd  in-md  man  layo  bhane, 
param-gati-md  prdpta  hunchha,  if  (bhane),  at  the  hour  of  (his)  breath  departing,  a 
man  with  pure  heart,  oven  for  a moment  placed  his  heart  (or  mind)  on  them,  he 
will  reach  salvation  (ib.,  p.  156).  As  an  example  of  bhane  (or  bhanye)  dekhi,  we 
have  (Luke  x,  0)  tyaha  mildp-ko  aantdn  ra-chha  bhanye  dekhi,  if  the  son  of  peace 
be  tbero. 

Very  similarly  kina  bhane,  i.e.,  on  saying  “ why,”  is  used  to  ipean  * because.’ 
Thus,  nitya  Bhagawdn-ko  darsan  garnd-le,  burhd-harn  pani  tarun  bh'aye,  kina  bhane 
bdrambdr  netra-kd  dtcdrd  Bhagaiodn-kd  mukh-kamal-kb  ainrit  pan  garda-the,  from 
continually  seeing  Bhagawan  old  men  again  becarno  young,  because  (lit.  on  having  said, 
or  if  they  said,  ‘ why  ’)  by  means  of  their  eyes  they  were  continually  drinking  the  water 
of  life  of  tho  lotus-face  of  Bhagawan  ( Bhagavata  Parana,  p.  160).  Mr.  Turnbull  gives 
as  an  example,  u bhdgyo  kina  bhanye  dardyo,  ho  fled  because  he  feared. 

The  usual  words  for  ‘ and  ’ are  ani  (cf.  Marathi  dni),  and  -ra.  Tho  word  -ra  is  an 
enclitic,  but  (unlike  the  Latin  qne)  is  usually  added  to  the  first  of  the  things  coupled 
together.  ^ 

TOL.  IX,  FART  IV.  H ~ 


KHAS-KTJRA  OR  NAIPlLl. 


52 


Thus,  bdjd-ra  ndch-ko  sor,  the  noise  of  music  and  danoing ; Bikramdjit-lS  tee-gaga - 
kd  rdjya  liye-ra  rdjya  gat'd,  Vikramaditya  took  the  kingdom  of  that  place,  and  ruled 
(it).  In  the  latter  cxamplo  liye-ra  is  practically  equivalent  to  a conjunctive  participle, 
as  explained  on  page  36. 

When  -ra  joins  two  sentences,  I have  occasionally  found  it  in  the  second  sentence 
in  unexpected  positions.  Thus  ( Bhdgavata  Burdna,  page  150) : — 

aba  Braj-md  pdlanu-hawas ; ma  pant  sneh-le-bharlyd-kd 

now  Braj-in  please-go  ; I moreover  affection-with-filled 

bandhu-varg-kd-ra  charan-kd  darSatt  garna  aula, 

relations-of-and  fect-of  inspections  to*make  will-come, 

i.e.  now,  please,  go  to  Braj  ; and,  moreover,  I will  come  to  pay  my  respects  to 
my  relations  who  are  filled  with  affection  for  me.  Here  »ra,  though  in  the  middle  of 
the  sentence,  and  suffixed  to  bandhn-varg-kd , can  only  join  the  sentence  to  what 
precedes. 

There  are  many  other  idioms  in  Khas-kura,  which  take  the  place  of  conjunctions, 
for  particulars  of  which  the  student  is  referred  to  pp.  123-132  of  the  second  edition  of 
Mr.  Turnbull’s  Grammar. 


INTBODU  CTION. 


53 


APPENDIX. 

Direct  and  oblique  forms  of  nouns  in  0 , u,  ft,  a,  etc.  (see  page  25). 

Singular. 


Direct  forms  in  o or  u. 

Specimen  II. 

bhag-\fi  sampati  urayo,  he  squandered 
the  goods  of  his  share. 

aphnu  pet  bharna  pdyena,  he  did  not  get 
(power)  to  fill  his  belly. 

via  timro  chhora  bhannn , to  call  me  your 
son. 

mdro  chhora  maryd-)s.Q  thiyo,  pheri 
bUchyo ; hardly  e-  ko  thiyo,  pheri 
paiyo,  my  son  was  dead,  again  survived ; 
was  lost,  again  became  found. 

ndch-  kd  sor  suni,  hearing  the  sound  of 
dancing. 

timro  bhdi  y5,  your  brother  came. 

tes-ko  babu  bol-binti  garyo,  his  father 
made  supplication. 

timro  tahal  garda-chhu,  I am  doing  your 
service. 

timro  dgyd  ndghtna,  I disobeyed  not 
your  order. 

Specimen  III. 

kitor-abasthd- k5  dnanda,  the  joy  of  the 
condition  of  youth. 

thulo  banayS,  he  made  (him)  big. 

Oblique  forms  in  ft  or  a. 

Specimen  II. 

kanchha-<^dM-h?  bhanda,  on  the 
younger  one  saying. 

kanchha-chh9ra-£*  sabai  dhan  batuli,  the 
younger  son  having  collected  all  his 
wealth. 

♦gpbS-pordes  gai,  having  gone  to  a far 
oonntry. 

Sphna-ansa-bhag’Ao  sampati,  the  goods 
of  his  own  share. 


Direct  forms  in  ft . 

Specimen  II. 

ma  timro  chhora  bhannu,  to  call  me  your 
son. 

^-chhora  dekhi,  seeing  that  son. 

merd  chhora  mare-lzb  thiyo , my  son  was 
dead. 

jetha-cAaAi-chhora  kliet-md  thiyo,  the 
elder  son  was  in  the  field.  But  ( Baitdl 
Pachin)—  gka  dvij-ko  chhoro  thiyo, 
lie  was  thetson  of  a Brahman. 


Oblique  forms  in  0 or  u. 

Specimen  II. 

babu  saga,  with  the  father. 
hahU'/d  (Agent  ease), 
aphnu  kheta-ma,  (he  put  him)  in  his 
fields.  1 

m<?m-babu-*o,  of  my  father. 
dphna-bShVL’chhiu,  (I  will  go)  near  my 
father. 

te«-k5  babu-te",  his  father  (saw  him). 
tes-T&Q-gardan-md,  on  his  neck. 


64 


khas-kubA  OB  naipAlI. 


kharcha  gari  sakd  (i.e.  sakya)  paohhi, 
after  completely  expending. 
dutch  parda,  On  affliction  falling. 
tes-dea-ls. a mania  aSga,  with  a man  of  that 
country. 

m§T2L-bdbu-kd,  of  my  father. 
aphna-ftd6«*cAAe«,  (I  will  go)  near  my 
father. 

he  baba.  0 father. 

W$lXL&-nukar-jastai,  like  your  own 
servant. 

pharakai  chhada*?««>  while  being  at  a 
. distance. 

ghar-ko  najik  pugda,  while  arriving  near 
the  house. 

sodhds,.  while  asking. 
timra*baba-te  yak  bhoj  gave,  your 
father  made  a feast.  * 
he  chhora,  o son. 


babu-^h  to  the  father. 
tap5ni-kD-w«AA|/i,  before  you,  in  your 
presence. 

ghar-lifi  najik , near  the  house. 
tea- kd  lagi,  for  him. 
babu-<?AdAi-f(?  bhanyo,  the  father  said. 


Specimen  III. 

mata-pita-lssi  najik , near  the  mother  and 
father. 

chhada,  While  being, 
hamra  nimitta,  for  our  sake. 
tapdni-haru-'jssi  najik,  near  Tour 
Honours. 

6«6«-ka  ghar,  in  a father’s  house. 
amd-Woi-idi  dnanda,  joy  to  a mother 
and  father. 


Specimen  III. 

ama-babU"f«*»  to  a mother  and  a father, 
bard  namratdi-le , with  groat  humility. 
babu-&a  ghar,  in  the  house  of  a father. 
nn-ko  rin-bdta,  from  their  debt. 


Specimen  TV. 

bdsyd-\ra.  sath , with  the  courtesan,  but 
jogl- ko  sath,  with  the  ascetic, 
bstal-ka  jukti-le , through  the  device  of 
the  goblin.  > 

;4 

, Plural. 

Direct  and  oblique  forms  Direct  and  oblique  forms 

in  # or  a . in  0 or  u. 


Specimen  IV. 

jogi- kd  sath,  with  the  ascetic,  but  besya- 
ka  sath,  with  the  courtesan. 


Specimen  II. 

yak-jana-mdnis-ko  tdui  chhdrS  thiyS, 
of  a certain  man . there  were  two  sons. 


Specimen  II. 

yak-j ana-mania- kd  dui  chhora,  thiyi of  a 
certain  man  there  were  two  sons. 


INTRODUCTION. 


55 


Sphllft  chdkar-ldi,  to  his  own  servants. 

gar6  (i.e.  garyd),  he  (plnral  of  respect) 
made. 

5phnS*«dMi-Aar«  saga,  with  my  own 
com  pa  nions. 

Specimen  III, 

dmd-bdbu-lai  gydn-prdpta  bhaye-kfi  jani, 
recognizing  his  mother  and  his  father  as 
being  become  endowed  with  knowledge. 

Specimen  IV. 

iina-ka  chdr  rdnl  chha  chhora  bhayfi, 
of  him  there  were  four  queens  and 
six  sons. 


Specimen  III. 

prasanna  gardune-bhaye-  Icq.  chhadd , 
pleased  makers-become  while-being, 
i.e.,  while  coaxing  (their  parents) . 


5G 


khas-kukA  or  naipalI. 


I give  four  specimens  of  Khas-kura,  and  these  may  be  taken  as  being  arranged  in  an 
ascending  scale  of  importance.  They  are  (a)  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society’s- 
version  of  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son,  taken  from  the  Gospel  of  St.  Luke  published 
in  1902 ; (6)  another  version  of  the  same  Parable  prepared  for  me  in  Nepal,  which  I 
owe  to  the  kindness  of  the  Nepal  Darbar ; (c)  a short  extract  from  the  Bhagavad  Bhakti 
Vilasini ; (d)  the  introduction  to  the  Khas-kura  version  of  the  Baitdl  PachUl*  The 
last  two  were  written  by  natives  for  natives.  The  others  are  translations,  of  which  the 
first  was  made  under  missionary  auspices,  while  the  second  was  prepared  by  natives 
for  the  purposes  of  this  Survey. 

[do.  i.] 

indo-Aryan  family.  Central  Group. 

KIIAS-KUUA,  NAIPALI,  GORKHALl,  P ARB  ATT  Y A,  oh  EASTERN 

PAUARI. 

Specimen  I. 

% 

( Calcutta  Auxiliary  Bible  Society,  1002.) 

ip*  *RT  tni  itn  fm  i 

STRUTS  Trt  W ^ 

^ ^ T fRUifat  f^r  *T  fafir?!  ^ WF${  \ 

^rf^r  sra  sr*ir  ^ wafait  ft*rr  am  ¥ift  srfirarrer 
tprt  Rrreft  i ^rf^r  sit 

vvzm ft  it^t  mm  mmjj, 

%crI  i mm  ^rt|  *tw  ^ 

*1^  ^ill  ^rrfW%  I ?TT  ofqf  %cl 

Wt  ciw  mm  VRTT  *TT  W&m  ^frr  XfTW  $ *rf®r 

*Tft  ^fa=bM%  f I SZlft  UTRig  3fT§  qfa  *rf^  ^fq- 

? fam  tr%  tot  f^nrt  cTRlr^t  7r^jff%r  rtr 
<iftt  wftr  HTfti^T  srtts  ^ttrtrt*  tfftr 
SNzt  ^rfwr  *rfa  « mfa  m\  ^alft  ^ 

^T%ft  ^^r  mmrz  %mi*  fesrct  Rift 
*RWt*ift  mmi*  RTTRT  I ^ t faff 


KHAS-KURA  OR  NAIPALi. 


67' 

Si  ^rf#t  frourl  *rfi  qqWt  ?nirfi  mv  to  S f»fe  ftet 

wff*t  3p5f  vrfsr  I 7R  qi*tTO%  ^TO^Tf  *T»ft 

fit  tott.  fTOTfa  **nfe  fnsro  ^rfi  #^t  tr^t  ft#t ' 
e St?mt  SJTJT  TOTS  t^T  *fS-  TOST  TO  SSJTfe  RTT  T TTfa- 

to  *rTTO  to  froiS  fr  Set  itet  SSit  ffft  *cfi  ife  ftfr 
^eiiSit  fait  *rfa  qrffr  i qfa  fafroTO  qf  <*mi  ii 

to  iiwr  Sst  to  itefc  iTOi  fafr  *rfa  ir#  qeit  qfror 

s ^ \ 

TO  qTOTifT  qRT  T qTTOt  Sfa  TOFt  I qfa  ft#  flSroqfaft 

Sotrto  ifaiTSe  ft  q*n  it  *rfq  emit  i qfi  ## 

fiSt  wt  q*it  ^fq  fait  xn?^T  to  qtit  fro- 

TOI  #^TO  fTOTq#  ft  TO#t  #fe  qift  qfa  I TO  #t  itfarf 

*rfr  *rfa  fro  to%  w qfq  'qfa  q^S  im  ^ie  #^rrf 

W3g  pmft  I TO  ##  eiTq^  qR*TO  3TO  faf  TOTt  %e  S t% 

" qf  tf#  fait  *nfq  to  w ^rfa  faiT  toto  #to  qqrfaf  e 
qfa  fafa%  TOT1  Si  ^RifT  faTOq  WZ  TOTO  qqifaTfa  iif 
qmiit  qrat  fa qfa  nr  ft  to  fait  art  fait  ftfqqrr  iim  to 
^irorfaq  f to  iter  qfa  ^rrfr  to  fafai  #^fit  ^Tfa  qejqT  wrot 
qfart  ^ff  i ^rfa  SNa  sfaro  qiit  q iteT  S er%  S to  ^fa 
^rfH  Set  $ ert  TOt  it  i to  ^ttos  e vmz^  qf  ^fTO  fttt 
fqpw#  ft  Set  wf  Srot  fffr  qff  €tft  qff  #t  ^erifit 
ffft  *rfi  qrift  vrff  ii 


▼OL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


58 


[ No.  I.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

KHAS-KURA,  NAIPALl,  GORKHALl,  PARBATIYA,  ob  EASTERN 

PAHAjtl. 

Specimen  I. 

(Calcutta  Auxiliary  Bible  Society f 1902.) 

jj 

Ek-jana-manchhe-ka  dui-bhfu-chhora  * tliiye.  Ani  tiniharu-ma-ko 

One-psrson-man-of  two-brother  sons  were.  And  them-in-of 

kai$chh6-chai-le  babu-lai  blianyo,  ‘ babai,  dhan-sampatti-ko 

young  er-the-one  ( ag .)  the-father-to  said,  ‘ O-father,  the-wealth-property-of 
ma-lai  parne-bbag  deu  * bliani.  Ani  tyes-le  tiniharu-lai 

me-to  the-f ailing-share  give  ’ saying.  And  he  (ag.)  them-to 

aphnu-jivika  b5ri  diyo.  Ani  dber-ai  din  bhaye-ka  tbiycnan 

his-own-living  having -divided  gave.  And  many-even  days  become  were-not 

kancbho-chhovO  sab-ai  thok  bliela  garye-ra  t&ro-des-ma 

the-young-son  all-even  things  collected  having-made  far-country-in 


gai  gayo, 

ani  walia 

kukarmma-ma 

din 

bitaudai 

having-gone  went , 

and  there 

evil-deeds-in  v 

days 

a- passing 

aphnu-db  an  -sampatti 

chbaraputta 

paryo.  Ani 

jaba 

tyes-le 

his-cwn-weal  th-property 

scattered 

made.  And 

token 

he  (ag.) 

apbna-sab-ai-tbok  kharcliye-ko-tbiyo,  taba  tyes-des-ma  saro-anikal 


his-own-a  ll-even  things  spent?had,  then  that-country-in  a-hard-famine 

paryo,  ani  tyes-lai  apugye  liumi  lagyo.  Ani  tyo  tyes-des-lca 

fell,  and  him-to  want  to-be  began.  And  he  that-country-of 

iWiarbasiharu-mS-ko  yeuta-k5  gaye-ra  lasiyo,  ani  tyes-lc  tyes-lai 
citizens-in-of  one-to  having-gone  leant-on,  and  he  (ag.)  him  (acc.) 

sungur  charaunu-lai  aplina-kbeta-ma  patbayo.  Ani  tyes-le 

swine  feeding-for  his-own-fields-in  sent.  And  he  (ag.) 

sungurharu-le  khSdai-  galy e-ka  - kusa- le  aghaine  ati  ichchbS 

the-8wine-by  an-eating-done-husks-by  to-be- satiated  very  wish 

garda-tliiyo,  ani  kas*ai-manchhe-le  tyes-lai  kyci  dTdai-na*thiyo. 

a-making-was,  and  any-even-man  (ag ) him-to  anything  a-givmg-not-was. 
Tara  jaba  tyes-lai  chet  uyo,^  taba  tyes-le  bhanyo,  ‘ mero-babu*ka 
But  when  him-to  sense  came;  then  he  (ag.)  said,  ‘ my-father-of 
katti-banni-garneharu-kS  rotl-kd  parasasta  cbha,  ani  ma 

how-many -wag  e-makers- to  bread-of  sufficiency  is,  and  I 

chai  yalia  anikal-le  nashta  huda-chhu.  MS 

on-the-other-hand  here  funine-by  destroyed  a-becoming-am.  2 


KHAS-KURA  OR  NALPALi. 


59 


bkanchhu,  “ lie 

I- will-say,  “ O 

mnkblji 
in-presence 
maphik-ko 
fit-at-all 

jattiko 

like 


uthye-ra  aphnu-babu-thai  janchbu,  ani  us-lai 

having-arisen  my -own- father -near  will-go,  and  him-to 

pita,  mai-lS  swarga-ko  biruddha-ma,  ani  tajm-ko 

father,  1 ( ag .)  heave4-of  opposition-in,  and  Your-Uonour-of 

pap  garyg;  ma-  pberi  tapai-ko  clihoro  bkaufnc 

sin  I-did ; 1 again  Your-Uonour-of  the-son  to-be-called 

chhui-na;  ma-lai  apbna-banni-gamebam-ma-ko 

T-am-not ; me  ( acc .)  your-own-wage-makers-in-ef  one 

tulyaunu-hawas  ” bhani.’  Ani  tyo  utliyc-ra  apbnu-baJm-thili  hyu. 

please-to-make-eqnal  ” saying .'  And  he  having- arisen  his-own-father-neor  came. 

Tara  tyo  tar-ai  huda-kheri  tyes-ko-bfibu-le  tycs-lai 

J But  he  far-even  a-being-while  him-of-the-fatfter  (ay.)  him  (acc.) 

dekhye-ra  tithayo,  ani  dugurye-ra  tycs-lai  analo  m5ri 

having-seen  felt-compassion,  and  having-run  him-lo  embrace  having-struck 

tycs-lai  chuma  khayo.  Ani  chhoro-chai-lS  tycs-lai  bbanyo,  ‘ lie-pita, 

him-to  kiss  ate.  And  son-the  (ag.)  liim-to 

mai-le  swarga-ko  biruddlm-mg,  ani  tap5i-ko 

I (ag.)  heaven-of  opposition-in,  and  Your-Uonour-of 

garyl ; ma  pberi  tapSi-ko  chlioro  bbanlne 

1 again  Yonr-Ronour-of  tlie-son  to-be-called 

Tara  babu-cbai-le  aphna-das-haru-lai  bbanyo, 

But  father-the  (ag.)  his-own-servants-to  said, 


J-did ; 
bhani. 
saying. 
mul 


said,  ‘ 0 -father, 
mukhoji  pap 

in-presence  sin 

maphik-ko  cbhm-na  * 
jit-at-all  I-am-not  ’ 

‘ dibit  t-ai 
‘ quickly -even 


labeta 


nikali  lyaye-ra 

honourable  robe  having-produced  having-brought 
tyes-ko-hat-ni5  autlii-ra  gora-ma  jutta 

him- of -hand- on  a-ring-and  feet-on  shoes, u* 

paluwa-cliai  bachcblio  lyaye-ra  mSr-ra 
calf  having-taken  kill-and 

“ Kina”  blianye, 

“ Why'* -if-you-say  (i.e.,  because), 
jiyo ; havalyfc-ko-tkiyo,  ani 
lived ; been-lost-had,  and 
lagye. 


tycs-lai 

him-to 

lagai 

having-pnt-on 


lagawa,  ani 

put-ye-on,  and 

dcwa,  ani 

* five- ye,  and 


fatted-the 

gar  3. 

let-us-make. 
ani  pberi 
and  again 
ananda 


hamikaru  khai  ananda 

us  having-eaten  rejoicing 
yo-mero-chhoro  marye-ko-tbiyo, 

died-ha  d, 
Ani  tinihara-lc 
And  they  (ag.) 


this-my-son 
bhani. 
was-found  ’ saying. 


paiyo  * 


garnu 


rejoicing  to-do  began. 

Aba  tyes-ko  jctbo-cbai-cbboro  kbet-ma  thiyo ; ani  tycs-le 

Now  him-of  elder-the-son  the-f  eld-in  teas;  and  he  (ag.) 

ghar-ko  najik  ai  pugda-klieri  baja-ra-nach-ko  sor 

the-house-of  near  having-come  on-arriving-tchile  music-ami -dancing-of  sound 

sunyo.  Ani  tycs-le  das-baru-mS-ko  ycuta-lai  cbheu  bolaye-ra, 

heard.  And  he  (ag.)  tlie-servants-in-uf  one  (acc.)  near  liaving-called, 

*yo  kya  ho?’  bliani  sodhyo.  Ani  tycs-le  tycs-lai  bbanyo,  ‘ tiniro 

* this  what  is  ? ’ saying  asked.  And  he  (ag.) 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


him-to  said, 


‘ thy 
j 'l 


€0 


khas-ktjrA  oh  naipAlI. 


timro  babu-lc 
thy  father  ( ag .) 


niaryo, 
killed, 

payo  ’ bhani. 
go r 

garyena ; 
tmde-not ; 


nikanandai 
in-good-health 
bbayo,  ani 


became, 

* 


angered 

babu-le 
the-father  (ag.) 


bliai  ai  pugyo,  ani 

brother  having-come  arrived,  and 

kina  ” bbanye  tyes-lai 
because  him  (acc.) 

Tara  tyo  krodhit 
saying.  But  he 

ani  tyes-kb 
and  him-of 

manaunu  lagyo.  Tara 

to-remonstrate-with  began.  But 

dii  bhanyo,  ‘ hera,  ma 

having-given  said,  ’’  ‘ see,  I 

garda-chhu,  ani  timro  ajSa 

a-doing-am,  and  your  command 

timi-le  ma-lai,  mai-le  a ph  nfwni  t raliaru-sa  n a 

you  (ag.)  me-to,  mc-by  my-own-friends-with 


paluwa-chaT  bachchho 


fatted-the 


hudai-garye-ko 
* a-being-made 
bbitra  janfi 
and  within  to-go 

baira  aye-ra 

outside  having-come 
aplinu-babu-iai 

his- own-fat  her-to 

yetti-barkha-dekhi  timro  lagi 

so-many-years-frorn  of-you  for 

kaile-i  tarkaina-ra 

ever-even  I-transgressed-not-qnd 
anaiula 

rejoicing 


tyos-le 
he  (ag.) 


calf 

pheri 
again 
ichchhb 
wish 
tyes-lai 
him  (acc.) 

uttar 

answer 

da6ti 

labour 


pani 

yet 

garmi-kb-lagi 
making-of-f or 


kailc-i  bakhra-ko  patho  diyau-na ; tara  yo  cbai  timro,  tyo 

ever-even  a-goat-of  kid  gave-not ; but  this  on-the-othcr-hand  your,  that 


imro  jivika 
your  living 


besveliavu-sana 

linrlots-with 


khalkaune-chaT,  clihoro,  jais-ai  jiyo, 

devourer-the , son,  as-even  he-came, 


taba  timi-le  tyes-ko-lagi  paluwa  bachchho  maryau  ’ bhani.  Ani  tyes-le 

then  you  (ag.)  him-of -for  fatted  calf  killed  * saying.  And  lie  (ag.) 

tyes-lai  bhanyo,  ‘ e chhora,  ta  sadli-ai  ma-saha  chhas,  ani  jati 

him-to  said,  ‘ 0 son,  thou  always-even  me-with  art,  and  whatever 


•mero  chha,  sab-ai  tcro  ho.  Tara  ananda-ra  ramaliat  garnn 

mine  is,  ^ all-even  thine  is.  But  rejoicing-and  merriment  to-do 


ucliit  tliiyo, 

“ kina  ’’-bbanye, 

proper  was. 

because. 

this 

jiyo ; ani  tyo 

haraiye-k  6-  tliiyo, 

ani 

lived ; and  he 

been-losi-had, 

and 

terb  bliai  maryc-kO-thiyO,  ani 

thy  brother  died-had,  and 

paly  o’  bhani. 

was-found * faying. 


61 


[ No.  2.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

khas-kuhA,  iVAIPALI,  GORKHAU,  PARBATIYA,  or  eastern 

pahari. 

Specimen  II. 

(Nepal  Darbar,  1899.) 

to  rrt  RTfRRjfit  ?s  ttn  Tm  i rw  RT$TRif?-*i 
rt r 3r  rtr%rrrt^rrts  fsg  sta  RfR  rrlrtrr  rr  ^rits 

f^t  I Rf*  f^R  Rf$  fRR  Rft$T  #TTT%  RR  RR  R^fR  £TRT  RRR  § 
*ff%  RTRRRT  Rft  RTHiRT  RRRTTOt  Rqfa  RR  TRt  I Rtrfft  ^ 
Rft  R%  R%  RR  STRvRT  RfRRTR  qfr  RRRTS  RTf 

R^T  RR  IrRiT  TO  RRT  RSRTfR  RTfRR  RR  R R^  | aft 
RSRffR%  RRRTS  RTTfi-J  ^RRT  R*TRR  RiTRRT  RTRt  I RfRR 

%fs  f^RR  l RRt  1^JT%  RTTR  ^Stt  qfa  RRffg  WZ  RR  RTRR  | 
RfRRT  qfe  RR  RFRt  ^ RU  RTR^Rt  RRRT  Atfo  *fTR  RRfa  RRTR 
RfR  RTRR  RTfRRT  SRTST^TT  RTRfTJR  fat  RT  Rf^TR  R^f  | R 
RTORT  RTR  ^ t RTRT  4***?*  RRTfRRTfa  RR  RTR  RT  | R RRTfTOt 
#tTT  R^  RtRT  RR  RSR  I RRTS  RTWRT  ^RT'fT^TT  RtRF  ^ 
RRSRR  RfR  RRRT  I Rfa  Rfe  RTRTRT  RTR  W RRt  1 Rt  WITT  R? 

vj  'J  -v  >i 

RiTO  W^TRT  RTOt  RTRR  ^RT  Rfa  SRfe  R RTOt  R^RRT 

TORTR  Rfa  RTS  TRTRt  | #faTR  RTRRTS  RRTt  % RTRT  t*RTT  RRTfRWT 
g€faf  RTR  RT  I R RRTfoTRft  WTTT  RR  RTtRRf  Rt  #R  I RT  RTRt 
RTRvRT  RTRTTOTS  RiRt  RRR  ^RT  *8TS  RRRTS  R I STRRT 
R^fa  RtfRT  1RT  Rfa  RTS  R I Rt  STfR  RTTS  fas  TOT  RTf 
fRRRR  Rt  RTt  WtTT  RRTOt  (or  R?Rt)  fftRt  I ST^lTOt 

fftRt  RT^Rt  RfR  fRfRSTO  RTR«R  RT%  II 

RTOt  mZl  RTfS  ^WRT  fRRt  t RTS  RTOt  RfRR  RIRT 
RTRIK  RTTOt  RtT  ^fR  RRRRT  RTRTRTS  STfRT  WT  St  RfR  Rt^ 
fRRt  RTi  R^Rt  I fTOTRSR  RfSR  fRTOTS  RTRRt%  fRRT  RTRT% 


62 


khas-kurA  or  NAIPAlI. 


to  ^ ?Nrsrrf  tf^T  *ft  fror*  fro  ^ i 

?Tf  *TfiP[  ^TTf:  f^TTf  TOt  I *T*m*  TOT* 

frot  %?:  tfrorr  m%f*4  trot  zro  ^ trf*r  frot  toots. 
TOffa  ^ xrf%  tot?:  ottot  ot^to  #r  tot  toots 

*teT  tot  qf*r  i toitTO  teNt  sftr  trot  TOf?r  to:  f^% 

frot  $Ttt  faf*r^  fofaSt  ^toT  ^rrf^r  ^ wi-  i to 
OTrorfro  TOfr  % #Ttt  *rt  to  i tft  ?ft  $ fit  fft  ft  i 

M N. 

*ifa%  tot  *rfr  *4  ott  gOTftnr  w fro  vfit  *ft  ^Tt  mi 
frot  ^fK  TOEft  I STT§S*Rt  fTOt  iTTirfr  II 


63 


{ No.  2.] 

t 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group, 

KHAS-KURA,  NAIPALI,  GORKHALl,  PARBATIYA,  6*  EASTERN 

PAHAJtl. 

Specimen  II. 

(Nepal  Darbdr,  1899.) 

Kol-yak-jana-manis-ko  dui  chhora  thiye.  Tx-madhye  kafiohlia- 
Certain-one-person-man-of  two  sons  were.  Them-among  younger 

chahi-le  babu-saga,  * mai-lc  paune,  ansa-bhag  ma-lai  dinu-hos,’ 
one-(ag.)  father-with,  * by -me  to-be-got,  share-portion  me- to  please-giye* 
bhani,  bhanda,  babu-le  ansa  chhutyai  diyo.  Kehi-dina-pacbhi 
saying,  on-saying , father  ( ag .)  share  dividing  gave.  Some-days-after- 

nij-kafichha-chhora-le  sab-ai-dhan  batuli  tarha-pardes  gai, 

that-younger-son  (ag.)  all-even-wealth  collecting  distant-foreign-land  going, 

tahi  moj-maja  gari  aphna-ansa-bhag-ko  sampati  sab-ai 

there  pleasure-delight  doing  his-oion-share-portion-of  property  all-even 

urayo.  Sampati  kharcha  gari-sake-pachhi  tes-thau-ma 

squandered.  Property  expenditure  making-completed-after  that-place-in 

thulo  anikal  pari  tes-lai  dukh  ai  parda  tes-des- 

great  famine  happening  him-to  sorrow  coming  on-happening  that-country- 

ka  yak-jana-saliar-basi-manis-saga  gal  basyo.  Tyo  sahar-basi-le  tes- 
of  a-person-cily-dwelling-man-with  going  he-dwelt.  That  city-dweller  (ag.)  him 
lai  aphnu  kbeta-ma  sugur-charaune  kam-ma  layo.  Kasai-le 

(acc.)  his- own  fields-in  swine-feeder  business-in  put.  Any-one  (ag.) 

kehi  diye-na.  Tes-le  sugur-le  khane  dhuto-le  pan 

anything  gave-not.  He  (ag.)  swine-by  to-be-eaten  husk-wilh  also 

aphnu-p&t  bharna  paye-na.  Chetiya-pachhi  bhanna  lSgyo  kl, 

his-own-belly  to-fill  got-not.  Sense-getting -after  to-say  he-began  that, 

‘ mera-babu-ko  prasasta*roti  khana  na-saki  ubajna  pani  paun 

‘ my-father-of  ample-bread  to-eat  not-being-able  to-leave-over  even  getters 

katika-darmahadar-chakar-haru  thiye,  ma-ra  bhok-le  inarda-chliu.  Ma 

many-wages-receiving-servants  were,  I-and  hunger-by  a-dying-am.  I 

uthi  aphna-babu-chlien  gai,  “ he  baba,  ISwar-ra  tapani- 

arising  my-own-father-niar  going,  “ 0 father,  God-and  Your-IIonour- 

mathi  maife  pap  ga*5.  Ma  tapafti-ko  chhora  bhannu  yogya  ko  aba 

upon  1 (ag.)  sin  did.  I Your- Honours  son  to-be-said  fit  at-all  now 

bhanna,  niA-lai  aphna-darmahadar-nokar-jast-ai  garnu-kawas  ” 

bccame-not,  me  (acc.)  thine-own-wagts-receiving-servant-like-even  please-make  ” 


64 


KIIAS-KURA  OR  NAIPALI. 


bhani  bhanu-la,*  bhani,  uthi,  aphna-babu-chhefl  gayb.  Ti- 

saying  toill-say*  saying,  arising , his-own-father-near  he- went.  That - 

chhora  dher-ai  farakai  chliada-ma  tes-ko-babu-le  dbkhi, 

son  much-even  at-a-dislance  being-in  his-father  ( ag .)  seeing, 

daya  gari,  daiiri  gai,  tes-kb  gardan-ma  ankamal  gati, 

compassion  making,  running  going , him-of  neck-on  embracing  doing, 

mwai  khayb.  Cbhora-le  balm-lai  bbanyo,  ‘ lie  baba,  I^vrar-ra 

kiss  ate.  Son  (ag.)  fatlier-to  said,  ‘ O father,  Ood-and 

lapafii-kb  mukhgji  pap  garb,  ma  tapafii-ko  chhora  bbanna 

Ydttr-  Ronottr’s  {in-) presence  sin  I -did,  I 3 our- Honour's  son  to-be-said 

lavak  kb  chbai-na.  Tara  babu-lc  aphna-chakar-lai  bbanyo,  *asal 
ft  at-all  am-not.  But  father  {ag.)  his-ownservant-to  said,  ‘ good 
luga  lyai  yas-lai  de,  hat-nia  authl-ra  gbra-ma,  jutta  pani 

clothes  Ih'inging  this-{one-)to  give,  liand-in  ring-and  legs-in  shoes  also 
lai-de.  Lau,  hami  khai  pii  maja  garau ; “kina?** 

putting-give.  Lo,  we  eating  drinking  pleasure  let-make;  "why?" 

bhane,  yb  nierb  chhora  marva-kb  {or  mare-kb)  tbiyb 

{if)  they -said  (i.e.  because),  this  my  son  dead  was 

pheri  bSchyb;  hara!ye-kb  tbiyb,  phbri  parvo,’  bliani,  tini-haru-le 

again  wassaved ; been-lost  was,  again  beeame-found ,*  saying,  they  (ag.) 

ananda  mane. 
rejoicing  experienced. 

Tcs-kb  jetha-chahi-ehhora  kbet-ma  tliiyb.  Ai  ghar-kb  najik 

rUim-of  elder-the-son  field-in  teas.  Coming  house-of  near 

pugda  baja-ra  nach-kb  sor  suni,  yak-jana-chakar-lai  daki,  , 

oti-arriving  music-and  dancing-of  noise  hearing,  one-personservant-to  calling, 

kya  ho  ? ’ bhani,  sbdhda,  * timro  bhal  ayb  kusalananda-sahi 
what  is  ? ’ saying,  on-asking,  * your  brother  came  good-health-wit h 


nij-lai  paye-kb-le  timra-baba-le  yak  bhbj 

. him  got-by  (i.e.  because)  your-father  (ag.)  a feast 

cbakar-le  tcs*lai  "bhanda,  tyo  risai 

servant  (ag.)  him-to  * on-saying,  he  being-angry 


g»re,  ’ bhani, 

•made,  ’ saying , 

bhitra  gaye-na. 

inside  went-not. 


Tcs-ko  babu  bahira  ai  tes-lai  \ bol-binti  garyb, 

Him-of  father  outside  coming  him-to  speaking  supplication  made. 

Tes-le  ;;  babu-lai  jabab  diyb,  ‘hera,  yatikfi-barkha-deklii  timro  tahal 

He  (ag.)  father-tv  answer  gave , ‘ see,  so-many-pears-from  your  service 

garda-chhu ; kailh£  pani  timro  asya  naghtfna,  ^’tai-pani 

a-doing-l-itm ; ever  even  yoilr  order  I-disobeyed-not,  nevertheless 

timi-le  kailhc  pani  r.na*lai  aphna-satlii-haru-saga  maja  garna-lai 

you  (ag.)  ever  even  me-to  my-own-oompaniolis-with  pleasure  making-for 


KHAS-KURA  OR  NAIPALi. 


65 


yota  patha  pani  diye-nau.  Besya-haru-saga  basi  timro-sampat 

one  kid  even  gave-not.  Uarlots-with  dwelling  yonr-property 

kbai-dine  yo  timrQ-chhora  aune  bittik-ai  timi-le  tcs-ko-lagi 

eater-up  this  your-son  on-coming  at-once-even  you  (ag.)  him-of-for 


bhoj  garyau.’ 

Taba 

babu*chahi-le 

blianyo, 

‘he 

chhora, 

ta 

feast  made* 

Then 

father-tlie  (ag.) 

said, 

‘0 

son, 

thou 

sadh-ai  ma-saga 

clibas, 

mero  jo  chlia 

sab-ai 

ter-ai 

bo. 

Hami-lC 

always-even  me-with 

art, 

mine  what  is 

all-even 

thine-even  is. 

Us-by 

maja  gari  harkha  gamu  raunasib  cbba,  “ kina  ? ” bhang,  vo 
pleasure  doing  rejoicing  to-niake  proper  is,  “ why  ? ” (if)  they-said,  this 
tgro  bhai  mare-ko  • thiyo,  phori  bachyo ; haraiye-ko  thiyo,  pbcxi 
thy  brother  dead  was , again  icas-saved ; been-lost  was , again 

paiyO.' 

became-found* 


vot.  IX,  VAST  IV. 


66 


The  following  specimen  is  taken  from  the  Bhagavad  Bhakti  Vilasinl,  a Klias-kura 
translation  of  the  10th  book  of  the  Bhdgavata  Purd^a.  Attention  may  be  drawn  to  the 
use  of  impersonal  honorific  verbal  forms.  Thus,  Sukadeva  garnu  hunchha,  Sukadeva  is 
doing  (or  did),  literally,  (by)  Sukadeva  doing  is  becoming.  Similarly,  tapdili  khed-md 
huuu  hun-thyd,  Your  Honours  were  in  trouble,  literally,  (by)  Your  Honours  being  in 
trouble  was  becoming. 

[ No.  3.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

KHAS-KIJRA,  NAIPALI,  GORKHALl,  PARBATIYA,  oe  eastern 

PAHARl. 

Specimen  111. 

(From  the  4/ith  chapter  of  the  Bhagavad  Bhakti  Vilasinl.) 

wi  WTT-qiqqil  OTH 

*ft  i vpttr  ^ im  mm  fzmm  masr 

t ^THT  t 5T^T  *TP*T  Ht  I rTmf^T  TFTT 

fafarr  ht¥  f *t  ^*?zft  i 

fprfa  f^t  irft  55ft  to*tt 

tow  ffaT  far  ^ ^ i sit  yr 

^WT-rowiif  ff^r  *ta<?rp*  *tt*  a 

N *V  \ vj  ^ \ ” 


67 


[No.  3.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

KHAS-KURA,  NAIPALl,  GORKHALI,  PARBATIYA,  or  EASTERN 

PAHARl. 


Specimen  III. 


(From  the  46th  chapter  of  the  Bhagavad  Bhakti  Vil&sini.) 


&ri-{5ukadev  agya  garnu 

(By-)&rl-$ukadeva . order  making 


hunch  1 1 a, 
becoming-is. 


ParamcSwar-Bhagawan-l5 
God-Bhagawan  ( ag .) 


ama-babu-lai  gyan  prapta  bhaye-ko  jani,  ‘ailhe  yo 

mother-father  ( acc .)  knowledge  obtained  become  knowing,  ‘ now  this 

gyan  dina  thik  chhai-na,’  bhani,  maya-le  tyo  gyan 

knowledge  to-allow  right  is-not ' saying , illusion-by  that  knowledge 

birsai  dinu  bho.  Waha-pa  chlii  Bhagawan  dui  bhai, 

causing-to  forget  giving  became.  There-after  Bhagawan  the-two  brothers, 

mata-pita-ka  najik  ai,  baro-namrataT-le  prasanna  garaune  bhave-ka 

mother falher-of  near  coming,  great-humility -with  satisfied  makers  become 

chhada,  ‘he  ama,  he  baba,’  bhani,  kehi  hlianna  lagnu. 

on-being,  ‘ O mother,  0 father ,*  having-saul , something  to-say  beginning 


bho.  ‘ Tapafti  hamra-nimitta  sarh-ai-khed-ma  hunu 

became.  ‘ Your-JIonours  of -us-for-th e-sake  hard-even-affiiction-in  being 

hun-thyo.  Tai-pani  balya-pauganda-kisOi’-ahastha-ko  ananda  hami-bata 

becoming-teas.  Nevertheless  infancy-boyhood-youth-condition-of  joy  us- from 


paunu  bhaye-na. 
getting  became-not. 

basna  payenau. 
to-dwell  got-not. 
balakh-lai  hunehka, 
a-child-to  becomes. 


Hami-abhagi-le  pani  tapaui-liaru-ka  najik 
We-luckless  (ag.)  moreover  Your-Honours-of  near 

Babu-ka  ghar  base-ko  jo  sukh 

Father-of  in-house  one-who-has-dwelt  what  happiness 
so  pani  hami-le  payenau.  Jas-le  ch'u-ai 
that  moreover  we  (ag.)  got-not.  Who  (ag.)  the- four 


puruslmrtha  dine,  Snrir  utpanna 
human-objects  giver,  body  produced 

thulo  banayo,  un*ko  rin-bata 

big  made,  them-of  debt-from 

gare,  pani  vin-chukti  buna 
he-may-do,  but  debt-payment  to-be 
6arir-l&,  samartba  bbai, 

body -with,  able  being, 


garyo,  jas-le  palan  gari 

made,  who  (ag.)  cherishing  having-made 


barabar 
continually 

saktai-na. 
is-able-nut. 
ama-baba-lai 
mother -fa  ther-to 


say -bark  ha-samma  sewii 

hnndred-year-asfar-as  service 
.To  putra  dban-le, 

What  son  wealth-toil  It, 

ananda  didai-na,  tes-lai 

joy  gives-not,  that-for 


paralok-mfi  aphn-ai  masu  kbwauebban.’ 
other-world-in  his-o>on-even  flesh  they-ivill-canse-to-eat: 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV.  * 


K i 


68 


KHAS-KTJRA  OR  NAIPAlI. 


FREE  TRANSLATION  OF  THE  FOREGOING. 

The  Holy  ^ukadcva  said, — When  ParameSwara  Bhagawan  (i.e.  Krishna)  recognized 
that  his  parents  had  attained  a knowledge  (of  his  divine  nature),  he  said  to  himself  that 
such  a knowledge  should  not  be  permitted,  and  caused  them,  by  making  them  subject 
to  earthly  illusion,  to  forget  it.  Then  the  two  divine  brothers  (Krishna  and  Balad&va) 
approaohed  their  mother  and  their  father,  and  with  great  humility  proceeded  to  render 
them  content.  ‘ 0 Mother,  0 Father,’  said  they,  * for  our  sakes  you  have  suffered  hard 
affliction  ; yet  never  have  ye  experienced  the  joy  that  comes  from  (children  in  their) 
infancy,  boyhood,  or  youth.  We,  too,  luckless  ones  that  we  were,  oould  never  dwell  near 
you.  We  never  had  the  happiness  which  comes  to  children  who  live  in  the  house  of 
their  father.  If  one  were  to  serve  continually  for  a hundred  years,  he  would  still  not 
be  able  to  repay  the  debt  due  to  those  who  gave  him  the  four  objects  of  human  existence 
(duty,  wealth,  love,  and  salvation),  who  produced  his  body,  and  who  cherished  him  and 
made  him  to  grow  up.  If  one,  who  is  able,  gives  not,  with  all  his  wealth  and  all  his 
body,  joy  to  his  parents,  in  the  future  world  he  is  condemned  to  cat  his  own  flesh.’ 


KllAB-KURA  OR  NAIPlLl. 


69 


The  following  specimen  is  the  preface  of  the  Khas-kura  translation  of  the  Baital 
Pachisi.  Attention  should  bo  drawn  to  the  frequent  honorific  plurals  of  verbs  with 
singular  subjects.  Thus,  raja  thiyd,  not  thiyd,  the  king  was ; and  many  other  instances. 

Note  also  the  method  in  which  these  plurals  of  past  tenses  end.^  Sometimes  they 
are  written  as  ending,  in  thiyd,  and  sometimes  as  ending  in  ye  or  e.  Thus,  in  the  first  few 
lines  wo  have  thiyd,  bhae,  thie,  garye,  gaye,  the  (for  thyd ),  die,  gave,  diye,  lchayii,  bhaye. 
These  woll  illustrate  the  remarks  on  the  pronunciation  of  these  sounds  on  page  22. 

[ No.  4.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

w 

KIIAS-KURA,  NAIPALI,  GORKHALl,  PARBATIYA,  or  EASTERN 

PAIlARl. 

Specimen  IV. 

(Preface  to  the  linitdl  Pachisi.) 

*it^t  to  'srfT  fwt  i ?rrNn  ttstt 

i ^tt  TRt  w €Kt  w i ^ t to  wtott  fm  \ 

' ” " " y X X N \ 

fiprerc  TOTOT  *T^ST  TT5TT  W I fcTTOI*  fcTTOl  *TOfTOWT- 

wrfr  srorat  Tmr  ftra-T  tto  nr  i to?{w  f%ar- 
mfatri  « mi  mpitm?  wi  ^ mgr  mimn  i mifft 
q&R  TTW  JI\t  I *STft  TPStraTf  W 3IWR 

qret  ?5nf  fii  i u5n%  ftt  snuiBWH  fi  fw^r 

d ^ ^ 

lit  I i€t  TTsrra  I TT^t%  ^TKt 

•gtprfTf  3Rt<pTTOT5  1 <$\  TO  I 

l TTWT%  TOt  e?Tt  TO1  f%  -%U4» 

^ i ?t  TT^T  Wtfe  *t*ft  Wl  II 

Tjwq  r ^5^  to  i art  TTsrot 

1\TW\  \ TTW  W *31?  ITS  TTO  flTOTfocT 

\ RITI  ?T^J3it  T^IWI  11  ?N  ?TlT^t  if^ft  ^ITt  I § 
TT^IT  ?T  fafTOTT  liT^T  lf*3  I TO  II 

sit  THSmT  TTO  fal  I fa  TO  fal  11  I TO 

1TOT  TO  fro  Z&ift  ??Tfa  far  *PT  lift.  ^f^TO*  ^fts  *T3IT 

^rfa-T  TO"  TOt  iff  3Tf  ^TTfT  ^UTTOT  3Tt 


70 


khas-kurA  or  naipAlI. 


WIT  HTTOIT  TTfH  TTWT%  S#f  I ^ t??IT%  71  fH 

^rtifNrrs  vfa  *m\  #t  faf^r  ^nrfr  ft 

*tctto  wit  i <ro  tt!  v$*m  i im- 

TOt  tItoM:  %wv$t  mrniu *rt  TOT«irt  tot  tot  i %to- 

*T  ^TT5T  % ipf  TOT  | ^-WTcT  TOTOTT  TO  Vtit  | ^7T 

t^r?n  to**  i to  €lft  wr*  $ *w*rr  tot  to  ti^t  f^ 
toto  tt^  ? ^ ^ f*sr  *ft*T  wt  i to  ^twniT  wz 

7Tt%  gfTO  CftT  qilMTT  #t%-7!  ^T3iT  TO?v  TfNhinT  *l4  TO  I 

TO*  front  tojt%  iTzmxz  ^twjk  %m*  vftw 

T%W  TTfTf  WTfa  ¥lTT*!T*  faff  TITfr  faft  ?T  TTTO1T  *rfT  TOfgJ 

II 

% TOTCT^  ; §T  TOTTO  fwf^T  TO  1 TO  SRTTOT  T?fr  TOWf 
TOT  ^ T$*l\ I ^ 5^  f7 m TO  ^5IT  | *TOT  ^TO* 

mi  # TO^cftr  to  i TO%%  *t€T  ^tW  ^r  f% 

i €t  TOT^rrj  ttt4  i ^srrt  *rgft  ^ <t  *tfNit 

tct4  *rf%  *rf<?  f^fr  ii 

TTOITi  fl  Wt^Wr  7TOV  ^TITTOST  ^fTOT  3fH?Nn*  mft  f^TTOT- 
TITO  *lfT  TTTOfaTTO  fasfiTnfatf  ^T  TO  II 


71 


[No.  4.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

KHAS-KTJRA,  NAIRA!;!,  GORKHlLl,  PARBA1TYA,  or  EASTERN 

PAHARl. 

Specimen  IV. 

(Preface  to  the  Baital  Pachlsl.) 


Bikramajit-le 


Vikramaditya  (ag.) 

jahgal-ma 

gaye. 

forest-in 

went. 

raja-lai 

yek 

the-king-to 

a 

Raja-le 

raja 

king 

Yek 

One 

raja 

king 

mari, 
having-killed, 

Kohi-bakhat-ma 
Some-time-in 
di,  aphu 
giving,  himself 

Kohi-bakhat-ma 

Some-time-in 


Dhara-nagar  nam  gare-ko  yek  sahar  thiyo.  Tahl-ka, 

Dhdra-nagara  name  made  a city  * teas.  There-of 

Gandharva-  sen  thiye.  Tin-ka  char  rani  ohha  chhora  bhay§. 

Gandharva-sena  was.  Mim-of  four  queens  six  sons  became. 

s6  yek  jankar  thiyc.  Tin-ka  tka3-ma  Sankha  nam  gare-ka 

than  one  learned  was.  Him-of  place-in  Sankha  name  made 

bhaye.  Tin-lai  tin-ka  bhai  Bikramajit-le 

became.  Him  (acc.)  his  brother  Vikramaditya  (ag.) 
tes-jaga-kd  rajya  liye-ra  rajya  gare. 

that-place-of  kingdom  took-and  ruling  did. 

aphna-bhai-Bliartrihaii-lai  rajya 

his-own-brother-Bharlrihari-to  kingdom 

Bhartrihari  nlti-purbak  rajya  gar-the. 

Bhartrihari  prudence-with  ruling  did. 
brahman-lo 
Brahman  (ag.) 

ti-brahmun-lai 

The- king  (ag.)  that- Brahman- to 

Tyo-amrit-phal  raja-le 

That-ambrosia-fruit  the- king  (ag.) 

aph  n u- py  aro-u  papati-kotwal-1  ai 
her-own-dear-paramour-chief-of-police-to 

phal  besya-lai  diyO.  Besva-le 

fruit  a-courtesan-to  gave.  Tlie-courtesan  (ag.) 

Raja-le  baro  aleharya  mani,  tyo  phal 

The-king  (ag.)  • much  surprise  experiencing , that  fruit 
Tyai-stri-charitra-bairagya-le  rajya  chhori  „ „ 

That-very-wife-conduct-disgust-from  kingdom  abandoning  ascetic  became. 

Rajya  sunnya  dskhi,  Indra*le  yek  rakli-wala  khataye. 

Kingdom  empty  seeing , Indr  a (ag.)  a 

rakh-waln  rajya-ko  khabardari  gar-thyo 
guardian  kingdom-of  watch  made. 


amrit-ko 

phal 

lyai 

diye. 

ambrosia-of 

fruit 

bringing 

gave. 

dhan-daulath 

di 

bida 

gare. 

wealth-riches 

giving 

leave- to-go 

made. 

rani-lai 

dive. 

Rani-le 

the-qneen-to 

gave. 

The-queen  (ag.) 

dii. 

gave. 


Kotwal-le 

The -chief -of -police  (ag.) 
raja-lai 

the-king-to 

li  aphai 
taking  himself 
jogi  bliave. 


guardian  appointed. 
* Rajya  sunnya 

* Kingdom  empty 


tyo 

that 

dii. 

gave. 

khaye. 

ate. 


TyOl 

That 

chha,’ 

is.’ 


72 


khas-ktjrA  or  NAIPAlI. 


bhani,  khabar  pai,  raja  Bikramajit 

saying,  news  getting,  king  Vikramaditya 

rakh-wala-dev-saga  raja-ko  kusti  paryo. 

guardian-god-with  king-of  wrestling  took-place. 

kal-d§klii  bachaS-cbhu.  Paihlo  yek  katha  sun. 

death-from  will-save.  First  a 

• Yo-rajya-ma  Cliandramana 

* This-kingdom-in  Qhandrabhanu 

jogi  rukh-ma 
ascetic  tree-on 
dekhi,  raja 
seeing,  the-king 


ayS. 

came. 

* He  raja 
‘0 


Tyaha  rajya-ko 
There  kingdom 
ma  timi-lai 
, I thee  ( acc .) 


gaye. 

went. 


Tali5 


gan, 
making, 
lage, 
began, 
rupaya 
rupees 
“ ma 
“/ 
gai, 
gging, 

swad 

taste 


yek 
There  an 
jhundiye-ko 

hanged 

“ jo  tyo 
“ icho  that 

paula,” 

will-get,” 

ti-jogi-lai 


hear. 

raja  tbiye. 
king  was. 

tal-tira 
below-towards 

aph  na-darbar-ma 
his-own-court-in 


Ti 

yek  din 

jangal 

Be 

one  day 

forest 

tauko, 

mathi-tira 

khutt& 

head, 

up-towards 

feet 

aye-ra 
came- and 


bhanna 

to-say 


jogi-lai  naba 

ascetic  (acc.)  here 

bhani,  raja-le 

saying,  the-king  ( ag .) 


iu,  tyo 

will-bring,  he 

urdl  diye. 
order  gave. 


lyaS-cbhu,” 


that-ascetic  (acc.)  will-bring” 
jogi-lai  lialmva  mukh-ma 
the-ascetic-to  sweetmeat 


bhani, 

saying, 


raja-saga 

the-king-to 


pai, 

getting, 


.lbgi 

ihe-ascctic 


mouth-in 

sadbai 

always 


chatauna  lagi. 
to-canse-to-taste 
haluwa-ma 
siceetmeat-in  (-for) 


lakb 

hundred-thousand 

Yck-besya-le, 
A-courtesan  (ag.)f 
binti  gari, 
request  making t 
Haluwa-ko 

began.  Sweetmeat-of 

palke. 

acqnired-a-cr aving. 

tej-le-ra  besya-ko  bav-bhav-le  * jogi-lai 

Sweetmeat-of  strength-from-and  courtesan-of  coquetry-from  the-ascetic-to 

Kara-ko  ichchha  bbayo.  13esya-ka  sath  jogi  chain  garna 

desire  became.  Courtesan-of  with  the-ascetic  happiness  to-make 

Daiv-basat.  besya-lai  garbha  rabyo.  Das-mainha-ma 

Fate-owing-to  the-courtesan-to  pregnancy  became.  Ten-months-in 
janmyo.  Jaba  ohlioro  pach-chba-mainha-ko  bbayo,  taba  yek 
was-born.  When  the-son  fire-si  x-months-of  became,  then  one 

besya-le  bhani,  “ lie  muni-ji,  dberai  sukh-bliog 

day  the-courtesan  (ag.)  said,  “ 0 saint-sir,  much  happiness-pleasure 
»aryau.  Aba  tirtba-jatra  jau,”  bbani,  muni-le  eh bora  kadh-ma 

you-made.  Now  pilgrimage-going  go,”  saying, 

boke-ra  bcsya-ka  satb  tiitha-jatr<i 

carried- anil  courtesan-of  with  pilgrimage-going 

phirai  besva-le  raja-lai  aphnu  kura-matra 

turning  the-courtesan  (ag.)  king-to  lier-own  business-only  showing 

gare-ko  ralie-ehha,”  bbani,  jani,  chhora-lai  tihf 

made  has,”  spying,  recognking,  the-son  (acc.)  there-even 

phiri  gai,  tapasya  gari,  aphnu  jog  kamayS. 

turning  going,  austerity  doing,  his-own  asceticism  completed . 


Haluwa-ko 


Cupid-of 

lage. 

began. 

cbboro 
a-son 
din 


saint  (ag.)  son 


garna 

to-do 


gaye. 

went. 

dekhai 


shoulder-on 
" Ghuma 
“ Twisting 
pariksa 

test 

mari, 

killing. 


logi 

the-ascetic 


KHAS-KURA  OR  NAIPALl. 


n 


“ o 


maharaj, 

king, 


dherai 

much 


kaha-tak 

ichere-up-lo 


liinti 

representation 


Yek-kal-ma 

tin-jana-ko 

janma 

hhai-rahc-chha, 

yek 

tell. 

One-time-in 

three-persons-of 

birth 

taken-place-has, 

one 

an -oilman, 

kumalc,  yek 

hujur. 

In- 

ma  dui-lai 

ju 

mfir-chha, 

a-pottcr,  one 

Your- Honour. 

Thcm-in  two  (acc.) 

icho 

will-kill. 

chakrabati 

huu-chlm. 

Kumale-le 

teli-lfii 

garu? 

may-I-make  ? 
ye  k 

one 

so 

he 


maryo, 

killed, 


universal-sovereign  will-become.  The-potter  ( ay .)  the-oilman  (acc.) 

aphu  jogi-ko  rup  li-ralie-chha.  So  hujur-lai  marna 

he-himself  ascetic-of  form  taken-lias.  lie  Your- Honour  (acc.)  to-kill 

khoj-chha.  Hujut-le  cliaturo  bhai,  tyai-jogl-lai 

is- seeking . Your-  Jlonour-by  alert  becoming,  that-cery-ascelic-to 

marnu,’  bhani,  arti  diyo. 

he•is-to•be-killed,,  saying,  instruction  he-gave. 


Bslja-le  tyai-jogi-ko  sath  rahi,  betal-ka  jukti-le 

The-king  (ag.)  that-very-ascetic-of  with  remaining,  the-goblin-of  device-by 

jogl-lai  mari,  niskantak  rajya  gari,  rajadhiraj 

the-ascehc  (acc.)  killing , thornless  kingdom  making,  Hing-of-  Kings 

Bikramajit  rabda  ^jhaye. 

Vikramaditya  remaining  became. 


FREE  TRANSLATION  OF  THE  FOREGOING. 

There  was  a certain  city  called  Dharanagar,  of  which  the  ruler  was  King  Gandharva- 
sena.  He  had  four  queens  and  six  sons,  each  of  whom  was  more  accomplished  than 
the  other.  He  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Sankha,  who  was  however  slaiu  by  his  brother 
Vikramaditya.  Vikramaditya  seized  the  kingdom  and  carried  on  the  administration 
of  the  country.  After  some  timo  ho  made  over  charge  of  the  kingdom  to  his  brother 
Bbartrihari,  and  went  off  to  the  wilds  (to  be  a devotee).  Bhartriliari  governed  wisely 
and  one  day  a Brahman  came  to  him  and  presented  him  with  an  ambrosia  fruit 
(which  conferred  immortality  on  whoever  ate  it).  The  king  rewarded  the  Brahman, 
and  let  him  go.  Then  he  gave  the  fruit  to  his  queen.  She  gave  it  to  her  paramour,  the 
chief  of  the  police,  and  ho  gave  it  to  a courtesan.  The  courtesan  (who  had  no  idea  of 
its  history,  thought  she  could  not  do  better  than  give  it  to  the  king),  and  did  so. 
Bhartriliari  was  much  surprised,  and  (having  enquired  into  the  faots  of  the  case)  ate 
up  the  fruit  himsolf.  Then,  being  disgusted  at  the  conduct  of  his  wife,  he  abandoned 
the  throne  and  wandered  forth  as  an  ascetic. 

Seeing  the  throne  empty,  the  god  Indra  sent  down  a guardian  to  look  after  it.  In 
the  meantime  Vikramaditya,  hearing  that  there  was  no  one  to  carry  on  tho  government 
roturned  home.  He  encountered  the  guardian  deity  -(who  challenged  him  to  a 
wrestling  match).  Vikramaditya  conquered  the  guardian  and  was  on  the  point  of 
killing  him,  when  he  cried  out,  * 0 king,  I will  save  your  life.  First  hear  this  story. 

vot.  IX,  PART  x.  L 


74 


khas-kurA  or  NAIPAlI. 


‘Formerly  the  king  of  this  land  was  one  Chandrabhanu.  One  day  he  went  (to 
hunt)  in  the  forest  and  saw  an  ascetic,  a jog!,  hanging  from  a tree  upside  down,  feet 
in  the  air  and  head  below.  When  he  returned  to  his  court  he  offered  a reward  of  a 
lakh  of  rupees  to  any  one  who  should  bring  the  jog!  to  court.  A courtesan  took  up 
the  challenge,  and  marched  o£E  to  wbero  the  holy  man  was  suspended.  8he  slipped  into 
liis  mouth  a piece  of  toffee.  He  liked  the  taste,  (and  did  not  repel  her  when  she  put 
in  some  more.  So  she  kept  feeding  him  with  the  sweetmeat,  until)  by  its  potency  and 
also  by  her  own  coquetries  Cupid  began  to  attack  his  heart.  (He  oame  down  from  his 
tree)  and  set  up  house  with  the  courtesan.  By  and  by  she  became  pregnant,  and  in  ton 
months  bore  him  a son.  When  the  hoy  was  five  or  six  months  old  she  said  to  the  holy 
man,  Sir  Saint,  you  have  been  very  happy  here.  Now  you  should  go  on  a pilgrimage.” 
So  the  saint  put  his  son  on  his  shoulder  and  went  off  with  the  courtesan  to  visit  holy 
shrines.  When  he  found  out  that,  leading  him  by  devious  routes,  she  had  only  taken 
him  to  the  king  to  show  that  she  had  done  (what  she  had  said  she  would  do),  and  to 
test  (his  sainthood),  he  promptly  there  and  then  killed  his  son,  and  going  back  finished 
his  interrupted  austerities.  * 

‘Tour  .Majesty,  to  make  a long  story  short,  three  men  were  born  at  the  same 
moment,  an  oilman,  a potter,  and  Your  Majesty.  Whichever  of  those  three  shall  succeed 
in  killing  the  other  two,  will  be  universal  monarch.  The  potter  has  killed  the  oilman 
and  has  disguised  himself  as  that  jog!.  He  is  now  seeking  to  kill  Your  Majesty.  Your 
Majesty  had  better  look  sharp  and  kill  him.’  So  saying  the  guardian  spirit  vanished. 

The  king  stayed  with  that  very  jogi,  and  by  means  of  a cunning  trick  suggested 
by  a betal,  or  gohlin,  succeeded  in  killing  him,  and  ruled  his  kingdom  happily  as 
Yikramaditja,  Supreme  King  of  Kings. 


Note.— Th"  Kl  a-kura  version  l extremely  condensed,  and,  in  order  to  make  the  etory  clear,  extracts  from  tho  full 
Hindi  veision  have  been  inserted  between  marks  of  parenthesis. 


75 


PALPA  DIAL^OT. 

The  following  is  the  text  of  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son,  taken  from  the  Scram- 
pore  Missionaries’  P$lpa  version  of  1827.  No  other  specimens  of  this  dialect  have  since 
been  obtained,  and  it  is  impossible  to  cheek  its  correctness.  It  is  therefore  given  more 
as  a curiosity  than  as  evidence  of  an  existing  form  of  speech.  As  will  be  seen  from  the 
following  short  note,  the  grammar  of  the  specimen  closely  agrees  with  that  of  Klias- 
kura.  In  the  Nagari  copy,  I have  followed  the  spelling  of  the  original. 

Pronunciation. —This  is  apparently  much  as  in  standard  Khas-kura.  In  the 
word  nisaki  for  nikasi,  there  has  been  a metathesis  of  8 and  k.  In  many  words  a final 
a is  not  sounded,  thns  approaching  the  pronunciation  of  Kumaunl. 

Declension.  —The  oblique  form  and  the  plural  are  generally  made  as  in  the  stan- 
dard dialect,  but  occasionally  we  find  Hindi  forms  such  as  napharo-ana , to  the  servants. 

The  usual  postposition  of  the  Accusative-Dative  is  ana,  and  of  the  Locative,  ma. 
A Locative  is  also  formed  by  the  addition  of  d as  in  bhitare,  inside.  For  the  Ablative- 
Instrumental  we  have  aita  and  siya.  “ For  ” is  represented  by  ban,  governing  the 
genitive,  as  in  us-ko  ban,  for  him.  The  postposition  of  the  Agent  is  ne.  In  this 
connexion,  it  may  be  noted  that  the  verb  bolanu,  to  say,  is  always  treated  as  transitive. 
The  genitive  postposition,  kb,  is  immutable,  as  in  eka  mdnasa-kb  do  gadeld  thyd. 

PrOUOUUS. — We  have  ma,  I ; ag.  ma-ne  ; md-ana,  to  me;  mero,  my;  hand,  wo; 
hami-ko,  of  us : ta,  thou  ; ag.  ta-ne  ; tero,  thy  : iya  and  (?)  e,  this : u,  he,  that ; obi.  u or 
us  ; ui,  they  (a  Kumaunl  form)  ; obi.  un  : d pano,  own  : jo,  obi.  sing,  jis,  who:  k;/d, 
what?  koi,  any  one;  kati , how  many  ? kina  (Khas-kura  kina  bhanye ),  because. 

Verbs. — The  verb  substantive  is  apparently  the  same  as  in  Khas-kura.  For  the 
Finite  Verb  w'e  have  : — 

Oblique  Infinitive  : garane  pachhi,  after  making.  So  many  other  similar  forms. 

Oblique  presont  participle:  hbnde-l,  immediately  on  becoming;  rahade,  while 
remaining  ; hirakade  liimkade , as  he  approached  (the  house). 

Conjunctive  participle  : gari-kana,  having  made,  and  many  others. 

Old  Present  and  Imperative : garu,  I may  make  (rejoicing) ; deu,  give ; gar  a, 
make;  pairdw,  clothe  ; hero,  see  ! mdrb , slay  ye. 

The  Future  adds  a sa  to  the  Khas-kura  form,  as  in  tanakuldsa,  I will  go ; bol uldsa 
(f  boluldsa),  I will  say  ; houldsa,  we  will  become  (joyful). 

The  Past  Tenso  is  formed  as  in  Khas-kura.  Thus,  bolyb,  be  said.  There  are  one  o? 
two  doubtful  forms,  such  as  bheriyd,  he  approached  (the  house) ; ma- ni  tahala  (fern.) 
gariy  I did  service,  in  which  (contrary  to  the  Khas-kura  idiom)  the  verb  agroes  in 
gender  with  the  object. 

For  compound  tenses,  we  have  maradb-h'u,  I am  dying ; rahadb-hb,  thou  remainest ; 
hbndo-hb,  it  is  becoming ; pawadb-ho,  they  arc  getting  ; jiyb-ho,  he  has  lived ; milyb-ho. 
be  has  been  found;  hardyo-thyb,  he  bad  been  lost;  sijyb-thyo,  he  had  died. 


l2 


VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


I No.  6.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


70 


Central  Group. 


KHAS-KURA,  naipali,  GORKHALt,  pArbatiyA,  or  eastern 

pauari. 

(Palpa  Dialect.) 

(Serampore,  1827.) 

iim  ft  r^rt  WT  \ ^ RRRt  ht-jr  qrroRt  qqnR 

R qqT  RRRt  Rt  fRTT  H*t  iTqtit  R HHR  f3  | RHRt 
q#t  RRRt  qft  RRRt  fRTT  Wt  I R f^R  R ff%f 

rt*i  r%rt  qnqRt  r^rr  q£k  qftqtR  ^qHH  RRqit  qR  Rif  iif- 
wmt  rrrr  *qcq  wt  i rhrr  q#t  sRt 

qfirefre  R %RH  qR  R RTRTftH  q$TR  HURt  I €t  R 

HRfqRTR  RH  ^ TT5TT#r  Wt  HR  ^ qqtRtit 

qftRqR  HTOTH  qSRt  I qR  R qq^Wt  fHHRHt  wfqfHH  HDRt 
Hfe  HTR  RTqit  qifq?  Htt  HTRHR  RqR  R fqit  I itRH  fvcfRi- 

>J 

rr  rrr  qr^rr  nft  qqiit  qrfq  rrr  rtht  qR  ^rf%q  hht^t 
^RRt  qtqftfr  qR  h gqrfHH  *reiti  i h RfeqtR  qnqRt  fqrqrt 

%t  *HejfoR  qR  RHHR  qt^HTH  q ffT  4 HTWt  fqqRTZtH  qR 

nit  HTg  mUa  Rqrr  i qR  qrlftm  nrt  r^rt  it%  RTRqr 

R f HHH  HTt  RRf  W*2fit  RHHt  RT  I qR  R RfeRTR  HPRt 

RRTHt  rt  fqrqit  qR  r St  strt  tiq  R*rit  gqm  RHqR  iqit 
qR  ^ht  r#  qR  ?RftRR  rrhT  irqm  qraarrit  qR  rrhr  ^«rt  i 
qR  R^HTH  RqR  qt^fr  R JRT  H HTR^fft  fqqRTRtH  qR  HTT  Rig 
wl%T  RRTt  qR  qftfHH  HTt  RqHT  RTRHf^  it%  RTRqr  R q I 

qifq?  gqT  RRiffqR  frwr  rhIrr  fq^t  qrsnqi  qnqqR  RqR 

qR  R^it  f3RlR  R5T  qR  ^ftR  RRRT  (fan*  I qR  HtC t 

qRgrqR  1%qR  RRt  qrq  Tfn  ftrfRqR  ?ftR  ttrrtr  i ftR  qq 
R%RT  ftrftrqR  fRRt  it  R qnqt  Eat  qR  iftft  ftrot  it  qR  Rq 

qnRiq  rtr  RTIRT  It 


PALP  A DIALECT.  ’ 77 

*Ri  if3T  JITVRT  SZTt  ^ TV<«n§  <3 

# %f  #f*t  to  toto  to  *r*  3#  i to  **r  tow  grf#it* 

)3#t  H»ft  ftt  W W ^ I *^%  TO*  ##t  Tift  Tf  TO!  f?T*# 
TOT  Sft  3*1%  ##  *T%TTO  TO#  f*R  TOTO  f*#  3TO*  *T#  l 

TOi  % ffro#  #t  to  #*f  ***r*  * to#  i TOjfft*  to#  3*1% 
frorfro*  toto  frofh  *#  i ***  toi*  f?*s*  to*#  3*1** 
##t  f ft  to  *#  to*  fift  ms r *ft  to  Tift  toto  tot  * to# 

TOftf  TO  *T$  %TO  TOT  TOST  ft  * frot  f*f  * TO*#  *##  TO 
#ft  TO  I *tf*t  Tift  f**  #*T*  TOlffff#  TO  tff*R  Tift  *% 
TO  TOTO  *#  TO  TO#  ffTOTOt*  TO#  *ft  ##  *tf*TO 
TO#  I TO*  TO*  ##t  * *t*T  * flft  TO  f*ft#  TOi  ftft 
f*#  TOT  ft  I #*#  *T#  TO  TO*®?  *T*t  *#**  # f*i* 

>J 

oft  f^t  ^ ’srnfftzft  ^ 11 


7S 


[ No.  6.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

khas-kurA,  naipAli,  GORKIIALI,  PARBATIYA,  or  eastern 

PAHARt. 

(Palpa  Dialect.) 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 


(Serampore,  1827.) 


Eka-manasa-ko  do  gadSla  thya.  Aru  un-ko  sanu-ne  apano 

One-man-of  two  sons  were.  And  them-of  the-younger  ( ag .)  his- own 

buba-ana  bolyo,  ‘e  buba,  dhana-ko  36  chira  mero-ansa-ma  hondo-ho 

father-to  said,  (0  father , wealth-of  what  division  my-share-in  becoming  is, 

u ma-ana  deu.’  Us-k6  pachbi  us-ne  un-ko  bari  dhana-ko  chira. 

that  me -to  give .’  That-of  after  he  (ag.)  them-of  for  wealth-of  division 

garyo.  U-pachhi  dherai  dina  na  honde-i  sanu-gadela 

made.  That-after  many  days  not  on-being-even  the-younger-son 

apano-sabhai-ana  batora  gari-kana  dura-de&i-ma  tanakyo,  am  uhi 
his-own-all  (ace.)  collection  made-having  far-country-in  went,  and  there 
randibaj'i-ma  apano-dhana-ana  kharaeba  garyo.  Aru  sabhai-ana 

harlotry-in  his-own-weallh  (acc.)  expenditure  made.  And  all  (acc.) 

kharaeba  garaue  pachbi  tliulo-nnikfila  u-desa-ma  bbai,  aru  u 

expenditure  on-making  after  great-famine  that -country -in  became,  and  he 

lachari-ina  pachharane  lagyo.  Us-ko  pachbi  u tanaki-kan 

helplessness-in  to-fall-backwards  began.  That-of  after  he  gone-having 

us-desa-ko  eka-praja-ko  nere  raliyo,  am  us-ne  bandolS-kb 

that-country -of  one-cultivator- of  near  remained,  and  he  (ag.)  swine-of 

cbaranc-ko  bail  u-ana  garaha-ma  pathayo.  Am  u bandelS-ko  (sic) 
feecting-of  for  him  field-in  sent.  And  he  swine-of 

ghichane-ko  khudi-sita  apano  bhundi  bharane  chaliyo,  baki  koi-manasa-ne 

eating-of  joy-with  his-own  belly  to-fill  wished,  but  anyjhnan  (ag.) 

u-ana  11a  diyo.  Ho^a-ma  biraki-kana  us-ne  bolyo,  * mero-buba-ko 
him-to  not  gave.  Sense-in  come-having  he  (ag.)  said,  ' my  fat  he  r-of 

kati-naphara  parachurA  aru  us-siya  jeyada  rotalo  pawadd-h5,  aru  ma 

how-many -servants  abundant  and  thut-than  more  tread  get  ling-are,  and  I 


bhuka-sita  marado-bu.  Ma  uthi-kana  apano-buba-ko  ngre  tanakulasa 

hunger-by  dying-am.  I arigen-having  my-own-falher-of  near  will-go 

aru  us-ana  bolulasa,  e bufia,*  ina  saraga-ko  bibalanto-ma  aru  t$ro 


and  him-to  I -will-say,  “ 

siimu  takasira  garyo,  , 

before  faults  did, 


0 father , I 
♦ . 

aru  awai-sita 
and  now-from 


heaven-of  opposition-in  and  of-ihe 
thro  gad  Ala  nawajadi  bond  layaka 
thy  son  named  to-become  fit 


PALPA  DIALECT. 


79 


na  hu.  Mil-ana  tero  6ka-naphara-ko  esato  gara.”  * Am  u uthi-kana 

not  I-amf  Me  thy  one- servant- of  like  make."  * And  he  arisen-having 

apano-buba-ko  acre  hirakyo,  aru  u dherai  ta<l  ha  raliade  us-ko 

his-own-father-of  Dear  came , and  he  very  far  in-remaining  him- of 

buba-ne  us-ana.  heryo,  aru  day  a,  garyo,.  aru  tanaki-kano  us-ko 
ihe-father  ( ag .)  him  saw,  and  compassion  made , and  gone-having  him-of 
ghokaro  athyayo,  aru  un-ana  chumyo.  Aru  gadela-ne  u-ana  bolyo,  * e 

wind-pipe  seized , and  him  kissed.  And  the-son{ag.)  him-to  said,  • O 

buba,  ma  saraga-kd  bibal&nto-ma  am  tero  samu  takasira  garyo,  arv 

father , 1 heaven-of  opposition-in  and  of-thee  before  faults  did,  and 

awai-sita  tero  gadela  nawajadi  hone  lftek  na  hu.’  Baki  buba 

now- from  thy  son  named  to-be  fit  not  1-am But  the-father 

napbaro-ana  bolyo,  * sabhai-sita  niko  po£aka  lai-kana  u-ana  pairaw ; 

servants-to  said,  * all-than  good  vestments  brought -having  him-to  clothe; 
aru  us-ko  dundalu-ma  mundra,  aru  us-ko  kbutto-ma  latadsi  pairaw  ; aru 

and  him-of  wrist-on  ring,  and  him-of  feet-on  shoes  clothe  ; and 

naoto  baohhura-ana  li-kana  inaro,  aru  hnrai  ghicbi-kana  khosa  ’ 
the-fat  calf  {acc.)  taken-having  slay,  and  we  eaten-having  rejoicing 

houlasa.  Kina  iya  mero  gadela  siji-kana  jiyo-ho  ; u harayo-thyo 

will-become.  Why  ? this  my  son  died-having  lived-has  ; he  lost-voas, 

aru  pheri  milyo-ho.’  Aru  ui  ananda  garane  lagya. 

and  again  got-is ' And  they  joy  to-do  began. 


Aru  us-ko  jethu- gadela  garalni-ma  thyo,  aru  hirakade  hirakade  u 
And  him-of  elder-son  field-in  was,  and  in-coming  in-coming  he 


kboparo-ko 

nere  bheriya,  aru 

baja 

aru 

nacha 

sunyo. 

Aru 

house-of 

near  approached,  and 

music 

and 

dancing 

heard. 

And 

gka-uaphara- 

•ana  daki-kana  us-ne 

puchhyo 

ki, 

* iva  kva 

bo  ? * 

Us-ne 

one-servant-to  called-having  he  {ag.) 

asked 

that, 

1 this  what 

is  ? ' 

lie  {ag.) 

u-ana  bolyo»  ' tero  e-bhai  hirakyo,  aru  tero  buba-ne  moto- 
him-to  said,  * thy  {?)  t^is-brother  came,  and  thy  father  {ag.)  the-fat - 
bacbliura-ana  maryo,  kina  us-ana  niko-da4a-ma  payo.’  Aru  u 

calf  {accfj^  slew,  because  him  guod-condition-in  he-found.'  And  he 

risayo-thyo  aru  hlutare  tannkane  na  chabyo.  Us-sita  us-ko 

angered-was*  and  in-inside  to-go  not  wished.  That-from  him-of 

bnba-n§  nisaki-kana  us-ana  vinati  garyo.  Us-ne  jawab 

the-fafher  {ag.)  emerged-having  him-to  supplication  made.  He  {ag.)  answer 

di-kana  apano-bu  ha-ana  bolyo,  ‘hero,  ma-ne  eto-baraklia  tero  tabala 

given-having  his-oim-father-to  said,  'see,  I ^9-)  so-many- years  thy  service 

gad,  aru  tero  agya  kabbai  na  lSghyo > baki  tS-ne  kabhai  ma-ana 

did,  and  thy  command  ever  not  transgressed ; but  thou  {ag.)  ever  me-to 

fika-ebegada-bi  na  divo  ki  ma  apanfl-gayB-ko  sahglia  khusi 
one-kid-even  not  gavest  that  my-own-friends-of  with  rejoicing 


80 


KHAS-KURA  OK  NAIPAl!. 


garu.  Baki  tero  jis-gadela-ne  patarivS-ko  sangha  rabi-kana  tftro 

may-make.  But  thy  what-son  ( ag .)  harlot s-of  with  remained-having  thy 

sabhai  dkana  kharacha  garyd,  ta-ne  us-ko  liirakane-ma  us-ko  bar! 
all  wealth  expenditure  made,  thou  {ag.)  him-of  coming-on  him-of  for 

moto-baohhura-ana  maryd.’  Us-ne  u-ana  bolyd,  ‘e  gadela,  tS  sadai 
the-fut-calf  {acc.)  killedst * He  (ag.)  him-to  said,  *0  son,  thou  always 

mero  ngre  rabadd-ho,  am  mero  sabhai  cbijd  tero  ho.  Hami-ko 

of-me  near  remaining -art,  and  mine  all  things  thine  are.  TJs-of 

kbu£l  aru  ananda  gar  nil  prayojana  ho,  kina  tero  g-bbai 

rejoicing  and  joy  to-make  necessary  is,  because  thy  (?)this-brother 
sijyd-tbyo,  aru  jindd  hondd-lid  ; u barayd-tbyd,  aru  milyd-bd.  * 

dead-teas , and  living  becoming-is ; he  lost-teas,  and  got-is.  ’ 


LIST  OF  STANDARD  WORDS  AND  SENTENCES  IN 
KHAS-KURA  OR  NAIPAlT. 


▼at.  n,  hit  it. 


LIST  OF  STANDARD  WORDS  AND 


English.  Khai-kur&  or  Naipill.  Dahl  (Hodgson). 


1.  One  • 

• 

• 

• 

Ek(-wftta),  yok,  yak,  ySuta, 
auta. 

Ek. 

• 

a 

• 

• 

2.  Two  . 

• 

• 

a 

Dui(-wata)  • 

• • 

Dwi 

• 

9 

• 

a 

8.  Three 

• 

• 

a 

Tin(-wata)  . 

• • 

Tin 

• 

a 

• 

• 

4.  Four  . 

• 

a 

a 

Char(-wa$ft) 

• • 

Char 

• 

a 

• 

• 

5.  Five  . 

*> 

a 

• 

Pitch  (-watft)  . 

• • 

[ 

Pftnoh 

a 

• 

a 

s 

6.  Six 

• 

• 

Chha(-wata) 

• • 

Chah 

a 

• 

• 

9 

7.  Seven 

• 

• 

Sat(-wata)  . 

• • 

■ sat. 

• 

• 

a 

• 

8.  Eight 

a 

Aih(-watft) 

• • 

Ath1 

a 

a 

a 

9 

Nino  . 

• 

Nau(-wata)  . 

• • 

Na-a 

• 

a 

a 

10.  Ten  . 

a 

• 

• 

Das(-wata)  • 

• • 

Das 

a 

a 

• 

11.  Twenty 

• 

• 

• 

Bis(-wata) 

• • 

BlS  a 

s 

• 

• 

• 

12.  Fifty 

• 

• 

• 

Pachas(-wafft) 

/ 

• • 

Pachfl 8 

a 

• 

• 

13.  Hundred 

• 

m 

Sae(-wata) 

• « 

Son 

a 

a 

a 

• 

14.  I 

a 

1 

i 

Ma,  ma  . 

• • 

Mai 

a 

• 

a 

• 

15.  Of  me 

• 

a 

i MerO 

• 

Ma*ro 

a 

a 

a 

• 

16.  Mine 

• 

• 

• 

Merfl 

• • 

• 

1 

1 

17.  We  • 

9 

a 

• 

Harai,  hami-haru 

• • 

Ha-mi 

i 

a 

• 

■ 

• 

18.  Of  ns 

9 

a 

• 

Hamrrt 

* # | 

i 

Ham-ro 

• 

a 

a 

• 

19.  Our  . 

• 

• 

a 

HamrO  . 

• • j 

• 

20.  Thou 

• 

a 

- 

T£ 

• a 

Tai . 

• 

• 

9 

21.  Of  thee 

S 

a 

• 

T*r0 

• 

TG-ro 

• 

• 

• 

m 

22.  Thine 

a 

• 

Tero  . 

• • 

« 

^3.  You  . 

• 

s 

• 

Timi,  timi-haru 

a • 

Ta-he 

a 

• 

a 

• 

24.  Of  you 

• 

9 

TimrO  . . 

a • 

Taha-ro 

• 

• 

• 

a 

:25.  Your  . 

• 

TioirO  . 

a a 

i 

1 Hodgson  nowhere  in  this  list 


83 


SENTENCES  IN  EASTERN  PAH&fRT. 


VSaw&e  ( Hodgson ). 

1 

Kuswfir  (Hodgwon).  ‘ 

English. 

fik. 

• 

Ek  ‘ . . . . • 

1.  One.  . 

DwI  ► 

• 

• 

DwI  , 

2.  Two. 

Tin 

• 

Tin  .... 

3.  Three. 

Char 

• 

Cbar  .... 

4.  Four. 

P&nch 

a 

• 

Panch  .... 

5.  Five. 

Chili 

• 

Chah  .... 

j 

G.  Six. 

Sat 

• 

Sat  .... 

7.  Seven. 

Ath1 

Ath1  .... 

8.  Eight. 

NO 

u • 

• 

No-u  .... 

9.  Nine. 

Das 

Das  .... 

10.  Ten. 

Bis 

• a • 

• 

Bis  .... 

11.  Twenty. 

Pachas 

• 

| 

j Pachas  .... 

12.  Fifty. 

So 

i • 

• 

! Sou  .... 

i 

13.  Hundred. 

Mui 

a • 

• 

i 

| Ma-ha  .... 

14.  I. 

Mo-ra 

• • 

• 

i 

Ma-ha-na,  or  -ini  ; baba-im, 
my  father . 

15.  Of  me. 

• ••  i 

” 

16.  Mine. 

Kami 

• • 

• 

i 

Ha-mi  .... 

j 

17.  We. 

j Ham-rai 

• • 

• 

■ Ham&ra  .... 

18.  Of  ub.  , 

Tu-i 


Torn 


To-ho 


19.  Our. 

Tft-ha  .... 

20.  Thou. 

Ta-ha-na,  or  -ir ; baba-ir, 

21.  Of  thee. 

thy  father . 

22.  Thine. 

Tti-mi  ... 

23.  You. 

Tftm&ra  «... 

24.  Of  you. 

25.  Your. 

di.tingui.hM  between  i end  f. 

«a!  tv  «1«W  WWW 


M 2 


English. 

Khns-knrft  or  Nalp&ll. 

i 

t 

Dahl  (Hodgton). 

1 _ 

26.  He  . 

• 

• 

• 

Tyo,  u . 

! 

. # . • • 

27.  Ofbim 

• 

• 

Tes-ko,  ua-kO  . . 

Cf-ker  • « . . 

28.  His  . 

• 

• 

• 

Tes-kO,  us-ko  . . 

29.  Thoy 

• 

• 

• 

Tini-haru,  uni-hara 

tT-nin  . . 

80.  Of  thorn 

• 

• 

• 

Tini-haru-kO,  uni-haru-kO  . 

Un-karo  • . • 

31.  Their 

• 

• 

Tim-harn-kO,  uni-haru-ko  . 

i 

32.  Hand 

• 

• 

Hat 

i 

! Hat  .... 

i 

33.  Foot 

• 

• 

• 

God  ft,  pSu  . • 

i 

God  .... 

3h  Nose  . 

• 

• 

• 

Nak  . 

35.  Eye 

• 

• 

• 

Aklia,  Ikho  . . 

, Ankhl  .... 

30.  Mouth 

• 

• 

• 

Mukh  .... 

Mil-hit  .... 

37.  Tooth 

• 

• 

• 

Da t .... 

Dant  .... 

38.  Ear  . 

• 

• 

• 

Kan  .... 

kin  • • • . 

39.  Ilair 

% 

• 

Rau  ( hair  of  body ),  kgs  ( of 
head).  j 

Bar  .... 

40.  Head 

• 

• 

• 

T&uko,  sir 

Mfld  .... 

41.  Tongue 

• 

• 

• 

JibhrO,  jibrO  . 

42.  Belly 

• 

• 

• 

Pet,  bhuni  . , . 

43.  Back  . 

• 

• 

• 

Pith,  pithi,  pi  thin 

44.  Iron  . 

• 

• 

• 

Phalam 

Phalam  .... 

45.  Gold 

• 

• 

• 

Sun  .... 

46.  Silver 

• 

• 

• 

Chgdl  .... 

47.  Father 

• 

• 

• i 

Babu,  b&  . 

Bilbo  .... 

48.  Mother 

• 

• 

Ami  .... 

tJ-ya  .... 

49.  Brother 

• 

• 

• 

Bhal  (younger),  dajyu 
(elder). 

50.  Sister 

* 

• 

• 

Bahir % bainhl  (younger), 
dldi  (elder). 

••• ... 

51.  Man  • 

• 

• 

• 

Mania,  manohhfi 

Ma-nus  .... 

52.  Woman 

4 

• 

• 

Aimai,  strl 

84 — Naipfcll 


Denwir  (Kodgtou). 


Kniwir  (Soda ton). 


English. 


Phalam  . 


Babft 

Am-b&i  • 


I • • • 

• . Hft-lo,  hft-lo  • 

Wok-rak . 

• Hfl.-lo-kara,  or  -ik  ; baba-i 
hi 8 father. 

tj-ho 

• • Hfl-ri,  ha-ri,  ha-ring 

Wal-ko  . 

• Haring-kara  • 

Hath 

• Hath 

GcmJ 

• , Qof  . . 

‘ Ankh&  • . • 

• Ankhi  . • 

Mfi-hft  • 

• Mft-hfc  . 

Dftnt 

I 

• Dant 

1 

’ Kftn 

• Kan 

Bar  . • 

• Bar 

| 

! Mfl-dek  . 

• Ka-p& 

• , Phalam  . 


M&-nufl  . 


Gok-oliai,  oba-w*i 


28.  His. 

. 29.  They. 

. 30.  Of  them. 

31.  Their. 

. 32.  Hand. 

33.  Foot. 

34.  Nose. 

35.  Eye. 

. 3G.  Mouth. 

. 37.  Tooth. 

. 38.  Ear. 

. 39.  Hair. 

. 40.  Head. 

41.  Tongue. 

42.  Belly 

43.  Back.  . 

44.  Iron. 


. 

45.  Gold. 

. 

46.  Silver. 

Bab&ik  . 

• 

. . ; 47.  Father. 

A-rnai 

• 

j 

, , 48.  Mother. 

49.  Brother. 

; 50.  Sister. 

i 

. | 51.  Man. 
i 52.  Womau. 


Naipftli-85 


English. 


Khas-knri  or  Naip&li, 


DSnw&r  (ITodgaon). 


53.  Wife  • 


54.  Child 


55.  Son  . 


56.  Daughter 


57.  Slave 


5S.  Cultivator 


59.  Shepherd 


60.  God 


61.  Devil 


62.  Sun  . 


63.  Moon 


64.  Star 


65.  Fire 


66.  Water 


67.  House 


68.  Dorse 


69.  Cow 


70.  Dog 


71.  Cat 


72.  Cock 


73.  Duck 


74.  Ass 


75.  Camel 


76.  Bird  . 


77.  Go  . 


78.  Eat  . 


79.  Sit  . 


S wftsnl  . . 


86— Naipall 


. Balakh 


. . Chhflrfl  . 


. . ChhOri 


. . Knmara,  kam&rO 


. . Kisani,  klidtiw&l 


. Goth&la  . 


I3hagawan,  Ifiwar 


. Blifit,  rakas  • 


Surje,  surj,-  ghSm 


Chandi  ama,  jfin 


. Tara,  tarfl 


Ago 


. Paul 


. Ghar 


. Gboflo,  ghopa  . 


. Gai 


Kukur 


BiralO 


. Bhalyft,  kukhurO 


. Has 


. Gadha  . 


Chara,  charO  . 


. Jft  . 


. Kha 


. Bas 


Ga-ma  . 


Ja-nha,  ja-n-ha  4 


Ti-rya,  ft-r-ya  . 


Ghar  . . 


GliOro 


Kflkfir 


Birilo 


Ch&rl  .... 


Ja-ukl  . 


Khflu  ... 


Bas-uk  . 


These  are  all  imperatives,  and  so  throughout  this  set  of  words. 


Dfthl  (Hodgion) 


KuswAr  ( Hodgson ). 


English. 


Kflkflr 
Mai-ni  . 


GA-xnA  • . • • | Surftj  « • . 

Jytin  . • • . Jtin  • • • 

Ta-rfti  ....  T&ra-i 
Agi  . . . . Aghi 


Agi 

Kyft 

Ghar  • • • 

Ghflra  . 


Goi  . • • • Gai 


53.  Wife. 

54.  Child. 

55.  Son. 

56.  Daughter. 

57.  Slave. 

.58.  Cultivator. 

59.  Shepherd. 

60.  God. 

61.  Devil. 

. 62.  Sun. 

. 63.  Moon. 

. 64.  Star. 

. 65.  Fire. 

. 66.  Water. 

. 67.  House. 

. 68.  Horse. 

. 69.  Cow. 

. 70.  Dog. 

. 71.  Cat. 

72.  Cock. 

73.  Duck. 

74.  Ass. 

75.  Camel. 

76.  Bird. 

. 77.  Go. 

. 78.  Eat, 

. 79.  Sit. 


1 These  are  all  imperatives,  and  so  throughout  this  set  of  words. 

Naip&ll— 87 


Pin! 

! Ghara  . . . 

| 

, Ghara  • . . 


. . Ku-kol  . 

I 

i 

. . Biralo  • . 


Cb&r&i  . 

• 

* 

• 

ChArl  • 

Jtf 

• 

• 

* | 

! Na,  nA-hinl 

Khft-ik  . 

• 

• 

• 

Kha-ik  . 

Bm  * 

• 

• 

• 

Bason  . 

English* 


Khas-kuri  or  N&ipllt. 


Dahl  < Body  eon) . 


i 


80.  Gome 

A . . . . 

A-ak  , 

81.  Beat 

Kufc  • . . a 

Thft-thft-ik 

82.  Stand  • . • 

Ubhi  . 

CTth-tik  (get  up) 

83.  Dio  . 

Mar  .... 

84.  Give 

DS  . 

Di-hik  . 

85.  Run  <*  • . . 

Paud,  dugnr  . * > 

Du-gar-nk 

86.  Up  . 

Mathi,  Sbhn 

tJpara  (above)  . 

87.  Near 

• 

Najik,  nagloh,  ngrai,  nira  . 

N&-glk 

88.  Down 

Tala,  tali,  muni,  3dh0 

Het  (below) 

89.  Far  .... 

T&fhfl  .... 

Tarho 

90.  Before 

Aglii,  aghiltira  . 

r 

91.  Behind 

Pachhi  .... 

92.  Who 

Kfl,  kuu 

Kfl-no  (interrog.) 

93.  What 

Kyiv,  ks  . 

94.  Why 

Kyena,  kina  . ■ 

95.  And  . . 

-ra,  am  «... 

Ra,  pttn  . 

96.  But  .... 

Tara  .... 

97.  If  . • 

Bhang  .... 

98.  Yes  .... 

HO,  jyu,  a 

Ha 

99.  No  . 

Hsina,  na,  aha . , 

Hoi-nft 

100.  Alas 

H 55  .... 

101.  A father  . ... 

Babu  .... 

102.  Of  a father 

Babu-kA  .... 

Ko  (of)  . 

103.  To  a father  . 

Babn-lai  . 

Lai  (to)  . 

104.  From  a father  . 

B&bn-bata  . , . ' 

Nbd  (from) 

105.  Two  fathers  . 

Dui  babu- barn 

106.  Fathers 

Babu-haru  • 

. 

88— Naip&U. 


Dftnw&r  ( Hodgson ). 


Knswftr  (Hodgson). 


English. 


An  (?  *n) 


. 80.  Come. 


M ar-ik 


Th&-tlia-ik  (strike  him)  . I 81.  Beat. 


tTth  (get  up)  . . . tXth-ou  ( get  up) 


82.  Stand. 


83.  Dio. 


DT-ik'  . 


Dfi-ik  • 


. 84.  Give. 


Dttgar 


. 86*  PWflK 


I Ak&sai  (above) 


0para'  (above) 


83.  Up. 


YS-chi 


Pas-yong 


87.  Near. 


Ha-then  (below) 


Hsfc  (below) 


88.  Down. 


Tar-hai  . 


Du-re  • • • • I 89.  Far. 


90.  Before. 


91.  Behind. 


Ko-hik  (interrog.)  • . ■ Ke  (interrog.) 


. 92.  Who. 


93.  What. 


Kyu-hun 


94.  Why. 


S&)  sii5  • • 


• ' Gyfl 


. . 95.  And. 


96.  But. 


97.  If. 


Tft  . 


Ah,  an 


98.  Yes. 


Boy-in  • • • • N& 


99.  No. 


100.  Alas. 


101.  A father. 


Ik,  ak  (of)  . . . ; Na,  kara  (of)  . 


102.  Of  a father. 


Ki  (to)  . 


. . | Lai  {to)  . 


103.  To  a father. 


Stt  (from)  . . . B&tho,  dSkhl  (from) 


104.  From  a father. 


105.  Two  fathers. 


106.  Fathers. 


Naipftll— 80 


TOl.  IX,  PA*t  IV. 


English. 

Khas-kur&  or  Naipftll. 

Dahl  (Hodgton)* 

107.  Of  fathers  • 

B&bu-haru-kG  . . 

••• 

108.  To  fathers 

Babu-haru-lfti  • , 

* 

109.  From  fathers  . 4 

Babu-haru-b&ta 

110.  A daughter  • • 

ChhOri  . • • 

111.  Of  a daughter  . 

ChhGri-kO  . . 

112.  To  a daughter  • • 

Chhori-lai  • • 

113.  From  a daughter  • 

ChhOri-bftta 

114.  Two  daughters  . 

Dai  obhorl-haru  • 

i 

i 

115.  Daughters  • 

Chhoil-haru  . . 

; 

i 

116.  Of  daughters 

ChliOrl-haru-kO  • . 

i 

117.  To  daughters 

Chhflri-havu-l&i  • • 

118.  From  daughters 

Chh5rl-haru-bft{a  . 

119.  A good  man  . 

t5k  jati  mams  . • 

120.  Of  a good  man  . 

Ek  jati  mftnis-kd 

121.  To  a good  man  • . 

fik  jati  manis-lai  • 

122.  From  a good  man 

jftti  m&nis-b&ta  • 

123.  Two  good  men  . • 

Dui  j&ti  manis-haru  • 

124.  Good  men  • 

Jati  manis-haru 

125.  Of  good  men 

Jati  manis-haru-kO  . 

126.  To  good  men 

Jati  manis-harn-l&i  . . 

127.  From  good  men 

Jati  m&nis-haru-ba(a 

1 

128.  A good  woman  . . 1 

Anti  jftti  aimfti  . 

129.  A had  boy 

Auta  na-jati  k6tO 

130.  Good  women  . 

Niki  aimai-haru  • • 

13 1.  A bad  girl  • 

Anti  na-jati  k£(l  • 

BOn-tha  ( bad)  . . . 

132.  Good  , . . 

Jati,  nikO  (in  health) 

Niko 

133.  Better 

1 

Bhanda  jati  ( better  than)  . 

• f , « 

90 — Naip&ll. 


Dftnw&r  (Hodgson). 


Kuewir  (Hodgson). 


English. 


VOL.  IX,  FART  IT. 


English. 

Khai-kuri  or  Naip&ll 

Dahl  (Hodffion), 

134.  Best 

Asal  ( very  good) 

135.  High 

AlgO  .... 

136.  Higher  . . 

Bhandft  algC  ( higher  than ) 

137.  Highest 

Jyada  algo  ( very  high) 

138.  A horse 

GhOfO  . • . • 

139.  A mare  • • 

Ghopl  . • 

140.  Horses  . 

Ghopa-haru 

141.  Mares 

GhOpi-haru  . 

142.  A ball 

Bahar  gOru  . . 

143.  A cow 

Gai  • 

144.  Balls  • 

Bahar-haru 

145.  Cows 

Gai-haru 

146.  A dog  • • 

Kakur  .... 

147.  A bitch  . 

Kuknrai 

148.  Dogs 

Knkur-haru 

• • ■ ••• 

149.  Bitches  . . 

Knknrnl-haro.  • » 

150.  A he  goat 

Boko,  bakhr&  . 

151.  A female  goat  . . i 

Bakhrl  .... 

152.  Goats  • . . 

Bflka,  bakhra-haru  . 

153.  A male  deer 

Dare  (jmale)  mirga 

154.  A female  deer 

Murull  ( female ) mirga 

155.  Deer 

Mirga  . 

156.  I am 

Ma  chliu,  (ha)  . , 

157.  Thon  art  . 

Ta  chhas,  (hoe) 

158.  He  is  • . 

U {or  tyO)ohha,  (ho) 

159.  We  are 

Hami-harn  chhau,  (hau)  , 

i 

160.  You  are  • . , j 

Timi-haru  chhau,  (han)  . 

• 

92— NaipSll. 


English. 


Dinwir  (Hodgson). 


0 


• •• 


Knswir  (Hodgson), 


134.  Best. 

135.  High. 

136.  Higher. 

137.  Highest. 

138.  A horse. 

139.  A mare. 

140.  Horses, 

141.  Mares. 

142.  A bull. 

143.  A cow. 

144.  Bulls. 

145.  Cows. 

146.  A dog. 

147.  A bitch. 

148.  Dogs. 

149.  Bitches. 

150.  A he  goat. 

151.  A female  goat. 

152.  Goats. 

' 

153.  A male  deer. 

154.  A female  deer. 

.« 

155.  Deer. 

156.  I am. 

• • ••• 

157.  Thou  art. 

158.  He  is. 

159.  We  are. 

160.  You  are. 

Naip&li— 93 


English. 

Khas-kura  or  XaSpftll. 

'DM.XRodgson) . 

161.  They  are  . 

Tini-haru  (or  uni-haru) 
chhan,  (hun). 

162.  I was 

Ain  thiy? 

163.  Thou  wast 

Ta  thiis 

164.  He  was 

Tyfl  thiyO  . . 

165.  We  wore  . • 

llami-haiu  thiyau 

166.  You  were  . 

Timi-haru  thiyau 

167.  They  were 

Tini-haru  thiyS 

168.  Bo  . 

Ho  .... 

A 

169.  To  be  . . 

Hunu  ... 

170.  Being 

Iludn  .... 

171.  Having  been 

Bhai-kana 

X 

• M • • • 

172.  I may  bo  . 

IlrtU  .... 

173.  I shall  bo  . 

Ma  hula  ... 

174.  1 should  be  . . 



175.  Beat 

Kut  .... 

i 

•••  i 

176.  To  beat 

Kutnu  .... 

1 

177.  Beating 

Kutdo  • 

1 

! 

178.  Having  beaten  . 

Kuti-kana 

179.  I beat 

Ma  (raai-le)  kutu,  kuta-clihn 

j 

180.  Thou  beatest 

i 

i 

Ta  (tai-15)  kut,  kutda- 
| chhas. 

i 

181.  He  beats 

„ 

Tyfl  (tes-lo)  kut5,  kntda- 
chha. 

i 

182.  We  beat 

1 

, Hfimi-haru  (-la)  kntau,  kut* 
da-chhau. 

! 

1 

! 

183.  You  beat  . 

Timi-haru  (-15)  kutau,  kut* 
da-chhau. 



184.  They  beat  . 

Tini-haru  (-le)  kutun,  kut- 
da-chhan. 

185.  I beat  (Past  Tense) 

Mai-l£  knte 

•• ■ ... 

18$.  Thou  beatest  ( Past 
Tense). 

Tai-l8  kutis 

187.  He  beat  (Past  Tense)  . 

Tes-lo  kntyfl  • 

• 

1)4 — Nhipili. 


Denwftr  (Hodgson). 


Kuaw&r  (Hodgson). 


English. 


161.  They  are. 


162.  I was. 


163.  Thou  wast. 


164.  He  was. 


165.  We  were. 


160.  You  were. 


167.  They  were. 


168.  Be. 


169.  To  be. 


170.  Being. 


171.  Having  been. 


172.  I may  be. 


173.  I shall  be. 


1 174.  I should  be. 


175.  Beat. 


176.  To  beat. 


177.  Beating. 


178.  Having  beaten. 


Thatha-im-ik-an  (I  beat  179.  I beat. 
him). 

Thatha-ir-ik-an  ( thou  beatest  180.  Thou  beatest. 
him). 

Thatha-ik-an  (he  beats ) . 181.  He  boats. 


182.  We  beat. 


183.  Yon  beat. 


184.  They  beat. 


j 185.  I boat  ( Past  Tense). 


186.  Thou  beatost  (Fast 

Tense). 

187.  He  beat  ( Past  Tense). 


Naipall— 95 


English. 

Khas-kurft  or  Xalpil!* 

Dahl  (Hodgson)* 

188.  We  beat  ( Past  Tense ) . 

Hami-haru-ld  kutySt  . 

m 

189.  You  beat  (Past  Tense) 

Timi-haru-lS  kutyan 

190.  They  beat  ( Past  Tense ) 

Tini-haru-ld  ku tfi  . 

191.  I am  beating 

Ma  (mai-1©)  kutdai-ohhu  . 

192.  1 was  beating  • 

Ma  (mai-lfi)  kutdai-thiye  . 

193.  I had  beaten 

Mai-le  kutfi  thiye 

194.  I may  beat 

Ma  (raai-le)  kut-K 

195.  I shall  beat 

Ma  (mai-le)  kut-u-U  . 

196.  Thou  wilt  boat  . 

Ta  (tai-lS)  kut-las  . 

197.  He  will  beat 

Ty<5  (tes-le)  kut-la  . 

198.  We  shall  bent  . 

Hiimi-haru  (-le)  kutau-15  . 

199.  You  will  beat 

Timi-haru  (-16)  kutau-lft  . 

200.  They  will  beat  . 

Tini-hani  (-le)  kntlau, 
kut  nan. 

201.  I should  beat 

202.  I am  be  aten 

i 

Ma  kutinchhu  . 

! 

203.  I was  beaten  , . Ma  kutiye 

! 

204.  I shall  be  beaten 

Ma  kutiula 

• • ■ • a • 

205.  I go  ... 

Ma  jau,  janchhu 

206.  Thou  goest  . , ' 

i 

Ta  ja,  janchhas 

j 

207.  He  goes 

Tyfl  jayS,  j&nchha 

208.  We  go 

Hftmi-haru  ja3,  janchhau  . 

209.  You  go  , 

j 

Timi-haru  jau,  janchliau  . 

210.  They  go  . . . ; 

1 

1 

Tini-haru  jann,  j&nchhan  . 

. 

211.  I went 

Ma  gayl  .... 

212.  Thou  wmteflt  , 

TaLgaiB  .... 

213.  He  wont  . . 

| 

Ty8  gayfl 

214.  We  went  . | 

i 

i 

HSmi-haru  gay3  . , j 

1 

96 — Naip&U. 


« 

Dinwftr  (Hodgt on). 

Ktuwlr  (Hodgson)* 

English. 

••••••  • 

188.  We  beat  ( Past  Tent#). 

189.  You  beat  (Fast  Tents). 

•••  «•» 

190.  They  beat  ( Past  Tents). 

* 

191.  I am  beating 

192.  I was  beating. 

• 

193.  I had  beaten. 

••• •«• 

194.  I may  beat. 

195.  I shall  beat. 

196.  Thou  wilt  beat. 

• M ••• 

197.  He  will  beat. 

198.  We  shall  beat. 

199.  You  will  beat. 

200.  They  will  beat. 

201.  1 should  beat. 

202.  I am  beaten. 

203.  I was  beaten. 

1 

204.  I shall  be  beaten. 

• 

205.  I go. 

y 

206.  Thou  goest. 

207.  He  goes. 

208.  We  go. 

••• 

••• ••• 

209.  You  go. 

•••  ••• 

(in** 

MMtt 

210.  They  go. 

211.  I went. 

212.  Thou  wentest. 

« 

••«  ••• 

213.  He  went. 

• ••  tM 

! 

214.  We  went. 

' 

Naipftli— 97 

o 


TOb  IX,  PART 


English. 


Khas-Vura  or  Xaip&ll. 


Dahl  {Hodgson)* 


215.  Yon  wont  . . f Timi-haru,  gayau 

i 

! 

216.  They  wont  . . Tini-haru  gayS 

217.  Go  . . . . Ja,  jau  .... 

218.  Going  . . . JiulO  .... 

219.  Gone  . . . GayA  .... 

220.  What  is  your  name  ? . Timrfl  nau  ke  (or  kya)  hA  ? 

221.  How  old  is  this  horse  ? YO  gliAdA  katibmJhA  bhayfl  ? 

222.  How  far  is  it  from  here  Yaha-bata  Kasmir  kati 

to  Kashmir  ? J tarha  chha  ? 

223.  ITow  many  sons  are  TimrA  (or  timra)  babu-kA 

there  in  your  father's  (or  ka)  ghar-ina  kati  janfi 
house?  chhfira-harn  chhan  ? 

224.  I havo  walked  a long  A ju  ma  dherai  hidye  . 

way  to-day. 

225.  The?  son  of  my  uncle  is  MciA  kaka-kA  clihAra-kA 

married  to  his  sister.  by  aha  tes-ki  bainhi-sita 

bhayA. 

226.  In  the  bouse  is  the  sad-  Ghar  bhitra  s6ta  ghApa-kA 

die  of  the  white  horse.  jin  chha.  j 

227.  Put  the  saddle  upon  Tes-kA  pithiu-ma  jin  kas.  | 

his  back.  j 


228.  I have  beaten  his  son  Mai-l8  tes-kA  (or  tes-ka)  j 

with  many  stripes.  chhora-l&i  dherai  palta  j 
(times)  kutekA  chhu. 

229.  He  is  grazing  cattle  on  PahfuJ-kA  takuri-ma  tes-le 

the  top  of  the  hill.  ! bastu  charaudai  chha. 

i 

230.  He  is  sitting  on  ahorse  Tes  rnkh  muni  tyA  ghApA 

under  that  tree.  | chadhi  rahye-kA  chha. 

231.  His  brother  is  taller  J Tes-kO  bhal  tes-ki  bahinl 

than  his  sister.  bhanda  algA  chha. 

232.  The  price  of  that  is  two  Tes-kA  dam  dui  rupiyS 

rupees  and  a half.  j adha  (or  ath  ana)  hA. 

233.  My  father  lives  in  that  MerO  babu  tyA  sauii  ghar- 

small  house.  I m&  ralm-chhau. 


234.  Give  this  rupee  to  him 

j Ya  rupiya  tes-laidgu  . 

i 

235.  Take  those  rupees  from 
him. 

Tyfl  rapiya  tyC-dekhi  l<5u  . 

i 

•••Ml 

l 

236.  Beat  him  well  and  bind 
him  with  ropes. 

Tes-iai  bes-gari  kufe-ra 
d6rl-l$  hijdlia. 

i 

237.  Draw  waLer  from  the 
well. 

Inar-dAkhi  pani  jhlk 



238.  Walk  before  me 

j MdrA  agadi  hid  (or  hip)  . 



i 

239.  Whose  toy  comes  be- 
hind you  ? 

i « 

Timra  pachhadi  aunS  kas- 
kA  ketA  ho  ? 

240.  From  whom  did  you 
buy  that  &' 

Tixni-le  tyA  kO-saha  kinyau  ? 

♦ 

241.  From  a shopkeeper  of 
* the  village. 

GaS-kA  Ok  jana  pasale  tafia 

i 

i 

98— Naipall 


Dtawftr  (Hodgson), 


Kusw&r  (Hodgson). 


English. 


TOL.  IX,  PABT  IT. 


215.  Yon  went. 


216.  They  went. 

217.  Go. 


218.  Going. 

219.  Gone. 


220.  What  is  your  name  ? 

221.  How  old  is  this  horse  P 


222.  How  far  is  it  from  here 
to  Kashmir? 

223.  How  many  sons  aro 
there  in  your  father’s 
house  ? 

224.  I have  walked  a long 
way  to-day. 

, 225.  Tlio  son  of  my  uncle  is 
married  to  his  sister. 

226.  In  the  house  is  the  sad- 
dle of  the  white  horse. 

227.  Put  the  saddle  upon 
his  hack. 

228.  I have  beaten  his  son 
with  many  Btripes. 

| 229.  He  is  grazing  cattle  on 
the  top  of  the  hill. 

; 230.  He  is  sitting  on  a horse 

j under  that  tree. 

i 

• 231.  His  brother  is  taller 
than  his  sister. 

232.  The  price  of  that  is  two 
rupees  and  a half. 

233.  3Jy  father  lives  in  that 
small  house. 

! 234.  Give  this  rupee  to  him. 

‘ 235.  Take  those  rupees 
from  him. 

236.  Beat  him  well  and 
bind  him  with  ropes. 

i 

i 237.  Draw  water  from  the 

| well. 

i 

1 238.  Walk  before  me. 


239.  Whoso  boy  comes  be- 
hind 3 0U  ? 

240.  From  whom  did  yon 
buy  that  ? 

241.  From  a shopkeeper  of 
the  village. 

Naipall— 29 

o 2 


'.  o.|  f I 


z> <cs^ 


Thngalnl  -\uwpra . .. 

...... .i  .,::_  ^"fcT\J  />*\w 


^N^Z>-  ^jTitimqSu/fidoJ  fohnifo 
kMML  ^ f if.1  t ('hitirhu/ujo 


f 4 ^Tr  f h \ ^X 


j.  x i 

Jfthtng  p ^JrfTu/'tyWw  or  .Va/ui  |* 

% Tares  t trn dad.  ^ » 


DabaP-^^p^ 

I Sahqq/frx 

u * //  x 


,rt  ‘n  yyW«  j I 

.y<i/i</^v  ■ I 

Misaj'T'tnuMri^dt  I 

/J/7XV/jgu^^  U Y ' r 


r • s.,^: 

• o 


V * I'm. 


^ * J 


t,J&04X o Nttban  '■  X 'pj  /Vltn  I 


^Vhafvisxjt 


. Nariiin^h  v Kautrifa  j 


j >^i»i,ujfs,Jhkid  V C \ 


(alciw  / 


Dharkot  //  ^ 


4^',  .'  /{  \|  v TiynUfhmu 

-,  \ I ^ /"  ' ihinehibun**!  { 

**^**A^  /i  , .TUrtyJunljLu  \-'/\ 

IS.  f < * \Mu,Uh«N’  ,/■  - / '\ 

* Jo*yj^Uh  £ * £&*.}/  I.hnprha  o 


: fc/ A'l^ 

Xs iht.. . !W4ioQ^ 


. innkfna  Let? 

vnli  : 


v|  Muru/tltirn 


<< 


> / 

■ -Qr  / 


...  . |1  MngdX/u- 

I Shorn  it  "£/  [ 7.0iJ  ? \w  / j 

ft  (flTMrZAFfAflNAG.iR  ( Y“f  V 

Knii'dkh?  \ / /\  £’•*!*}  1,(  ,;N 


LuzaJiiji  h 


|tt  u p 

Illustrating  the 

CENTRAL  PAEARI  LANGUAGES 
AND  DIALECTS. 

Seale  1 Ineh  — 32  Miles. 

II  it  u » s a a.sMilrs 


\J.itrn  bafekrrn  J 


V xf-”  --/ora  Mr  i; 


A 


L..... 


Vn^1  V ,„.,;Z\.Zy  „ 

^ ^ v...  / dejIuUwtrtt rx 

]*  j *•  \ \ ^ 

u / JSJ1! 

5\/  MBs?)  . \ ^k 


eg  No.  43AjE.,  11-L.-1M0 


101  ' 


Central  PahArI. 


In  the  General  Introduction  to  the  Pahari  languages,  some  account  has  been  given  of 
Wh.re  spoken.  ’ tlie  Sreat  Kha4a  tribe,  and  the  facts  need  not.  be  repeated 

here.  We  shall,  therefore,  confine  ourselves  to  the  tribes 

speaking  Central  Pahari. 

Speaking  roughly.  Central  Palmy!  is  the  language  of  the  western  portion  of  the' 
^ancient  Sapadalaksha,  viz.  of  the  lower  Himalaya  between  Nepal  and  the  Panjab,  but 
omitting  the  Jaunsar-Bawar  tract  of  Dehra  Dun..  The  following  extract  from  pp.  269  ff. 
of  the  second  volume  of  Atkinson’s  Himalayan  Districts'  describes  the  ethnio  elements 
of  the  population  of  this  tract : — 


u The  grea% mass  of  the  population  in  Kumaon  and  Garhwal  profess  a belief  little  differing  from  the 
orthodox  Hinduism  of  the  plains.  The  existing  inhabitants  belong  to  the  KhaSa1 2  or  Khasiya  race  and  speak  a 
dialect  of  Bind!  akin  to  tho  language  of  the  Hindus  of  Rajputana.  All  their  feelings  and  prejudices  are  so 
strongly  imbuod  with  the  peculiar  spirit  of  Hinduism  that  although  their  social  habits  and  religious  belief  are 
often  repugnant  to  those  who  strictly  observe  the  orthodox  ceremonial  usages  of  Hinduism,  it  is  impossible  for 
any  one  that  knows  them  to  consider  the  Khasas  to  be  other  than  Hindus.  There  are  several  facts  connected 
with  their  history  that  show,  whatever  their  origin  may  have  been,  the  Khasas  have  for  centuries  been  under 
the  influence  of  the  Brahmanical  priesthood.  The  shrines  of  Kedar  and  Badari  are  both  within  Garhwal  and 
from  time  immemorial  have  been  visited  by  crowds  of  pilgrims  from  all  parts  of  India,  whose  enthusiasm  for 
Hinduism  must  have  acted  on  the  hill  men  brought  into  connection  with  them  as  guides  and  purveyors.  Again, 
many  of  these  pilgrims  took  up  their  residence  in  the  hills  and  leavened  the  manners  and  observances  of  the 
rough  indigenous  population.  Many  other  immigrants  arrived  to  take  service  amongst  the  petty  princes  of  the 
hills  or  to  receive  their  daughters  in  marriage,  and  thus  we  find  a considerable  sprinkling  of  families  all 
through  these  hills  who  consider  themselves  one  with  the  various  castes  in  tho  plains  whoso  tribal  name  they 
bear.  To  the  north  in  the  inter- Alpine  valleys  of  Bhot,  we  have  a tribe  of  decided  Tibetan  origin  and  whose 
affinities  are  found  in  the  trans- Himalayan  tribes  of  Hundes.  They  arc)  known  as  Bhfifciyas  by  the  people  of 
the  lower  hills,  who  in  turn  are  designated  Khasiyas  by  the  Bhotiyas,  whilst  the  people  of  the  adjoining  por- 
tion of  Tibet  are  known  as  Hunas  or  lluniyfis.  In  addition  to  tho  tribes  already  enumerated  there  are  the 
R&jis  or  Riijyas,  the  modern  representatives  of  the  Rfijya-Kiratas  and  the  Thiirns  and  Bhnksas  of  the  Tarai 
lowlands  and  traces  of  the  Nagas  and  Sakas,  whilst  others  contend  that  wo  have  hero  also  old  Baktrian 
(Yavana)  colonies.  For  our  present  purpose  it  is  only  necessary  to  observe  that  there  are,  at  tho  present  day, 
three  great  divisions  of  the  population,  the  immigrants  from  the  plains,  the  Khasas  and  Bhfttas.” 


It.  will  have  been  seen  that  while  the  higher  parts  of  the  Himalaya  in  Kumaun  and 
The  speakers  Garhwal  are  inhabited  by  people  of  Tibcto-Burman  stock, 

the  lower  valleys  arc  mainly  inhabited  by  Kha&is.  These 
claim  to  be  of  liajput  origin.  They  came  in  prehistoric  times  from  the  North-West,  and 
gradually  worked  eastwards,  annexing  the  whole  of  the  lower  Himalaya  as  far  east  as 
central  Nepal.  Their  own  tongue  must  have  had  the  same  origin  as  that  of  the  Aryan 
languages  now  spoken  on  the  North-West  Frontier, — Lahnda,  Kashmiri,  Shinn.  of  Gilgit, 
Kliowar  of  Chitral,  and  so  forth  ; but  in  the  tract  of  country  at  present  under  consider- 
ation, they  have  adopted  the  language  of  the  Gujars  and  Rajputs3  who  entered  Kumaun 
tmd  Garhwal  in  later  times,  modifying  it  as  they  did  so  in  certain  particulars  that  still 
betray  clear  traces  of  the  ancient  Kha4a  tongue  of  their  forefathers. 

While,  on  tho  one  hand,  Kha4as  and  subsequently  Gujars  peopled  the  hills  from  the 
North-West ; on  the  other  hand,  there  was  also,  from  vevy  early  times,  a steady  flow  of 
Rajput  immigration  from  the  plains  of  India  in  the  South.  These  found  a congenial 


1 Forming  Vol.  XI  of  tho  Gazetteer  of  the  3T.-7F.  P. 

• Indian  Words  occurring  in  this  extract  are  spelt  according  to  the  system  followed  in  (ho  Linguistic  Survey. 

1 Regarding  the  Gnjare,  see  the  General  Introduction  to  the  Pahfip  languages,  pp.  8 ff. 


CENTRAL  PAHARl. 


atmosphere  amongst  the  KhaSas  and  Gujars  who  claimed  to  be  of  the  same  caste.  As, 
Atkinson1  says : — 

“ Whatever  may  have  been  their  origin,  the  Khasas  have  forgotten  it,  and,  influenced  by  modern  fashion, 
have  sought  to  identify  thomselves  with  the  dominant  Hindu  races,  ns  a HindA  converted  to  Islam  and  called 
Shaikh  seeks  to  be  known  as  a Saiyad  when  he  becomes  well-to-do  in  the  world.  In  this  respect  the  KhasiySs 
do  not  differ  from  any  other  hill  tribe  brought  under  Bralimanieal  influence.  All  see  that  honour,  wealth  and 
power  are  the  hereditary  dues  of  the  castes  officially  established  by  the  authors  of  the  Manava  D h arma  Sastras 
and  seek  to  connect  themselves  with  some  higher  than  their  own.  Even  at  the  present  day,  the  close  observer 
may  see  the  working  of  those  laws  which  have  in  the  course  of  centuries  transmuted  a so-called  aboriginal  hill- 
race  into  good  HindAs.  A prosperous  Kuniaun  Do  in  stonemason  can  command  a wife  from  the  lower  RajpAt 
Khasiyas,  and  a successful  Khasiya  can  buy  a wife  from  a descendant  of  a family  of  pure  plains  pedigree.” 

Of  this  early  Rajput  immigration  into  the  tract  now  under  consideration  there  are 
numerous  traditions,  but  we  do  not  come  to  the  more  solid  ground  of  written  memorials 
till  the  10th  or  11th  century  A.D.,  when  Ave  find  a number  of  people  of  this  caste  enter- 
ing the  country.  Some  of  these,  taking  advantage  of  internal  dissensions  among  the 
Klia£a  inhabitants,  succeeded  in  conquering  it,  and  in  founding  dynasties  that  lasted  till 
the  Nepal  conquest  in  1790.  Thus,  Kumaun  was  conquered  by  Som  Chand,  who  appeal's 
to  have  come  from  Kanauj  about  the  year  950  A.D.  The  date  of  the  arrival  of  the  pre- 
sent Rajput  dynasty  of  Garhwal  is  lost  in  the  mists  of  antiquity,  and  all  that  we  can  be 
fairly  certain  of  is  that  Ajaya  Pala,  ruling  in  the  lltli  century,  is  s(iid  to  have  been  the 
thirty -sixth  or  thirty-seventh  from  the  founder  of  the  line  of  kings,  who  is  traditionally 
said  to  have  been  no  other  than  the  famous  Kanishka,  and  to  have  come  as  a Rajput 
conqueror  from  Gujarat.  The  Gorkhas  of  Nepal,  who  in  later  times  brought  all  this 
country  under  their  sway,  were  themselves  Rajputs  who  claimed  to  have  come  originally 
from  Udaipur.  The  results  of  the  Musalman  conquest  of  India  materially  hastened 
this  immigration.  Numerous  bodies  of  ltajputs,  fleeing  from  foreign  oppression,  found  a 
ready  asylum  amid  their  brethren  of  the  Himalaya. 

In  this  way  the  original  Khasas  of  Kumaun  and  Garhwal  fell  under  Rajput  sway. 
They  intermarried  with  their  conquerors  and  adopted  their  language.  As  already  stated, 
we  have  no  literary  remains  of  the  old  Khn6a  speech.  Central  Pahari  is  now  a form  of 
Rajasthani,  but  throughout  its  vocabulary  and  its  grammar  are  scattered  numerous  relies 
of  the  tongue  that  it  supplanted.  Attention  is  drawn  to  the  more  important  of  these  in 
the  introduction  to  the  Kumauni  section.  The  subject  will  also  be  further  discussed  in 
dealing  with  Western  Pahari. 

Central  Pahari  includes  two  closely  connected  languages, — Kumauni  spoken  in 
Languages  of  the  Group.  Kumaun  and  Garhwali  of  Garhwal.  Each  of  these  is,  so  far 

as  the  materials  available  permit,  described  separately  in  the 
following  pages.  The  number  of  speakers  of  each  is  as  follows : — 

Language.  Where  spoken.  Number  of  speakers.  Total. 

Kumauni  • Naini  Ta!  . . . . . 66,119 


Garhwali 


Where  spoken. 

. Naini  Ta! 

Number  of  spMkcrs.  Total. 

. . 66,119 

Almora  . 

. . 370,669 

• Garhwal 

436,788 

401,126 

Tehri- Garhwal 

. 240,281 

Almora  . 

. 22,667 

Debra  Dun  • 

. . 5,000 

Elsewhere 

. 1,750 

670,824 

Total  , 1,107,612 

1 Op.  Laud,  p.  440. 


INTRODUCTION. 


103 


The  close  relationship  between  Central  Pah&ri  and  Rajasthani  has  long  been  rccog- 
_ „ . nized, — it  should  indeed  be  difficult  for  the  most  casual 

observer  to  avoid  noticing  it.  In  order  to  show  how  far  the 
two  languages  agree,  _ and  how  far  they  disagree,  in  the  use  of  inflexions,  I here  give  a 
synopsis  of  the  principal  grammatical  forms  of  each.  I select  two  dialects  of  Rajasthani, 
— Marwarl  of  the  West,  and  Jaipur!  of  the  East, — and  compare  with  them  each  of  the 
two  languages, — Kumauni  and  Garhwali.  In  the  last  column  I give,  for  purposes  of  com- 
parison, the  corresponding  forms  of  the  nearest  Western  Pahari  dialect, — the  Jaunsari 
spoken  in  the  Jaunsar-Bawar  tract  of  the  Delira  Dun  district.  This  has  hitherto  been 
classed  as  a dialect  of  Central  Pahari,  but  a cursory  inspection  of  the  forms  given  will 
show  that  it  differs  widely  from  Kumauni  and  Garhwali,  and  must  be  classed  as  con- 
nected with  the  Western  Pahari  spoken  in  the  Simla  Hill  States.  It  will  be  noticed  that 
it  is  the  eastern  Rajasthani  forms  which  most  closely  agree  with  Central  Pahari. 


DECLENSION  OP  NOUNS. 

GHOUO,  ahorse. 


\ 11 A J AST 

1 

j 

' Mftrw&ri. 

H*sf. 

Jaipur!. 

Kumauni. 

Garhwftli. 

JauoBftri. 

Singular  — 

Nominative 

i 

(jhndo 

rjftnro 

o/ioro 

! ‘ 

ghorn 

ghdro 

Agent 

ghfiddi 

ghorai 

1 

... 

ghore 

Oblique 

tf  hod  a 

l <7 herd 

g h u'h  ra  \ 

ghSrd 

gkcire 

Plural— 

Nominative 

(j  hod  l 

j ghdfd 

! 

ghicdra 

' chdrd 

ghdre 

Oblique 

<f  h odd 

i 

g h nrd 

ghwaran 

ghorau 

9 ho  ft 

In  the  above,  note  tr.eo-form  of  the  Nominative  <i*igu:ar,  an!  the  d of  the  Oblique  singular  and  Nominative  plural. 


POSTPOSITIONS. 


IUjastkani. 

Mar  wap. 

Jaipur!. 

Knmaunl. 

Garbw&ll. 

JaunBfiri. 

Agent 

... 

... 

i le 

i 

i 

■ 

t 

... 

Genitive 

/•<5,  n i,  ri 

kfi,  k 7,  A t 

, kot  ka , ki 

k&t  ka,  ki  | 

a‘P,  ke*  kt 

Dative 

ndi 

\ 

it «ff  kai 

ka  7,  kani 

kut  sant 

kh 

Ablative 

Sttf  u 

9 <v 

silt  sat 

ha (if  ha 

i 

i _ J 

te 

1,  te 

*.  Of.  Atkinson,  Op.  Laud.  Vol.  II,  p.  209,  and  Kellogg,  Hindi  Grammar , 2nd  Ed.,  p.  6J . 


104  CENTRAL  PAHArI. 


PRONOUNS. 

First  Person. 


Rajasthani. 

Kumauni. 

Garhwftli. 

Jaunaftrl. 

Mftrwftp. 

Jaipur!. 

1 

Singular — 

Nominative 

hu,  mhfi 

ma! 

ma! 

ml,  mat 

halt,  me 

Oblique 

mha , 7110*1 

ma,  mfit  mat 

ma! 

ml,  mat 

mu 

Genitive 

7H hard,  ward 

mhdi'd 

mero,  myoro 

mfa'8 

mird 

Plural- 

Nominative 

m h i,  me. 

171  hd 

ha  77% 

ham 

dm 

Oblique 

mhfi , ma 

mha 

haman 

hdmu 

dmu 

Genitive 

mh  <£i'd , mat'd 

mhfi-kd 

hamai'o 

hamdrd 

a m3 7' 5 

Socond  Person. 


Rajasthani. 

Kumauni. 

Garhwftli. 

JaunsSri. 

Mftiw&p. 

j Jaipur!. 

Singular— 

i 

i 

i 

j 

Nominative 

tu,  thu 

tu 

tu 

i ta  | 

tu 

Oblique 

tha , tat 

ta , tu,  tai 

ttci 

twi,  twai 

tun.  ta 

Genitive 

thdrd  j 

thai'd 

tcro,  tydi'O 

tird 

tgri 

Plural- 

1 

j 

Nominative 

thi,  tamS 

thi 

turn 

turn 

turn 

Oblique 

tha,  tarn S 

tha 

tuman 

tumu 

tumfi 

Genitive 

thfird , toward 

tha-kS 

tumaro 

turnSrd  , 

tuhdrd 

This. 


! 

i RajasthInt. 

Knmauni. 

Garhwftli. 

Jaunsftrl. 

Mftrwftrl.  \ 

i 

j Jaipur!. 

Singular— 

! 

Nominative 

yd,  fern  .yd 

yd,  fern.  y3 

D'1 

yo.Um.yi 

eu 

Oblique 

in 

« 

t 

i/9-  yai 

yi,  fem.  yi 

es 

Plural- 

Nominative 

i.  Si 

y* 

yi 

efi 

Oblique 

<g  f9 

ya,  ana 

$s 

inan 

yS 

eu 

In  the  above,  and  the  next,  note  how  the  fexr.infce  forms  of  Rljosthlnl  reappear  in  Garhwftli. 


INTRODUCTION. 


105 


Tli  at. 


Rajasthani. 

| 

Jaipur!. 

Kumaun!. 

Giifhw&U. 

i ! 

Jaum-arl. 

Singular— 

i 

Nominative 

i u,  f em.  ted 

toft,  fem.  tod 

■u 

wo.  (em.  tod 

Oblique 

■ uv 

fS 

U 

toe , fern,  tot 

... 

Plural- 

• 

Nominative 

1 todi 

i 

teat 

i 

«• 

a 

tvS 

... 

Oblique 

i - 
wdt  und 

I 

| w,i  1 

unan 

WU 

... 

OTHER  PRONOUNS. 


RIjasthasI. 


i 

M&rwftp- 

Jaipur!. 

Kumaun!. 

i ' 

GHyhw&li. 

Jauns&r!. 

Relative 

jtk6,  ieu'..jxkd 

J6,  fem ,j& 

1 jo 

: >3 

Oblique  Sing. 

jin 

; ji,  jai 

jejai 

! jes 

Correlative 

iikd,  fem.  tika  \ 

so 

1 SO 

s5 

i s6 

| 

Oblique  Sing. 

tin  1 

! « 

j te , tax 

tZ,  tax 

1 tit 

Interrogative— 

1 

1 

I 

i 

i 

Moac.  fem. 

hurt 

kun 

' ko 

ko 

kuna 

Oblique 

kun 

kun 

i ke,  kai 

kZ,  kai 

i kos 

Neut. 

kii 

kal 

i kyd>  ke 

kyd 

k'i 

Oblique 

kunl 

kai 

kZ,  kai 

IS 

kdi 

Indefinite— 

1 

Maac.  fem. 

; kbl 

kdi 

j kw?t  kai 

ktvt 

• kde 

! 

Neut. 

kai 

kyS 

ke 

kichhu , kuchh 

j kichh 

In  Jaunstoi,  as  well  as  in  RAjasthtai,  the  relative  pronoun  jS  is  commonly  employed  as  a demonstrative  pronoun 
meaning  1 that  *. 

Verb  Substantive. 


Rajasthani. 

i 

— 

| Kumaun!. 

Garhwftl!. 

eJaunsftr!. 

MArwfcp. 

Jaipur!. 

1 

i 

i 





Pbbbknt— 

i 

j 

i 

Singular. 

1. 

hu 

chhv 

chhu 

chhali 

v or  os5 

2. 

hSi 

chhai 

chhai 

chhai 

au,  of1 

3. 

kai 

chhai 

1 

chh 

chha 

o,  os  9 

9 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


106 


CENTRAL  PAHArI. 


Rajasthani. 

Kumauni. 

QafhwftU. 

Jaunsftrf. 

M&rw&ri. 

Jaipur!. 

Present — 

Plural . 

1. 

ha 

chha 

chhS 

chhawaTL 

TS.d*8 

2. 

hb 

eh  hB 

chhau 

chhayai 

artist 

3. 

Adi 

chhai 

chhan 

chhan 

au,  6*3 

Past  Masc. — 

Singular. 

1. 

2. 

chha  | 

■ 

chhiyfi 

chhiyS 

||  chhayH 

thS 

3. 

Plural. 

1. 

o. 

SA<5 

chha  < 

chhiyo 

chhiya 

cJihiyfc 

> chhayH 

. 

thi 

3. 

chhiya 

FINITE  VERB. 

•'  To  go." 

Participles  and  Infinitives. 


Piesent  Participle. 

Past  Participle. 

Infinitive. 

MftrwAri 

ehal*td 

chalyb 

chdTnti.  chaVnb 

Jaipur! 

chaTtb 

ckalj/6 

chal*nu 

Kumauni 

hifano 

hifo 

i 

1 htfano 

Garh^ftli 

ckaldb 

chalyb 

chalnd 

Janns&ri 

nafhdd 

\ 

nafkb 

nafhnd 

Old  Present. 


| Rajasthani. 

Kumauni. 

Gajhwill. 

J aungRri. 

MarwSfi. 

I Jaipur!. 

Singular. 

t 

i 

1. 

chalft 

! chalu 

ii(S 

chalS 

nafhS 

2. 

chalai 

chalai 

hitai 

chalh  j 

nafhe 

3. 

chalai 

chalai 

hi( 

i 

chal 

*«#*« 

Plural. 

1 

1. 

chala 

chala 

hits 

chala 

nafhS 

2. 

chald 

chain 

hifav 

chalydi 

nafhd 

3. 

chalai  | 

chalai  | 

hi  ta  n 

chalan 

nafhS 

INTRODUCTION 


107 


Imperative. 


Rajasthani. 

Kumaunl. 

Garb- wall. 

Jaunsftrl. 

M&rwftrl. 

Jaipur!. 

Singular,  2. 

chaf 

chal 

hi(  1 

chal 

na\h 

Plural,  2. 

chain 

chald 

hi(au 

chald 

nafhfi 

Future. 

Rajasthani. 

Kumaun!. 

Garb  w All. 

Jaunsftrl. 

» 

MArwftrL 

Jaipur!. 

Singular,  3. 

chalaild 

chalatln 

hitalo 

j challi. 

nathda 

Plural,  3. 

chajaild 

chafaild 

hifala 

1 

1 chal  Id. 

i 

nathde 

Present  Sing.  1. 

Imperfect  Sing.  1. 

MArwftp 

chain -hu 

chaltd-hd  or  chalai-hd 

Jaipur! 

chal  u-chhu 

chalat-chhd 

Kumaun! 

• hitu*chhu 

hi(a-chhiyH 

Gafhwftl! 

chaldli-chhau 

chaldd-ckhayd 

Jaunsftrl 

... 

natkS-thd 

p 2 


VOL.  IX,  PART  IV 


10S 


CENTRAL  PAHART  (KUMAUNT). 


The  speakers. 


Kumauni  is  the  Aryan  language  spoken  in  the  suh-Himalayan  tract  known  as 

Kumann,  which  may  bo  taken  as  including  the  whole  of  the 
Where  spoken.  Almora  District  and  the  northern  part  of  the  Naini  Tal  Dis- 

trict of  the  United  Provinces  of  Agra  and  Oudh.  It  is  spoken  by  an  estimated  number 
of  436,788  people.  To  the  north  are  the  higher  ranges  of  the  Himalaya,  inhabited  by 
people  speaking  Tibeto-Burman  languages  which  are  dealt  with  in  Vol.  Ill,  Part  I,  of 
this  Survey.  South  of  the  district  of  Naini  Tal  lies  the  native  state  of  Itampur,  in  the 
north  of  which,  in  the  tract  known  as  the  BMbar , or  sub-montane  forest  lowlands,  a 
few  speakers  of  Kumauni  (300  in  number)  are  reported  to  exist.  Their  speech  is  locally 
known  as  BhabarT,  and  may  be  looked  upon  as  an  overflow  from  Naini  Tal.  . 

In  the  south-east  of  the  Almora  District,  there  is  a peak  over  7,000  ft.  high  named 

Kanadeo,  the  old  name  of  which  was  Kurmachala.  Here 
ame  o Language.  the  god  Vishnu  is  said  to  have  resided  for  three  years  in  his 

Kurma,  or  Tortoise,  incarnation,  and  whilst  there  to  have  been  worshipped  by  Iiulra, 
Narada,  and  the  Rishis.  The  name  * Tvumaun  ’ is  said  to  be  connected  with  this  word 
* Kurmachala.’  * Kumauni  ’ is  an  adjective  formed  from  “ Kumaun.” 

The  original  inhabitants  of  Kumaun,  so  far  as  history  takes  us,  as  elsewhere  in  the 

sub-Himalayan  tract,  were  the  Klia£as,  and  the  Khas,  or 
Khasiya  tribe  still  forms  an  important  element  of  the  popu- 
lation. In  Kumaun,  most  of  these  are  now  classed  as  Brahmans  or  as  Rajputs.  As 
described  in  the  General  Introduction  to  Central  Paliari,  immigrants,  not  Ivhalas,  have 
for  many  centuries  been  entering  this  sub-montane  tract,  Gujars  coming  from  the  AVcst, 
and  Rajputs  coming  from  Rajputana  (using  this  word  in  its  widest  sense).  In 
Kumaun,  the  earliest  historical,  or  semi-historical,  Rajput  name  that  wc  come  across  is 
that  of  Som  Chand,  a Chandrabansi  Rajput  of  Kanauj,  who  immigrated  at  the  head  of 
his  followers  about  the  year  950  A.D.,1  and  established  himself  at  Cliampawat.  He 
found  the  country  divided  into  a number  of  small  pal  (Is,  in  each  of  which  there  was  a 
semi-independent  ruler.  Taking  advantage  of  internal  dissensions  existing  between 
these,  he  eventually  brought  the  whole  country  under  his  sway.  He  thus  founded  the 
“ Chand”  dynasty,  which  ruled  Kumaun  with  varying  fortunes  till  the  year  1790  A.D., 
when  it  was  conquered  by  the  Gorklias  of  Nepal.  These  Gorkhas  were  themselves  of 
Rajput  origin,  and  claimed  Udaipur  as  their  former  home  (see  p.  17,  ante).  They 
held  Kumaun  till  it  was  taken  by  the  English  in  the  year  1816,  as  a sequel  of  the  second 
Nepal  war.  It  will  thus  be  seen  that  for  at  least  nine  centuries  Kumaun  was  under 
Rajput  rule.  During  this  period  there  was  also  continual  immigration  from  Rajputana, 
which  was  materially  hastened  by  the  pressure  of  Musalman  conquest  in  the  plains. 

These  Rajput  rulers  imposed  their  own  language  and  customs  upon  the  Khavas 
Origin  of  the  language.  iU,d  ^hjars  whom  they  conquered.  The  Kha&is,  themselves, 

claimed  to  be  Rajputs  by  origin,  and  intermarriages  resulted 
that  further  tended  to  assimilate  their  tribal  customs  and  language  to  those  of  their  con- 
querors. One  result  of  this  has  been  the  complete  disappearance  of  the  old  Kha&a 


1 Thin,  aud  what  follow  i,  are  taken  .rom  Vol.  II,  pp.  i/jTj  ff.,  0f  Atkinson'*  Himalaya n Qanettoer. 


INTRODUCTION. 


109 


language  as  an  independent  form  of  speech,  and  the  language  of  Kumaun  is  now  a form 
of  Rajasthani.  There  are,  however,  certain  well-defined  peculiarities  in  Kumauni  which 
it  is  difficult  to  explain  otherwise  than  by  assuming  the  reaction  of  the  Khaki  language 
that  might  naturally  be  expected.  The  most  important  of  these  is  the  frequent  occur- 
rence of  epentliesis,  or  the  change  of  a vowel  owing  to  the  influence  of  another  vowel 
in  the  succeeding  syllable,  much  as  the  English  ‘ mat  ’ becomes  ‘ mate,’  with  a change  of 
the  sound  of  the  ‘a’  owing  to  the  presence  of  the  following  ‘e.’  So,  in  Kumauni,  the 
word  chelo,  a son,  becomes  chyalh  in  the  plural,  the  che  becoming  changed  to  chya,  on 
account  of  the  a following  in  the  syllable  la.  Another  marked  peculiarity  of  Kumauni 
is  the  tendency  to  disaspiration,  as  in  the  word  par  for  park,  read.  There  are  other 
minor  peculiarities  also  which  it  is  unnecessary  to  quote  here,  but  these  two  alone  are 
sufficient  to  point  to  a relationship  between  the  old  Klmsa  language  and  the  ‘ Pisaclia’ 
languages  of  the  North-West  Frontier, — Kashmiri,  Khowar,  Shina,  and  so  forth.  The 
reasonableness  of  this  conjecture  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  from  early  times  we  have 
historical  evidence  that  the  Khakis  extended  right  along  the  suit -Himalayan  tract  from 
the  extreme  north-west,  that  they  came  originally  from  that  quarter,  and  that  they 
gradually  worked  their  way  eastwards  as  far  as,  at  least,  central  Nepal.  It  may  be 
added  that  one  of  the  principal  dialects  of  Kumauni  is  called  Khas-parjiya,  or  ‘ the 
speech  of  the  Khaki-subjects.’ 

Till  the  last  few  years  Kumauni  has  received  no  literary  cultivation,  and  this,  and 

the  fact  that  its  speakers  inhabit  a mountainous  country 
Dwlect®'  where  intercommunication  is  difficult,  have  led  to  a multi- 

plicity of  dialects.  No  less  than  twelve  dialects  are  recorded  in  these  pages,  and  there 
are  probably  many  more  local  variations.  The  classification  of  these  dialects  is  rendered 
somewhat  difficult  by  the  necessity  of  a cross -division.  On  one  side  there  is  the  standard 
dialect,  which  is  separated  from  the  others,  not  on  account  of  its  local  habitation,  but  by 
the  fact  that  it  is  employed  for  literary  purposes  and  is  the  polite  form  of  speech  used 
over  the  whole  district.  On  the  other  side  are  the  remaining  dialects  which  are  separated 
according  to  locality,  and  it  happens  that  those  that  most  nearly  approach  the  literary 
standard^are  none  of  them  spoken  where  the  standard  lias  its  headquarters  aud  receives 
literary  cultivation, — the  country  in  the  vicinity  of  the  town  of  Almora.  The  popular 
speech  of  this  tract,  the  so-called  Khasparjiya,  is  less  like  the  literary  standard  than  is, 
sav  the  Kumaiya  dialect  of  Pargana  Kali  Kumaun,  a considerable  distance  to  the  south- 
east The  chief  peculiarity  of  the  standard  dialect  is  that  it  has  preserved  the  termina- 
tions of  nouns  and  verbs  in  full,  and  this  is  also  the  case  in  the  dialect  of  Kali  Kumaun, 
while  Khasparjiya  and  most  of  the  other  dialects  tend  to  drop  them.  On  the  other  hand, 
as  the  town  of  Almora,  the  educated  classes  of  which  employ  the  literary  dialect  m formal 
conversation,  is  situated  in  the  heart  of  the  Khasparjiya  tract, Jhis  literary  dialect,  although 
in  its  grammatical  forms  more  nearly  approaching  Kumaiya,  is  at  the  present  day  really 
based  on  Khasparjiya,  and  has  even  been  described  in  one  of  be  reports  supplied  for  (his 
Wov  as  a ‘refined  form’  of  that  dialect.  That  Kumaiya  lias  preserved  the  old 
^ Heal  forms  more  truly  than  Khasparjiya  is  explained  by  the  iact  that  the  court 

situated  at  ClJnpawat  in  the  Kali  Kmnaun  Pargana. 

* form  of  Kumauni  is  spoken  all  over  the  Kumaun  are.  as  the 

polite  form  of  conversation,  and  hence  no  figures  can  be  given  for  the  number  of  i s 


110 


CENTRAL  PAHi-Rl  (KUMAUNx). 


speakers.  That  may  be  taken  as  the  samo  as  the  number  of  oducated  Kumaunis, 
wherever  they  live,  who,  liowevor,  also  employ  one  or  other  of  the  local  dialects  when 
speaking  without  formality  to  men  of  their  own  neighbourhood. 

As  for  the  local  dialects,  we  may  first  take  Khasparjiya,  the  basis  of  the  standard. 
As  already  stated  it  drops  the  final  vowels  that  are  still  preserved  in  the  literary  form  of 
speech.  It  is  spoken  in  the  centre  of  Kumaun,  in  Pargana  Barahmandal  and  in  the 
adjoining  parts  of  Pargana  Dan  pur,  both  belonging  to  the  Almora  District.  Closely 
connected  with  it  are  (1)  Phaldakotiya  of  Pargana  Phaldakot,  of  Almora  and  of  the 
adjoining  country,  including  the  north  of  the  Naini  Tal  District,  and  (2)  Pachliaf,  or  the 
* western’  dialect,  spoken  in  the  south-west  of  Almora,  on  the  borders  of  British  Garh- 
wal,  and  immediately  to  the  west  of  Phaldakotiya  and  Khasparjiya. 

The  next  group  of  dialects  consists  of  those  of  the  Kumaiya  typo,  i.  e.,  those  which 
retain  the  final  vowels  of  the  standard  with  more  or  less  completeness.  Commencing  at 
the  south,  there  are,  first,  the  Kumaunl  spoken  in  the  greater  part  of  Naini  Tal,  and  the 
KumaiyS  of  Kali  Kumaun  immediately  to  the  east  of  that  district.  Hero  the  final 
vowels  arc  almost  entirely  preserved.  North-west  of  Kali  Kumaun  lie,  in  order,  the 
three  Parganas  of  Chaugarklia,  Gangola,  and  Danpuv,  where  we  have,  respectively,  the 
Chaugarkhiya,  Gangola,  and  Dfmpuriya  dialects.  The  last-named  is  also  spoken  in  the 
south  of  the  adjoining  Joliar  Pargana.  Here  the  preservation  of  final  vowels  is  not  so 
complete.  There  is  a distinct,  but  not  universal,  tendency  to  drop  them.  It  may  be 
pointed  out  that  Khasparjiya  lies  immediately  to  the  east  of  Chaugarkhiya. 

Next,  in  the  east  of  the  District  of  Almora,  along  the  Nepal  Frontier,  there  is  a 
row  of  dialects  in  which  Kumaunl  shows  the  influence  of  the  neighbouring  Khas-kurfi, 
or  Naipali.  These  are  named,  after  the  Parganas  in  which  they  are  respectively  spoken, 
SoriyalT,  Askoti,  and  Sirall.  It  should  be  mentioned  here  that  in  these  localities  there 
are  some  12,185  Gorkluis  from  Nepal,  who  speak  their  own  Khas-kura  more  or  less  cor- 
rupted by  intercourse  with  the  surrounding  Kumaunis.  This  mixed  language  will  not  be 
described  in  the  following  pages. 

Finally,  north  of  Pargana  Askot,  lies  Pargana  Johar.  AVe  have  seen  that  Dan- 
puriya  is  the  dialect  of  the  south  of  this  Pargana.  In  its  north,  the  language  is  the 
Tibeto-Burman  Rangkas,  and  in  the  centre  of  the  Pargana  we  find  a mixed  jargon,  half 
Kumaunl  and  half  Tibeto-Burman,  called  Johari. 

To  sum  up,  the  following  is  a list  of  the  main  dialects  of  Kumaunl,  excluding  the 
literary  form,  together  with  the  number  of  speakers  of  each,  as  estimated  for  the  purposes 
of  this  Survey  : — 


Xaiue  of  Dialect. 
Khasparjiya 
Phaldakfliiya 
Paohhal 

Kumaunl  of  Naini  Tal 
Bhabari  of  Rampur1 
Kumaiya  .. 
Chaugarkhiya 
GaAgtila 
Danpuriya 


Number  of  speakers. 

75,930 

20,908 

95,750 


56,679 

300 

37,696 

37,210 

37,734 

23,851 


Carr 


led  over 


Total. 


192,588 


193,470 

3b6,068 


1 See  p.  10S  ante. 


INTBODUCTION. 


Ill 


N&mo  of  Dialect.  Number  of  speakers.  Total. 

Brought  forward  . 380,058 

Sony*11 19,866 

■Askfitt 10,964 

Sirall  • • 12,481 

- 43,311 

JflhSrl 7,419 


Total  number  of  speakers  of  Kumauni  436,788 

The  oldest  writer  in  Kumauni  with  whom  I am  acquainted  is  Gumani  Pant,  who 

Literature  was  ^)0rn  *n  1790  A.D.  He  composed  principally  in  San- 

skrit, but  lie  is,  nevertheless,  host  known  for  a number  of 
curious  verses,  in  each  of  which  the  first  three  linos  are  in  Sanskrit,  while  the  fourth  is 
in  Kumauni  or  Hindi.  These  are  very  popular  all  over  northern  India,  and  several  of 
them  have  been  printed  in  pamphlet  form  under  the  title  of  Gumani  Kiti,  while  others 
also  appear  in  the  volume  of  his  collected  works  (see  the  list  below). 

Krishna  Pare  was  an  author  of  a different  sort.  He  flourished  in  the  first  quarter 
of  the  19tli  century,  during  which  period  Kutnaun  was  captured  by  the  English.  He 
wrote  numerous  short  satirical  poems,  that  are  still  known  and  repeated  all  over  Kumaun, 
in  which  he  laments  the  evil  times  that  have  fallen  on  his  country  and  strongly  criti- 
cizes the  new  regime  of  law  and  order.  Some  of  these  have  been  printed,  as  noted  in 
the  list  Inflow. 

Of  late  years  several  patriotic  gentlemen  of  Almora  have  endeavoured  to  give  their 
native  language  the  honour  of  a literature  by  writing  books  in  Kumauni.  Those  which 
have  come  under  my  notice  are  recorded  in  the  following  list.  Of  them.  Pandit  Jwalfi 
Datt  Joslu’s  translation  of  the  Daka-ktondra-charita  and  Pandit  Gaiiga  Hath  TTprefi’s 
If  ill  Dialect  ft  of  the  Kumaun  Division  have  been  freely  used  in  my  account  of  the 
language,  and  1 am  much  indebted  to  them  for  the  permission  kindly  granted  to  reprint 
extracts  from  their  works.  I would  also  call  attention  to  Pandit  Ganga  Datt  Uproti’s 
Proverbs  and  Folklore  of  Kumaun , which  is  a most  valuable  collection,  affording  a mine 
of  information  regarding  the  habits  and  customs  of  these  Hill  people. 

The  Serampore  Missionaries  commenced  to  print  a version  of  the  Xew  Testament  in 
Kumauni.  In  the  year  1832  they  reported  that  they  had  carried  it  down  to  Colossians, 
but  that  the  work  was  there  stopped  owing  to  the  death  of  the  Pandit  engaged  upon 
it.  Another  version  of  the  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew  was  published  at  Lucknow  in  the 
year  1876. 

The  following  is  a list  of  those  books  written  by  Kumauni  authors  that  T have  seen  : — 

BuuraB  Datt  JOshT. — Sukh-ko  Vdfo.  The  H'ay  to  Health . a Sanitary  Primer.  Allahabad,  1894. 

ChintAmani  JOSHT. — Durya  ( Chandl ) Pdfha-slrah,  a translation  from  Sanskrit.  Almora.  1S97. 

GaShA  Datt  UTkktI. Phlras-ka  Mahdriij-kl  lldiy  Astar-ko  Itihas,  a translation  of  tlie  Hook  of  Kstker. 

Almora,  1892. 

GaSgX  Datt  UrRKTl. — Proverbs  anti  Folklore  of  Kumaun  and  Garhiodf.  hudiana,  1894. 

GaSgJ  Datt  UpkBtT. — Hill  Dialects  of  the  Kumaun  Division.  Almora,  1900. 

GumAsI  Past.  — Qumdnl-Nlti,  edited  by  Kowa  Datt  Uprc'tl,  Almora,  1894.  Another  edition,  nrith  Eng- 
lish translation  in  Indian  Antiquary  for  1909,  pp.  17<  If. 

GumAnI  Pa nt. Gu mani-kavi-v i rachifa  kdvya-samyrah.ih , the  poet’s  works,  collected  and  edited  by  DfivI 

Datt  6arm&.  Etawah,  1897,  _ 

JwXt.A  Datt  JOSHT. The  Dala-kumdra-charita,  or  the  Adventures  of  Ten  Princes,  ot  Pandi.  translated 

into  Hindi  and  Kumauni.  Almora,  1892. 


112 


CENTRAL  PAHARi  (KUMAUNI). 


Authorities. 


Krishna  — An  old  Kumaunl  Satire,  edited  and  translated  by  G.  A.  Grierson,  Journal  of  the  Royal 

Asiatio  Society,  1901,  pp.  476  If. 

Krishna  PXrK. — A Specimen  of  the  Kumaunl  Language.  Verses  by  K.  P.  with  English  translation  and 
Notes  by  Gaftga  Datt  UprStl.  Indian  Antiquary,  1910,  pp.  78  ft. 

LTi.Idhar  Jo  s Hi. — Metrical  Translation  of  the  Meg  had  ut  a of  Kalidasa.  Almora,  1894. 

Siva  Datt  SattI  SarmX. — Buddhi-prave.i,  in  throe  parts,  eaoh  containing  both  Hindi  and  Kumaunl 
verses.  Bombay,  Pt.  I.  1908,  Pt.  II.  1907,  Pt.  III.  1905. 

Siva  Datt  SattI  Sarm I, — Mitra-vinod,  songs  in  Kumaunl,  Bombay,  1909. 

Siva  Datt  SattI  SabmJ. — Qnpl-Cit.  Bombay,  1909. 

The  only  work  hitherto  published  that  contains  an  account  of  the  Kumauni 

language  is  Kellogg’s  Hindi  Grammar  (2nd  Edition,  London, 
1893).  In  this  there  are  paradigms  of  the  principal  gram- 
matical forms.  Pandit  Gatiga  Datt  Upreti’s  work  on  the  Hill  Dialects  of  Kumaun 
Division,  already  noted,  contains  a number  of  valuable  specimens  of  several  dialects 
of  the  language. 

In  the  preparation  of  the  accompanying  sketch  of  the-  Kumauni  language,  I have 

received  great  assistance  from  Pandit  Chintmnani  Joshi 
Grammar.  Pandit  Ganga  Datt  Joshi,  Pandit  Jwalii  Datt  Joshi,  arid 

Pandit  Liladliar  Joshi,  who  have  most  kindly  revised  the  proofslieets,  and  have  thus 
enabled  me  to  make  many  important  additions  and  corrections.  I am  more  particularly 
indebted  to  the  first-named  gentleman,  who  took  the  trouble  to  prepare  a most  valuable 
account  of  the  pronunciation  of  the  language  and  of  the  rules  for  the  permutation  of 
vowel-sounds,  which  throw  a remarkable  light  upon  the  Khasa  basis  of  Kumaunl,  and 
materially  enhanced  the  value  of  this  grammar.1  Many  vowel  sounds  of  Kumauni  can- 
not be  represented  in  ordinary  Deva-nagari,  and  no  attempt  has  been  made  to  record 
them  in  the  various  books  hitherto  printed  in  that  character,  the  letter  representing 
some  nearly  related  sound  being,  in  each  case,  used  instead.  A mere  transliteration  of 
the  specimens  employed  hv  mo  would  lienee  give  an  incomplete  and  misleading  account 
of  the  pronunciation  of  the  language,  whose  grammar  sometimes  depends  on  changes  of 
sound  not  represented  in  writing.  Thanks  to  Pandit  Chintamani  Joshi’s  notes,  I have 
been  able  to  record  in  the  Roman  character  the  exact  shades  of  sound  employed  in  each 
form.  These  remarks  apply  only  to  the  grammar  and  specimens  of  the  literary,  stand- 
ard, dialect.  In  the  notices  of  the  various  local  dialects,  I have  had  no  such  help  at 
hand,  and  I have  therefore  perforce  given  the  specimens  of  these  dialects  exactly  as 
they  were  received.  It  would  have  been  easy  to  rewrite  them  according  to  the  rules 
laid  down  for  the  standard,  hut  I have  thought  it  best  not  to  do  this,  as  I am  not  aware 
how  far  these  rules  of  pronunciation  apply  to  the  dialectic  forms.  Probably  they 
all  do  apply,  and  the  student,  if  lie  so  desire,  can  easily  apply  them  himself  where 
necessary. 

As  a supplement  to  the  Kumauni  section  I give  two  vocabularies,  one  Kumauni- 
English,  and  the  other  English-Kumnuni.  The  latter  I owe  to  the  kindness  of  Mr. 
It.  Burn,  I.C.S.,  who  had  Colonel  Thornhill's  English -Jaunsari  Vocabulary,  printed 
on  pp.  413  ff.,  translated  into  Kumaunl.  Prom  this  translation  it  was  easy  to  prepare 
both  vocabularies.  Here,  as  in  the  case  of  the  local  dialects,  the  spelling  is  based  on 

1 Almost  the  whole  of  the  aeoount  of  tho  voweWounda  of  the  language  !t  baaed  upon  the  materials  supplied  by  the 
gentleman,  and,  indeed,  practically  the  whole  of  the  grammar  was  rewritten  in  the  light  of  his  remarks  on  the  subject. 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


113 


transliteration,  and  no  attempt  is  made  to  represent  the  vowel-sounds  according  to  the 
rules  laid  down  for  the  standard  dialect. 

The  following  sketch  of  Kumauui  grammar  is  founded  partly  on  the  two  specimens 
annexed,  and  partly  ^ on  Pandit  Jwala  Datt  Joshis  translation  of  the  Da&akwmdra 
Charita.  References  to  the  former  arc  by  number  of  specimen  and  paragraph.  Thus, 
eto  kari-ber  (II,  3)  means  that  the  phrase  is  to  be  found  in  the  third  paragraph  of  the 
second  specimen.  References  to  the  latter  are  simply  by  page-number.  Thus,  hamari 
JchuSi  rftni  ya  ni  chhi  (page  201)  indicates  that  the  phrase  is  to  be  found  on  page  201 
of  Pandit  Jwala,  Datt  Joshi’s  hook.  So  far  as  was  possible,  I have  confined  myself 
to  the  two  specimens  printed  herewith,  but  in  many  cases  this  could  not  be  done. 

Pronunciation. — The  Kumaunl  pronunciation  of  the  vowols  differs  considerably 
from  that  to  which  we  are  accustomed  in  Hindi,  and  requires  a detailed  account.  It 
varies  from  place  to  place  and  amongst  the  different  classes  of  society.  The  description 
which  is  here  given  represents  the  pronunciation  used  in  conversation  by  educated 
Kumaunis  of  Almora.  In  reading  books,  or  in  formal  speech,  the  pronunciation  more 
nearly  approaches  that  of  ordinary  Hindi. 

a is  pronounced  as  in  Hindi,  like  the  a in  ‘ America  ’ or  the  e in  ‘ lather.’  In 
prose  it  is  not  pronounced  at  the  end  of  a word,  as  in  bdlak,  not  bdlaka,  a child 

but  when  certain  terminations,  of  which  the  most  important  are  le,  by,  and  ko,  of,  are 
added  to  such  a word,  the  a is  pronounced,  as  in  bdlaka-le,  by  a child.  In  poetry  the 
pronunciation  of  a final  a depends  upon  the  metre,  as  in  the  following  line  : — 

janama  marana  tero  ke  lai  nihati, 
dhanadhan  Prabhu  terijdta  nihati. 

The  letter  XTT  has  two  sounds,  represented  in  transcription  by  a and  a,  respectively. 
The  first  is  a short  vowel,  and  is  sounded  like  the  a in  the  German  ‘ Mann.’  Thus,  <?nTT 
tyhrh,  thino  (masc.  plur.),  both  syllables  being  short.  The  second  sound  is  the  regular 
long  a of  Hindi,  sounded  like  the  a in  ‘ father,’  as  in  TT*T  ray,  a tune.  When  for  any 
reason  a is  shortened,  it  becomes  a,  the  difference  not  being  shown  in  the  native  charac- 
ter. T.  4,  <3,  Uf,  are  pronounced  i,  i,  u,  u,  as  in  Hindi. 

The  letter  tj  has  two  sounds,  represented  in  transliteration  by  e and  e,  respectively. 
The  former  sounds  like  the  e in  * set,’  or  ‘ wet,’  as  in  cheli,  a daughter.  The  latter 
is  the  ordinary  long  e of  Hindi,  sounded  like  the  a in  ‘ fate,’  as  in  bhet,  an  interview. 

The  letter  § has  two  sounds,  represented  in  transliteration  by  at  and  di,  respec- 
tively. The  former  sounds  like  the  a in  ‘ sat,’  * sad,’  ‘ pat,’  etc.,  as  in  Ira  haith,  sound- 
ing almost  like  the  English  word  ‘ bat.*  This  is  the  sound  of  the  vowel  in  all  Tadbhava1 
words.  The  sound  of  at  is  that  which  is  usual  in  Hindi  latsamas,  like  that  ot  the  • m 
* right.*  It  principally  occurs  in  Tatsama  words,  such  as  chaitra,  the  name  of  a 
month. 

The  letter  xrt  has  also  two  sounds,  represented  in  transliteration  by  o and  d,  respec- 
tively. The  former  is  a short  vowel,  sounded  like  1 he  first  o in  ‘promote,’  as  in 
rofo,  bread.  The  second  is  the  ordinary  long  6 of  Hindi,  sounded  like  the  second  o in 
‘ promote,’  as  in  Tfa  rot,  a cake. 

» A Tadbhava  word  is  ono  which  has  descended  to  Kumauui  from  Sanskrit  through  Prakrit.  A Ta/sama  on  the 
contrary,  it  one  which,  like  bdlak,  a child,  haa  been  borrowed  directly  from  that  language. 

VOL.  IX,  PAST  IV.  ^ 


114  CENTRAL  PAHArI  (kUMAUNI). 

The  letter  au  is  always  long,  and  is  pronounced  like  the  a in  ‘ ball,’  and  not  like 
the  ou  of  ‘house.’  Thus,  wta  bhaut,  much,  nearly  rhyming  with  the  English  ‘ caught.’ 

In  writing  in  the  Nagarl  character,  no  attempt  is  made  by  natives  to  discriminate 
between  the  long  and  short  pronunciations  of  u,  tfc  and  nor  will  this  bo  done  in 
the  following  pages,  but  so  far  as  is  possible  the  short  and  long  sounds  will  be  distin- 
guished in  transliteration. 

There  are  certain  rules  under  which  a long  vowel  is  liable  to  be  shortened  or  other- 
wise changed  when  followed  in  the  next  syllable  by  a short  vowel.  It  should  bo  remem- 
bered that  d,  e,  ai,  and  o,  although  written  in  the  Nagarl  character  WT,  $ and  wt  are 
considered  to  be  short  vowels,  ns  distinct  from  a,  e,  di,  and  o.  These  rules  should  bo  care- 
fully mastered  as  the  whole  system  of  declension  and  conjugation  depends  upon  them. 
They  are  as  follows : — 

1.  Whenever  a long  vowel  is  followed  in  the  next  syllable  by  a short  vowel  which 
is  not  the  final  silent  a,  that  long  vowel  becomes  short.  In  such  a case,  a is  shortened  to 
it,  e to  e,  and  o to  o.  Thus,  Tte  rot  (with  final  silent  a),  a cake,  has  the  b long,  but 
rofo,  bread,  has  the  first  o shortened  to  o,  because  it  is  followed,  in  the  final  syllable 
by  a short  o.  Similarly,  we  have  words  such  as  bharo,  hire,  sirhi,  a ladder,  bhulo,  forgot, 
each  with  a short  vowel  in  the  first  syllable,  though  we  should  expect  a long  vowel  from 
the  analogy  of  the  Hindi  bhdrd,  sirhi,  and  bhiild. 

The  principal  exceptions  to  this  rule  occur  in  the  case  of  words  borrowed  from  other 
languages,  such  as  hakim,  an  officer,  or  (Tatsamas,  borrowed  from  Sanskrit)  bdlak,  a 
child,  dtur,  sick.  Also  a long  vowel  is  not  shortened  before  the  infinitive  termination 
,io,  as  in  risd.no,  to  be  angry.  There  are  also  a few  other  exceptions  in  the  conjugation 
of  verbs,  especially  in  the  case  of  the  periphrastic  tenses,  which  will  appear  in  the  tables 
of  the  tenses. 

2.  When  the  letter  a is  followed  by  it,  it  tends  to  become  itself  it  also.  Thus 

baro,  great,  has  its  plural  gTST  bitrd,  often  written  incorrectly  in  the  Nagari  character 

^3T.  Similarly,  the  word  dagara,  with,  becomes  dagara  (II,  2)  written  or  (incor- 
rectly) in  Nagarl.  Again,  the  word  ban,  a forest,  has  its  genitive  bana-ko,  which 

when  agreeing  with  a masculine  plural  noun  becomes  band-kd.  Again  (II,  21,  the 
Sanskrit  word  durdasti  when  adopted  into  Kumauni,  becomes  durddHa.  This  rule 
explains  passages  such  as  the  following : — 

dekhu  ham  dwin-me  ko'baro  chh,  let  us  see  who  of  us  two  is  great  (I,  2). 

But, — sard  band-led  rukhan-kani  jo  bdfd  hard  clihiyd,  all  the  trees  of  the  forest 
which  wrere  very  great  (I,  2). 

3.  When  the  letter  e or  e is  followed  by  d,  it  becomes  yd.  Thus,  mero,  my,  has  its 
masculine  plural  myhrd,  .and  the  Hindi  word  meld,  becomes  myhld  in  Kumauni.  This 
change  is  usually,  but  not  always,  indicated  in  the  Nagarl  character.  Sometimes  we  see 
inT  and  sometimes  *yirr,  sometimes  5t3ET  and  sometimes  73T35T,  but  the  pronunciation  is 
always  mydrd,  my  did.  We  may  quote  the  following  examples  from  the  specimens: — 

rajai-ki  cheli  kdlindi  chhu.  I am  Kalindi,  the  daughter  of  the  king  (II,  6). 

rhjd-kd  chyala-kani  bhulo  tidivii  samaji-ber,  recognizing  the  king’s  son  as  a good 
man  (II,  2). 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


115 


mero  bob  pdtala-ko  raja,  my  father,  the  king  oi'  Patala  (II,  6). 

myara  an-me  bahaut  ghau  hai  rau-chhiyd , there  were  many  wounds  in  my  body 
(11,2). 

tydrd  ghlan  janyo  ke-lai  chh,  why  is  there  a Bralnnanical  thread  round  your 
neck  ? (II,  2). 

4.  Similarly,  the  letter  o or  o when  followed  by  a becomes  w'a.  Thus,  roto,  a cake, 
has  its  plural  rvoata.  The  same  remarks  as  in  the  last  case  regarding  writing  in 
the  Nagari  character  apply  also  here.  Thus  we  come  across  both  -cfei  and  pZT,  but 
the  pronunciation  is  always  rwdt'a.  As  examples  from  the  specimens,  we  may 
quote  : — 

dviyift  paik  Idkdrh-kdbwdja  samet,  the  two  heroes  with  the  loads  of  sticks  (I,  4). 

ui-kani  rtcafa  din  ja-chhu,  I am  going  to  give  loaves  to  him  (i,  3). 

thvoafa  dinan  jSlai,  for  a few  days  (II,  2). 

6.  When  e or  o precedes  o,  many  people  change  them  to  yd  and  wo  respectively. 
Thus,  they  pronounce  mero , my,  as  mydro,  and  bojo , a load,  as  bwojo.  The  o in  this  case  is 
not  the  iirst  o in  * promote,’  but  is  the  o of  ‘ hot  ’ or  * policy.'  This  pronunciation  some- 
times appears  in  writing,  so  that  we  find  both  wft  and  «rT5ft  as  well  as  and  or, 

as  it  is  sometimes  written  but  some  people  say  that  forms  such  as  mydro  and  bwojo 
are  vulgar  and  are  not  used  in  polite  conversation.  Examides  of  these  forms  in  the  speci- 
mens are : — 

mydro  bdb  inandijaso  chhiyo , my  lather  was  just  like  1 hese  (IT,  2).  Cf.  mero  bdb  above. 

taso  chyolo  tero  hai  ga-chh,  such  a son  has  been  born  to  thee  (II,  1).  Here  avc 
have  chyolo  and  tero  side  by  side. 

bhdri  pa  hay  jaso  btodjo,  a load  like  a great  mountain  (I,  2). 

6.  An  initial  e is  often  pronounced  ye  or  yn  by  the  vulgar,  and  this  sometimes 
appears  in  writing,  so  that  avc  may  find  such  a word  as  etuk  written  as  yetuk  or 
yatuk,  but  this  pronunciation  is  not  heard  in  polite  conversat  ion. 

When  the  letter  d is  followed  by  i the  two  together  form  the  diphthong  ai  (not  ai  as 
in  Hindi).  Thus,  the  Hindi  for  * he  eame  ’ would  be  dl-gayd  or  d-gayd.  In  KumaunI  it 
is  ai  (notai)  gayo  (II,  7).  This  change  is  extremely  common.  Thus  we  have  lantai  (for 
lautd-i)  diya,  cause  him  to  return  (II,  2)  ; dekhai-ber,  having  shown  (II,  2) ; snnain  lie 
caused  (me)  to  hear  them  (root  sum,  cause  to  hear)  (II,  2) ; sikai  (root,  sikd,  teach),  he 
taught  (a  feminine  object)  (II,  2)  ; jabber,  having  gone  (II,  5);  ai-ber , having  come 

(II,  0). 

In  the  same  way,  words  Avhioh,  in  Hindi  haA7c  an,  have  an  in  Kumauni.  Thus, 
Hindi  ghdu,  Kumauni  ghau,  a wound  (1J,  2).  Hindi  nan,  Kumauni  nan  (I,  2),  a name ; 
pau-chhiyo  (for  pdu-chhiyo),  he  was  obtaining  (II,  7). 

The  letters  l and  l Avlien  medial  or  final  aro  often  dropped,  and  to  prevent  the  hiatus 
thus  called,  the  letter  to  is  generally  inserted  in  its  place.  Thus,  budal  or  badaw,  a cloud  ; 
beliya  or  beiya,  yesterday ; chd l no  or  chatoi.io,  to  strain;  dldtol , a ditodll  song;  galiino 
or gauno,  to  melt ; khlo  or  khioo,  black;  kamlo  or  khmwo,  a blanket;  kirniala  or  kir- 
matoa,  an  ant;  nit  Id  or  ndw'a,  a brook;  ntgdli  or  nigaico,  a kind  of  bamboo ; palo  or 
phtoo,  frost;  6yal  or  kyato,  a jackal ; thvl  or  thdw,  a lip;  ujydlo  or  njyhtco,  bright, 
vot.  ix,  part  iv.  ^ 2 


116 


CENTRAL  PAHARl  (KUMAUNI). 


There  is  a strong  tendency  to  disaspirate.  Thus,  bhunrto  or  bunno,  to  fry.  Conso- 
nants which  are  aspirated  in  Hindi  are  oommonly  disaspirated  in  Kumauni.  Thus  : — 

Hindi.  Kwnannl. 

parhd  (II,  5),  rend. 

bdjhd  btcojo*  { I,  2),  a load. 

sukhi  gayd-hai  suki  ga-chh  (I,  1),  has  dried  up. 

sikhdi  sikai  (II,  2),  he  taught  her. 

kadhe  or  kdnhe  kctna  (I,  3),  on  the  shoulder. 

Sometimes,  however,  there  are  instances  of  prefixing  h,  as  in  haur  (I,  1),  but  more 
usually  aur,  and. 

The  cerebral  n is  very  common  in  Kumauni.  In  words  which  arc  not  borrowed,  but 
have  reached  the  language  from  Sanskrit  through  the  medium  of  Prakrit,  every  single 
medial  n of  Prakrit  has  remained  a cerebral  in  Kumauni.  Tlius,  the  Sanskrit  word 
vanah  becomes  vano  in  Prakrit,  and  therefore  is  ban  in  Kumauni.  Tf  the  Kumauni  n 
represents  a double  nit  or  nn  in  Prakrit,  then  in  Kumauni  the  n is  dental  and  not  cere- 
bral. Thus,  the  n in  kdn,  the  ear,  is  dental,  because  it  is  derived  from  the  Prakrit 
kaniid  with  a double  nn.  On  the  other  hand,  in  Tatsama  words,  borrowed  directly 
from  the  Sanskrit,  the  n in  Kumauni  is  dental,  when  it  is  dental  in  that  language. 
Thus,  the  Sanskrit  dinah  or  dinarii,  a day,  dhanam,  wealth,  and  manafi,  mind,  are 
represented  in  Kumauni  by  din,  dhan,  and  man,  all  with  dental  n,  because  the  n is 
dental  in  Sanskrit.  This  rule  only  applies  to  a medial  n.  An  initial  n is  never 
cerebral. 

Kumauni  also  has  a cerebral  /,  which  is  subject  to  exactly  the  same  rules  as  the 
cerebral  n.  This  is  well  illustrated  by  the  following  pairs  of  words.  Prakrit  balarn, 
Kumauni  bal,  force,  but  Prakrit  bollai,  Kumauni  hal,  he  says ; Prakrit  kald,  Kumauni 
kal,  a machine,  but  Prakrit  kallam,  Kumauni  kal,  to-morrow  or  yesterday ; Prakrit  kald, 
Kumauni  kdlo,  black,  but  Prakrit  kallo,  Kumauni  halo,  deaf.  This  distinction  between 
dental  and  cerebral  is  is  not  marked  when  writing  in  the  Nagari  character,  but  will  be 
marked,  as  far  as  possible,  in  transliteration.  It  must  be  remembered  that,  as  in  tlio  case 
of  n,  an  initial  l is  never  cerebral. 

The  somi-consonant  x>  or  to  is  very  often  written  »,  especially  before  i or  l.  Thus  we 
have  both  vi  and  ui  for  ' him.’ 

As  in  Khas-kura,  there  is  a preference  in  Kumauni  for  short  vowels  at  the  end  of 
a word.  Thus  we  have  nhmi,  not  ndmt,  famous,  in  the  first  line  of  Speoimen  I.  Nasaliz- 
ation by  anundaika  is  very  common,  and  is  often  omitted  in  writing.  Thus  Specimen 
I has  always  me,  while  Specimen  II  has  always  mS,  for  ‘ in,*  the  latter  being  the 
correct  pronunciation. 

Article- — The  numeral  ek,  one,  is  commonly  employed  as  an  indefinite  article. 
As  usual,  the  place  of  the  definito  article  is  supplied  by  a demonstrative  pronoun. 

Gender* — There  are  two  genders,  masculine  and  feminine.  These  generally  follow 
the  Hindi  and  Rajasthani  rales.  The  distinction  of  gender  is  not  confined  to  sex  as  in 
Khas-kura.  A few  words  which  are  feminine  in  Hindi  and  Rajasthani  are  masouline  in 
Kumauni.  Thus,  Skho,  ar  eye,  is  masculine  in  mydra  S>khd-nte,  in  my  eye  (I,  4). 

Kumber. — There  are  two  numbers,  singular  and  plural. 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


117 


Tadbhava1  nouns  which  in  Hindi  end  in  d,  in  Ivumauni,  as  in  Itnjasthilm,  end  in  o. 
Thus  Hindi  chela , Kumauni  chelo  (or  chyolo),  a son.  These  nouns  form  the  nominative 
plural  by  changing  the  final  o to  a.  Tims,  bhino,  a wall,  plural  bhind  ; buro,  old,  plural 
bufh ; or  (with  the  changes  indicated  in  the  rules  of  pronunciation)  baro,  great,  plural 
bbrb>;  charo,  a bird,  plural  chitrit  ; chelo  {chyolo),  a son,  plural  chyalh  ; bojo  (btoojo),  a 
load,  plural  bwajit. 

Feminine  nouns  in  i (or  i)  sometimes  form  the  nominative  plural  in  iya  (or  iya)  as 
in  Hindi.  Thus,  cheli,  a daughter,  nom.  plur.  cheliya,  or  cheliya,  but  this  form  is  con- 
sidered vulgar,  the  nominative,  plural  ot'  such  nouns  being  regularly  the  same  as  the  sin- 
gular. 

In  the  case  of  other  nouns,  the  nominative  plural  is  the  same  as  the  nominative 
singular.  Thus,  hitman,  a Brahman,  or  Brahmans  ; paw,  a foot  or  feet. 

C&ge. — As  in  other  Indo- Aryan  languages,  cases  are  generally  made  by  means  of 
postpositions.  Certain  nouns  are  put  into  an  oblique  form  before  these  are  added. 

In  the  case  of  most  nouns,  the  oblique  form  singular  is  the  same  as  the  nominative. 
Thus,  rebja-kani,  to  the  king;  ddimi-le,  by  the  man  ; baman-kani,  to  the  Brahman;  des- 
hai,  from  the  country.  But  masculine  tadbhava  uouns  in  o make  the  oblique  form  sin- 
gular (and  also  the  nominative  plural)  by  changing  the  o to  a.  Thus,  akho,  eye,  obi. 
form  singular  and  nom.  plur.  akhit. 

Occasionally  wc  come  across  an  oblique  form  in  ai,  which  is  used  for  all  kinds  of 
nouns.  Thus  we  have  rdjai-ki  cheli,  the  daughter  of  the  king  (II,  6).  The  ai  is  even  added 
to  a plural  oblique  form.  Thus,  pdpi,  a sinner  ; obi.  plur.  pdpin  ; but  pdp  'mai-ki  durditsit, 
the  evil  condition  of  sinners  (II,  2).  This  termination  ai  must  be  distinguished  from 
another  termination  m which  only  gives  emphasis,  and  does  not  indicate  case.  Thus,  del, 
two ; dviyai,  the  two,  both  (I,  4)  : swain,  a dream ; swainai,  merely  a dream  (II,  3)  ; 
inarm  jaso,  like  these  very  persons  (II,  2). 

Occasionally  we  also  meet  nouns  whose  nominatives  do  not  end  in  o,  yet  with  an 
old  oblique  form  in  it.  These  forms  are  usually  almost  adverbs.  Examples  in  the 
specimens  are  kdr,  time;  adhardt  khrit,  at  the  time  (of)  midnight  (II,  4) : dis,  a direc- 
tion ; uttar  di&a-huni,  towards  the  direction  (of)  the  north  (II,  3)  ; both  kun  and  kuna,  in 
ek  purab  di6ct-kit  kun- me,  doharo  pachhd-kit  kuna -me,  one  in  the  corner  {i.e.  quarter)  of 
the  East,  and  the  other  in  the  oorner  of  the  West  (I,  1). 

Once  or  twice  there  are  instances  of  an  oblique  form  singular  in  ».  Thus,  gitlan,  on 
the  neck  (II,  2)  : talau,  a pond  ; talaun,  in  the  poud  (1, 1)  : bhllan  jaso,  like  a Bhil  (II,  2). 

The  oblique  form  plural  is  made  by  adding  an  or  n to  the  nominative  plural.  If 
the  nominative  plural  ends  in  it  or  S this  is  changed  to  an.  Thus,  kutndr,  a prince,  nom. 
plur.  kutndr,  obi.  plur.  kumaran  (II,  1)  : khut,  a foot ; khutan  paf’o,  he  fell  at  his  feet 
(II,  8)  : Skho , eye  ; nom.  plur.  Skhct;  obi.  plur.  Skhan  (II,  6)  : chhyatri,  a knight;  nom. 
plur.  chhyatri  ; obi.  plur.  chhyatrin  (II,  1)  : dagafi,  a female  companion ; nom.  plur. 
(vulgar)  dagafiyd  ; obi.  plur.  dagafiyan  (I,  2). 

In  one  instance  the  oblique  plural  ends  in  nit,  instead  of  n,  viz.,  kifo,  a worm  (I, 
2)  ; ham  sab  kiranit-kh  bardbar  chhu,  we  are  all  equal  to  worms  (I,  5).  Attention  has 
been  already  drawn  to  the  form  pdpinai-ki  durda&a,  the  evil  condition  of  sinners  (II,  2) . 


1 Regarding  the  terms  tadbhava  and  tateama , see  note  on  p.  113. 


118 


CENTKAL  PAHJLrI  (KUMAUNl). 


In  tlic  above  it  will  have  been  noticed  that  the  oblique  form  is  often  employed  by 
itself,  without  any  postposition,  to  indicate  any  case,  most  usually  the  looative. 

The  following  are  further  examples  of  this  use  of  the  oblique  form 
bhth  (nom.  bhto),  on  the  road  (I,  1). 
dhura,  (gone)  to  the  mountain  top  (I,  2). 
akha,  in  the  eye  (I,  4). 
bicajh  samet,  together  with  the  load  (I,  4). 
my  lira  da  gar  a,  in  my  company,  with  me  (II,  2). 
toi-ka  kindra,  on  its  bank  (II,  3). 

Pachhd-kh  Paika-k'a  gliarpujo,  he  arrived  at  the  house  of  the  Western  hero  (1, 2). 
ghar,  (took  me)  home  (IT,  2). 

gorn-bhaisan  char  an- hit  ni , for  the  grazing  of  kino  aud  buffaloes  (I,  3). 
ek  din , on  one  day  (II,  1). 
bhllan  jaso,  like  a Bhll  (II,  2). 
tol-kh  man,  in  his  mind  (II,  7). 

There  are  the  usual  cases,  formed  respectively  with  the  following  postpositions : — 
Nominative,  no  postposition. 

Accusative,  same  as  nominative,  or  katti,  kan,  kat. 

Instrumental  and  Agent,  le ; Instr.,  kit  miiriyh  (=  Hindi  ke  mare). 

Dative,  kani,  kat,  that  (or  (hi) ; huni,  hu ; su  ; kit  lijiyii  ( = Hindi  ke  liye ). 
Ablative,  bati,  liai,  hai-ber,  from;  me-hai  ( = HindI  mP-se ) ; dagari,  with. 
Genitive,  ko  (kit,  ki ). 

TiOcative,  mi f (or  me),  in,  on  ; par,  on  ; jdl  ii  ( — Hindi  tak). 

Note  that  when  an  oblique  form  ends  in  an  unpronounced  a,  it  takes  that  a again 
into  pronunciation  before  the  postpositions  le  and  ko  (kit,  ki).  In  the  plural,  this  is 
optional  before  le.  Thus,  bhat,  a warrior,  has  its  agent  case  singular  bhata-le,  and  its 
genitive  singular  bhata-ko,  etc.  In  the  plural,  the  agent  is  bhatan-le  or  bhatana-le,  aud 
its  genitive  bhatana-ko.  If  an  oblique  case  ends  in  it,  this  it  becomes  a before  these  post- 
positions. Thus,  chdo,  a son,  has  its  agent  case  chyitla-lc,  and  its  genitive  singular 
chyhla-ko,  etc.  Before  kit,  under  the  usual  rule,  all  these  «s  become  it,  thus,  bhatanh 
ka,'chyalana-ka.  So  rhth-kii  boh  hat. , at  the  time  of  night  (1,4)  ; rish-kit  miiriyii,  through 
anger  (I,  2)  ; purab  dish-kit  kun-me,  in  the  direction  of  the  Eastern  quarter  (1, 1) ; puraba- 
kh  paika-le,  by  the  hero  of  the  East  (1, 1).  In  writing,  however,  this  change  of  a to  a , 
and  vice-versa,  is  often  not  followed,  so  that  in  the  specimens  we  find  regularly  chyhla- 
le,  chyalit-ko.  This  has  been  corrected  in  the  transliteration. 

We  may,  therefore,  thus  decline  the  two  nouns,  bhat,  a warrior,  and  chelo,  a son  : 

Sing.  l>lur. 

lSTom.  bhat  bhat. 


Acc.  bhat,  bhat-kani 

Instr.  & A g.  bhata-le 

Dat.  bhat-kani 

Abi.  bhat - ha  i 

Gen.  bhata-ko , bhata-kh,  bhata-ki 

Loc.  hhat-me 

Voc.  are  bnat 


bhat,  bhatan-kani. 
bhatan-le,  bhatana-le. 

bhatan-kani. 

bhatan-hai. 

I hat  ana- ko,  bhalanh-kh,  bhalana-ki. 

bhatan-me, 

are  bhatau. 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


119 


Sing. 

Nom.  ohelo  (vulg.  chyolo ) 

Acc.  chelo,  chyala-katjii 

Instr.  & Ag.  chyhla-le 

Dat.  rhyalh-kaui 

Abl.  chyalh-hai 

Gen.  chyala-ko,  chyalh-ka , chyala-ki 

Loc.  chyhla-m & 

Voc.  are  chyala . 

For  other  nouns  we  may  quote : — 


Plur. 

chyhUt. 

chyala,  chyalan-kani. 
chyalan-le , chyhlana-le. 

chyalan-kani. 

chyalon-hai. 

cyhlana-ko,  chyalana-ka,  chyala na-ki • 

chyalan-mi. 

are  chyalau. 


Sing. 


Nom. 

rhjh,  a king 
chafo, 


a bird 
, a horse 


ghoro, 
adimi,  a man 
dSku,  a robber 
hat  an,  a traveller 
dagari,  a female  companion 


Plur. 

Ob).  Nom. 

raja  (gen.  raja-ko ) mja 
chhra  cliar'a 

ghwara  ghicard 

adimi  adimi 

dSku  daku 

batau  batau  or  batinod 

dagari  dagari  (vulg. 

dagariya) 


Obi. 

rajan. 
char  an. 
ghtcaran. 

aditnin. 
dakun. 
bat  atm. 
dagarin  (vulg. 

dagariyan). 

It  is  unnecessary  to  give  many  examples  of  the  Nominative.  The  following  will 


suffice : — 

Paik-kani  bari  rla  at  (for  at),  great  anger  came  to  the  hero  (I,  2). 
ek  ban  hhtilai  phni  piti-eu  tti  talan-me  ago,  a wild  elephant  also  entered  that  pond 
to  drink  water  (I,  1). 

chyolo  tero  hai  ga-chh , a son  has  boon  born  to  yon  (II,  1). 
hgo  bctlo,  fire  was  lit  (II,  5). 

ek  bafi  sundar  dekhani  chant  jwein  syairti  chhi,  there  was  a very  beautiful  young 
woman,  fair  to  look  upon  (II,  5). 

blch-mi  Pdrbati-kd  pan  chhan,  in  the  midst  are  footprints  of  Parvati  (IT,  3). 
wl-kani  dagariya  (nom.  sing,  dagariyo)  tci-kd  ktee  ton  ni  mila,  he  found  none  of 
bis  companions  there  (II,  7). 

Idkdfa  ek-batta  khrd,  sticks  were  collected  (II,  5). 

The  case  of  the  Agent  is  employed  exactly  as  in  Hindi  (and  not  as  in  Khas-kura) 
being  used  only  with  the  subjects  of  transitive  verbs  in  tenses  formed  from  tlio  past 
participle.  Tlio  verb  agrees  in  gender  and  person  with  the  object,  wdien  the  object 
is  in  the  form  of  the  nominative.  If  the  object  lias  tin*  postposition  kani  (Hindi  kb)  the 
verb  remains  in  the  masculine,  exactly  as  in  Hindi.  In  Kumauni,  this  case  is  exactly 
the  same  in  form  as  the  instrumental,  its  postposition  (as  in  Khas-kura)  being  le.  A 
few  examples  will  suffice  here.  Others  will  be  found  under  the  head  of  verbs : — 
tel  ddimi-le  wl-thai  yo  kayo , that  man  said  to  him  (II,  2). 
bufiya-le  kayo , the  old  woman  said  (I,  3). 

rdja-le  muni- hi  bat  (fom.)  mhni-ll,  the  king  obeyed  the  word  of  the  saint  (II,  1), 
ek-eka-le  yau  sari  bat  (fern,  plur.)  kaiti,  each  one  told  all  these  things  (I,  4). 
tnybra  dagariyana-le  ek  hcima#  pakafo,  my  companions  seized  a Brahman  (II,  2). 


120  CENTRAL  TAHARI  (TvUMATTNI). 

The  usual  postposition  of  the.  Accusative  is  £«?**»  used  exactly  lj^e  the  Hindi  kd. 
As  in  Hindi,  and  under  the  same  oircumstances,  the  accusative,  whqp  not  definite^  has  the 
form  of  the  nominative.  Examples  are  : — t 

rdja-kd  chyalh-kaiti  bhalo  ddirni  samaji-ber,  having  recognised  the  king's  son  as 
a good  man  (II,  2).  * . 

baman-kani  ni  mdrau , do  not  kill  the  Brahman  (II,  2). 

ahra  banh-kd  rukhan-kani  vphri-ber,  having  torn  up  the  trees  o|  the  whole  forest 

(L  2). 

d hatry ft  Teat *,  mako  courage,  i.e.  take  heart  (II,  6). 

ui-kani  (dative)  rwath  din  ja-chhu,  I am  going  to  give  loaves  to  him  (I,  3). 

The  following  examples  show  the  use  and  force  of  the  various  postpositions  of  the 

Dative : — 

Bdjbahan-kani  d$aj  bhayo,  to  Rajavahana  there  became  astonishment  (i.e.  he  was 
astonished)  (II,  2). 

ye-kani  pdpinai-ki  durdash  dekhai-ber,  having  shown  to  this  (person)  the  evil 
state  of  sinners  (II,  2). 

Jamd-kd  dut  mai-kani  (acc.)  Jam-raj -that  li-gityd,  the  messengers  of  Tama  took 
me  away  to  King  Yama  (II,  2). 

Mdtanga-le  kuwar-thai  kayo , Matanga  said  to  the  prince  (II,  3).  Note  that  verbs 
of  saying  have  the  indirect  object  in  the  dative,  not  in  the  ablative  as  it  would 
be  in  Hindi  ( [kutoar-ae  kahd ). 

bimbard-kd  mukh-thai  pujo,  he  came  to  tho  mouth  of  the  cave  (II,  7). 
ui-ki  cheli-th§  JPaika-ko  patio  puchho,  he  asked  to  (i.e.  from)  his  daughter  the 
whereabouts  of  the  hero  (I,  2). 

u yeth-uth  desan-hut.it  nhai-gayd,  they  went  away  hither  and  thither  to  (various) 
countries  (II,  4). 

gau-huni  bath  Idgd,  they  started  on  the  way  to  the  village  (I,  3). 
pant  pin-8U  ui  talau-me  hyo,  he  came  into  that  pond  for  drinking  water  (I,  1). 
hpani  dagariyan-kani  dekhaun-au  hpani  klialdi-me  dhari-liyo,  she  placed  it  in  her 
pocket  for  showing  it  to  her  friends  (I,  2). 

m 

shmalh-kd  lijiyd  ahtu-ko  thaifo,  a sack  of  sat lu  for  provision  (for  the  journey) 

(1.1). 

The  postpositions  of  the  Instrumental  case  are  le  and  kh  rnariyh.  The  latter 
corresponds  to  the  Hindi  ke  mane.  Examples  are  : — 

band-kit  mirag  hpani  bdna-le  talau-me  dyd,  the  beasts  of  the  forest  came  into  the 
pond  by  (i.e.  according  to)  their  habit  (I,  1). 
chillat  karo,  jai-le  ui  Paika-ki  nln  tati  gai,  ho  made  a scream,  by  wh^h  the 
sleep  of  that  hero  was  broken  (I.  1 . 

dara-ka  mhriyd  bhhji  gai , through  fear  she  ran  away  (I,  2).  Hindi  (defr-ke  marS). 

The  following  examples  illustrate  tho  use  of  the  Ablative  postpositions  : — ^ 

hgh-bafi  bhair  nikalo,  he  emerged  from  the  fire  (II,  5).  (Compare  dgd-hai,  below). 
toi-ka  akhan-bati  asu  hi  paitha,  tears  began  to  come  from  her  oyes  (II,  6).  Com- 
pare akha-hai , below). 

u>i  din-bafi  mat  hphnh-clagariyan-h ai  alag  rS-chhu,  from  that  day  I dwell  apart 
from  ray  companions  (II,  2.) 


121 


1 STANDARD  .DIALECT. 

ka-bafi  d^fbhai,  wfience  hast  tlioA  come  (II,  2)  f 
jMb-bati  mat  jtbdn  bhay&,  since  I have  been  a youth  (II,  $). 
jaawe  Mdtang  aga-hai  bhctir  d-chhtyo,  as  Matanga  came  out  from  the  fire  (II,  5). 
(Compare  hgh-b'ati,  above.) 

Skhh-hai  nikhli-ber,  having  extracted  (the  bit  of  grass)  from  her  eye  (I,  4). 
(Compare  a khan-bat  i,  above.) 

miran-hai  flag  hat-jai,  having  become  apart  from  the  others  (It,  3). 
jo  mai-le  dakun-hai  bachd-chhiyo , (the  Brahman)  whom  I had  saved  from  the 
robbers  (II,  2). 

hpani  khaldi-me-hai  ghri-ber,  having  taken  (it)  from  in  (i.e.  out  of)  her  pocket  (I,  4). 
As  examples  of  the  Ablative  of  comparison,  we  may  quote  : — 

ek-hai  ek  thulo,  ek-liai  ek  nano  chh,  one  is  greater  than  another,  one  is  smaller 
than  another  (I,  5) . 

dpU-dptt-kani  ye  aamadra-ki  sab  bastun-me-hai  aaban-hai  nano  jdni-ber,  (then  every 
one)  each  having  considered  himself  smaller  than  everything  from  in  (i.e.  of) 
all  the  things  of  this  world  (I,  4)  (i.e.  having  considered  himself  the  smallest 
thing  in  the  world). 

The  postposition  of  the  Genitive  is  ko.  As  in  Hindi,  the  genitive  is  an  adjective, 
and,  when  the  governing  noun  is  masculine  and  is  not  in  the  nominative  singular  or  in 
that  form  of  the  accusative  singular  which  is  the  same  as  the  nominative  singular,  the 
ko  becomes  ka.  llemember  that  before  kd,  a becomes  a.  When  the  srovernimr  noun  is 
feminine,  the  ko  becomes  ki  under  all  circumstances.  Thus 
Pdtdla-ko  rhjd,  the  king  of  Patala  (II,  3). 
chhyatrina-ko  kdm,  the  profession  of  knights  (II,  1). 
rdjd-kd  chydld-kani,  to  tho  son  of  the  king  (II,  2). 

Jamh-kd  diit,  the  messengers  of  Yama  (II,  2). 
muni-ki  bat , the  word  of  the  saint  (II,  1). 

asurna-kd  rhjai-ki  clieli , the  daughter  of  the  king  of  the  Asuras  (II,  6). 
icajirna-ki  saldha-le,  with  the  advice  of  the  viziers  (II,  6). 
dharma-ki  puatak , hooks  of  religion  (II,  2). 

Other  examples  will  be  found  under  the  head  of  adjectives. 

The  genitive  is  sometimes  used  in  senses  where  in  English  we  should  employ  another 
case.  Thus,  ndma-kd  banian,  Brahmans  of  name  (i.e.  Brahmans  in  name)  (II,  2). 

The  most  common  postpositions  of  tho  Locativd  are  m&,  mat  or  me,  in  or  on,  and 
jalai,  up  to.  Par,  on,  is  also  used  by  the  vulgar.  Tlius,  jahgal-mS,  in  the  forest  (II,  2) ; 
atoaUpmS,  in  a dream  (II,  3) ; hpani  khaldi-me,  in  her  pocket  (I,  2)  : hphnd  khtoard-me, 
on  his  own  head  (I,  2)  : thtodrd  dinan-jalai,  up  to  (i.e.  for)  a few  days  (II,  2). 

Other  postpositions  which  indicate  locality  are  dagari  or  dagafd,  with,  and  najU, 
^uear.  Examples  are : — 

kumdran-dagari  toi-kani  bhair  bhejo , he  sent  him  forth  with  the  princes  (II,  1). 
vsl-kd  dagdfd  jdna-ko  kardr , an  agreement  of  going  with  him  (II,  4). 
tydrh  dagdfd , with  thee  (II,  3). 
tit  talau-ka  najik,  near  that  tank  (1, 1). 

ui  talau-kd  najlkd-kd  banh-kd  mirag,  the  beasts  of  tho  forest  of  near  that  tank  (1, 1). 

VOL.  TX,  PART  ft.  R J 


122 


centra!  vahari  (kumaunI). 


It  will  be  seen  that  all  these  except  dagafi  govern  an  oblique  genitive. 

The  Vocative  in  the  singular  is  always  the  same  as  the  oblique  form.  In  the 
plural  it  usually  takes  the  suflix  an  as  shown  in  the  paradigms.  Sometimes  we  find  a 
plural  noun  taking  a instead  of  an. 

Adjectives* — Excopt  tadbham  adjectives  ending  in  o and  a few  others,  all  adjec- 
tives are  immutable.  Thus  the  feminine  of  sundar  is  sundar,  as  in  : — 
eh  bari  sundar  jtodn  syaini,  a very  beautiful  young  woman  (II,  5). 

Tadbhava  adjectives  in  o (and  these  include  all  genitives)  follow  the  analogy  of 
Hindi.  That  is  to  say,  they  change  o to  a when  agreeing  with  a masculine  noun  which 
is  not  in  the  nominative  singular  or  in  that  form  of  the  accusative  singular  which  is  the 
same  as  the  nominative  singular.  When  agreeing  with  a feminine  noun  they  ohange 
o to  i throughout.  The  following  are  examples  (including  further  examples  of  the 
genitive) : — 


doharo  Tachho-ka  knna-me  raii-chhiyo,  the  second  (hero)  lived  in  the  West  (I  1) 
jaso  chyblo  tn  cha-chhiye,  taso  chyolo  tero  hai  ga-chh,  what  kind  of  son  you  were 
desiring,  that  kind  of  son  has  become  yours  (II,  1). 
bhalo  ddimi  samaji-ber,  recognizing  (him)  as  a good  man  (II,  2). 
eka-ka  ndm  suni-ber,  having  heard  the  name  of  the  one  (I,  1). 
dakuna-ko  ham,  the  profession  of  robbers  (II,  2). 
thmtra  (nom.  thoro)  dhil-me,  in  a short  interval  (II,  5). 
myhrii  (nom.  mero)  dkha-me,  in  my  eye  (I,  4). 
myhrh  an-tne,  in  my  body  (II,  2). 
hpiinh  des-hai,  from  his  own  country  (II,  1). 

liindhydchala-kb  jangal-me,  in  the  forest  of  Vindhyachala  (II,  2). 
tci-ka  ghlan , on  his  neck  (II,  2). 

ye-kh  marana-ko  bakhat,  the  time  of  the  death  of  this  (person)  (II,  2). 

myara  (nom.  mero ) dagariyh  rdji  huner  nh'atan,  my  companions  will  not  be 
agreeing  (II,  4).  e 


Ihkarli  ek-batla  k'ara,  sticks  were  made  collected  (II,  5). 

wi-ka  lukara  bafa  (nom.  sing,  baro)  sundar  chhiya,  her  clothes  were  very  beauti- 
ful (II,  5). 

thrntfh  dinan  jalai,  for  a few  days  (II,  2). 

tt>S-kh  pafinai-ki  dnrclMa,  the  evil  condition  of  the  sinners  of  tlwt  niece  (U  91 
ipW.Jagariyan-iai  a I am  dwelling  apart  from  my  compare 

wl-ka  Skhan-bati,  from  her  eyes  (II,  6). 

bari  ris  hi  (for  ai),  a great  anger  came  (I,  2 ; II,  2). 

pdpmai-ki durdhsa,  the  evil  condition  of  sinners ’(see  above). 
adimina-ki  baft  bhlr,  a great  crowd  of  men  (II,  5). 

jabmahkani  apani  sudh  ai,  when  my  consciousness  came  to  me  (II,  2) 

Maha deb-j yu-kt  puja,  worship  of  Mahadeva-ji  (If,  2).  ' ' 

hpa#i  bana-le,  according  to  their  own  habit  (T,  1).* 
dohari  fhaur  nasi  lh-;.  went  away  to  another  plaoe  (I  1) 
path  syatm-le  kayo , the  first  woman  said  (I,  4).  ’ 


STANDARD  DIALS  C^T. 


123 


hphyh,  wajirna-ki  saldha-le,  with  the  advice  of  mv  viziers  (II,  0). 

hpavi  dagafiyan-kani  dekhaun-su,  for  showing  to  her  own  (female)  friends  (I,  2). 

Comparison  is  made,  as  in  Hindi,  by  putting  the  thing  with  which  comparison  is 
made  in  the  ablative  case.  Examples  are  given  under  the  head  of  the  ablative. 

PRONOUNS,  (a)  Personal  Pronouns  . — the  first  two  personal  pronouns  are 
declined  as  follows  : — 


Sing.  Nominative 
Agent 
Accusative 
Genitive 
Oblique  form 

Plur.  Nominative 
Agent 
Genitive 
Oblique  form 


I. 

mat 

mai-le 

■mat  (- kniti ) 

mero  (vulgar  my  dr  o) 

mm 

hum 

hama-le 

hamaro 

human 


Thou. 

tn 

tiel-le 
tied  (- kani ) 
lent  (vulgar  tyoro) 
ticl,  tvoe 

turn 
tmna-le 
tumaro 
t iiman 


In  the  above  the  plural  is  commonly  employed  honorificallv  for  the  singular.  An 
emphatic  form  of  tn  is  tu-l,  thou  verily,  thou  only.  Following  the  usual  rule  of  pro- 
nunciation the  oblique  forms  of  hamaro  and  tumaro  are  hamurh  and  tnniaru,  respectively. 
Examples  of  tho  use  of  these  two  pronouns  are  the  following  : — 

jab-bati  mat  jicdn  bhayU , mai-le  lai  lilt-pit  bahaut  kari-chh,  ever  since  I 
became  a youth,  I also  have  done  much  robbery  (II,  2). 
max  Asurna-ka  rhjai-ki  cheli  chhu,  I am  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  the 
Asuras  (II,  <>). 

mai-le  nnan-tlwi  kayo,  I said  to  them  (II,  2). 

tol-kani  mat  dekhi-ber  tith  liigi,  to  him,  having  seen  me,  there  came  a feeling 
of  compassion  (II,  C). 
mai-kani  mhri-diyo,  they  killed  me  (II,  2). 
mai-kani  ghar  lijai,  having  taken  me  away  home  (II,  2). 
mai-kani  apani  audh  cii,  my  consciousness  came  to  me  (II,  2). 
turn  nmi-dagafi  bydt  lai  karan,  do  you  also  make  a marriage  with  me  (II,  6). 
mydro  bdb  lai  inan-ai  jaso  chhiyo,  my  father  also  was  like  these  very  people 
(H,2). 

mero  bdb  Fdtdla-ko  raja  Fisnu-le  mhri  de-c'nh,  Vishnu  has  killed  my  father, 
the  king  of  P.atala  (II,  6). 

my  hr  a ah-md  bahaut  ghau  liai  rau-chhiya,  there  were  many  wounds  in  my 
body  (II,  2). 

tea  myara  mitr  hya,  my  friends  came  there  (II,  2). 

ham  teri  tapasyd  dekhi-ber  bhrh  khusi  bhaya,  I (honorific  plural),  having  seen 
thy  austerity,  became  much  pleased  (II,  3). 
human  deS-de^an-me  tci-katii  dhnnano  chai-ehh,  it  is  proper  for  us  to  seek  aim  in 

various  countries  (II,  4). 

turn  hamari  larai  dekhi  diyau,  do  you  look  on  at  our  fighting  (I,  3). 

R Jm 

VOL.  IX,  PAXT  IV. 


124 


CENTRAL  PAHARl  (KUMAUNl). 


kai-kani  tu  yeti  % jnn  diye,  do  thou  not  allow  anyone  to  come  hither  (II,  5). 
In  ko  chhai,  who  art  thou  (fcm.)  ? (II#  6). 

achho,  tui  li  liye,  good,  do  thou,  and  thou  alone,  take  (it)  (I,  4). 
tiol-le  mai-katjti,  jab  mat  chup  hai-ber  tqpasyd  karandr-chhyS,  dukh  de-chh  ; so 
mat  ttce-kani  yo  sardp  di-chhn  ki  terit-  aur  teri  syaini-me  bichlibf  holo,  thou 
hast  troubled  me  when  I was  engaged  in  silently  performing  austerity  ; 
therefore  I give  this  curse  to  thco  that  there  will  be  separation  between  thee 
and  thy  wife  (page  CO).  (Note  terh-  ....  me  here  for  twe-mOt). 
ab  ttce-kani  phal  dinu,  now  I am  giving  to  thee  the  fruit  (of  thy  austerity) 
(II,  3). 

ttoe-dagari  bhet  karana-ki  bari  ichchhd  chhi,  there  was  a great  wish  of  making  a 
meeting  with  thee  (I,  2). 

n ttoe-dagari  byd  karalo,  lie  will  make  marriage  with  theo  (fern.)  (II,  6). 
mai-kani  ttoe-dagari  mili-ber  bari  khnki  bhai-chh,  great  joy  has  become  to  me 
on  meeting  with  thee  (II,  8). 

taso  chyulo  tero  hai  ga-cbh,  such  a son  has  become  thine  (II,  1). 

tyar'a  galanjanyo  ke-lai  ehh,  why  is  there  a Brahmanical  thread  on  thy  neck  ? 

(II,  2)  . 

teri  tapasyd  dekhi-ber , having  seen  thy  austerity  (II,  3). 

ye-vlle  mat  tumaro  Sno  chai  rau-chyS,  ant'  ab  turn  tci  jag  it  dekhan-huni 
hiti-di  hdlau,  for  this  cause  I was  watching  for  your  coming ; and  do  you 
now  come  along  to  inspect  that  place  (II,  3). 
turn  harnari  larai  dekhi-diyau,  do  you  watch  our  fighting  (I,  3). 
tuma-le  myara  upar  bari  dayd  kari-chh,  you  have  made  (=  shown)  great  com- 
passion upon  (=to)  me  (page  77). 

je  tuma-le  hukam  de-chhiyo,  te  tnat-le  kari  hhla-chh,  I have  performed  the  order 
which  you  gave  (page  69). 
tumaro  Sno,  your  coming  (as  above). 

tumara  darSan  hai  gat,  your  interviews  have  occurred,  i.e.  (I)  have  met  you 
(interviews  in  plural  of  respect)  (II,  8). 
tumari  awdl-bhiri  dekhulo , l will  see  your  combat  (I,  3). 

(b)  The  Demonstrative  Pronouns  are  also  employed  as  pronouns  of  the  third  person. 
In  Rajasthani  these  have  feminine  forms  in  the  nominative  singular,  but  I have  not 
noted  any  such  forms  in  KumaunI,  and  both  pronouns  seem  to  be  throughout  of  common 
gender.  They  are  declined  as- follows 


This,  He,  She,  It. 

That,  He,  She,  It. 

Sing. 

Nom. 

yo 

u 

Acc. 

yo,  ye,  ye-kani 

it,  tof,  ui,  wl-kani,  ui-kani 

Gen. 

ye-ko 

tci-ko,  ui-ko 

Obi. 

ye  (or  yai) 

tci 

Plur. 

Nom. 

yd,  yau 

it 

Gen. 

inaro 

ttnaro 

OhI. 

inan,  in 

unan,  un 

STANDARD  DIAXEOT. 


125 


When  used  as  adjectives,  the  nominative  forms  are  employed  with  nouns  in  the 
nominative,  and  the  oblique  forms  with  nouns  in  oblique  cases.  In  and  un  are  only  used 
as  adjectives. 

The  forms  of  the  genitive  plural  Should  he  noted.  The  termination  rb  is  the  ter- 
mination of  the  genitive  in  the  Marwarl  dialect  of  Rajasthani.  As  usual,  the  oblique 
forms  of  these  genitives  are  inhrh  and  unhrh. 

An  emphatio  form  of  yo  is  ye,  this  very,  and  of  u is  ul  or  wl,  ho  indeed,  that  very 
person.  Similarly  the  emphatic  forms  of  the  oblique  plural  are  inanai  and  unandt. 

The  following  arc  examples  of  the  use  of  these  pronouns  : — 

tol  adimi-le  un-thai  yo  kayo,  that  man  said  this  to  him  (II,  2). 
yo  ek  baman-kani  bachun-mM  marl  ga-chh,  this  (person)  has  been  killed  in 
saving  a Brahman  (II,  2). 

apdn'a  purayfo  dn-me  yo  raulo,  he  will  remain  in  his  own  old  body  (II,  2). 
toi-mS  yo  kardmat  chhi,  in  it  there  was  this  power  (II,  7). 
yo  kai-ber,  having  said  this  (IT,  4). 
ye  dekhi,  seeing  this  (II,  5). 

ye-vlle  ye-kani  ehhari  diya,  for  this  reason  release  him  (II,  2). 
ye-kani  tu  swain-di  jan  samajiye,  do  not  thou  consider  this  merely  a dream 
(11,3). 

ye-kani  mulitk  jit  ana  chainl,  to  him  kingdoms  to  be  conquered  are  necessary 

(U,  1). 

ye- kit  tnarana-ko  bakhat  ni  hyo,  the  time  of  his  death  is  not  come  (II,  2). 
ye  sanisdra-ki  sab  bastun-me-hai  saban-hai  nano,  smaller  than  all  from  among 
all  things  of  this  world  (I,  4). 
ye  jangal-me,  in  this  forest  (II,  2). 

yo  bat  sochi-ber  ki  * myara  dagafiya  ye  bat-me  rdji  huner  nhatan  *,  think- 
ing this  thing  that  ‘ my  companions  will  not  be  agreeing  in  this  thing* 

(II,  A). 

ye  blch,  in  the  meantime  (II,  4). 
ye  pachhin,  after  this  (II,  2). 

yb  yeth-nth  phira,  they  wandered  hither  and  thither  (II,  2). 
ySdtoi  paik,  these  two  heroes  (I,  4). 

yd  sab  kirn  hamira  biralu-kani  dl-de,  give  all  theso  inseots  to  our  cat  (I,  4). 
myoro  bdb  lai  inan-ai  jaso  chhiyo,  my  father  also  was  just  ( ai ) like  these  people 
(II,  2). 

tt  nhai  gayo , he  went  away  (II,  2). 
u baman  milo,  that  Brahman  was  met  (II,  2). 

vnero  mdlik  Rdjbdhan  ul  ohh,  that  very  person  is  my  lord  Rajavahana  (II,  8). 

tot  dekhi-ber,  having  seen  him  (II,  2). 

tol-kani  maran  paithh,  they  began  to  kill  him  (II,  2). 

t ol-le  kayo,  he  said  (II,  1). 

toi-le  kayo , she  said  (II,  6). 

ui-le  apana  kh'aniya  satu  talau-me  khiti-diya,  he  threw  his  sattu,  which  he  had 
for  food,  into  the  pond  (I,  1). 


126 


CENTRAL  PAHARl  (KUMATTNI). 


wi  ddimi-le  rajh-kh  chyitla-thai  kayo , tlmt  man  said  to  the  king’s  son  (II,  2). 
raja -Ip  wl-kani  hpdtrn  deS-hai  bh  air  bhejo,  the  king  sent  him  forth  from  hi* 
country  (II,  1). 

vi-ka>d  ek  talau  milo,  to  him  was  met  (i.e.  he  oame  upon)  a pond  (I,  l). 
ui-kani  nritth  digit,  she  gave  loaves  to  him  (I,  3). 
wl-thaT  yo  kayo,  he  said  this  to  him  (II,  2). 

m clin-bati  mat  dphuh  dagariyan-hai  ala>)  ru-chhu,  from  that  day  I am  dwelling 
apart  from  my  companions  (II,  2). 

tof-kh  gal  an  janyo  chhi . a Brahmanical  thread  was  on  his  neok  (II,  2). 

ni-ko  niiti , her  grandson  (I,  4). 

ui-kh  pachhin-bati , from  behind  him  (I,  2). 

ui  talan-kh  najikii-kh  bana-kh  mirag,  the  wild  beasts  of  the  neighbourhood  of 
that  lake  (I,  1). 

loi-me  tu  jdye,  do  thou  go  into  it  (a  cave)  (II,  3). 

Mat  an  <7  aur  u tot  bhybl-me  puja,  Matahga  and  he  arrived  in  that  mountain 
(II,  4). 

m bakhat , at  that  time  (II,  7). 

u Pdtal-me  puji-gityit,  they  arrived  in  Patala  (II,  5). 

tmaro  baro  bhhri  pahdr  jaso  btoojo,  a great  heavy  bundle  of  them  (sc.  trees) 
like  a mountain  (I,  2). 
united  aghin-bati , in  front  of  them  (II,  5). 
unana-le  sab  jdgd  dhuno , they  searched  in  all  places  (II,  4). 
unana-le  ddimina-ki  ban  bhir  dekhi,  they  saw  a great  crowd  of  men  (II,  6). 
unan-kaui  ek  tdl  milo , they  came  upon  a lake  (II,  5). 
mai-le  nnan-thai  kayo,  I said  to  thorn  (II,  2), 
man  ck  ddimi  milo,  they  came  upon  a man  (II,  2). 
jab  unan  run  ai-chhi,  when  sleep  came  to  them  (II,  4). 

(c)  The  Reflexive  pronoun  is  dpu,  self,  which  does  not  change  in  declension 
except  that  its  genitive  is  it  pa  no  (-unit,  -atii),  own.  Aphi  is  an  emphatic  form  of  dpu. 
Examples  of  its  use  are  : — 

dpU  i ol-le  mastak-di  lakar'a  ek-batta  khret,  he  himself  collected  many  sticks 

(II,  5). 

una-le  lari  bhfr  dpu  ujyani  Uni  dekhi,  they  saw  coming  towards  themselves 
(i.  e.  them)  a great  orowd  (II,  5). 

jab  mat-kayi  apani  sudh  at,  ta  niaimle  apu-kani  gang al~ aid  paf'iyo  pdyo , when 
my  own  senses  came  to  me,  then  I found  myself  fallen  in  the  forest 

in.2). 

tab  sabana  le  dpu  dpu-kani  nano  ja  ii-ber,  then  all  each  thinking  himself  small 

(i*  ^0* 

iipttnh  des-hai  bhair  bhejo,  he  sent  them  forth  from  his  own  countrv 

(II,  I).  7 


ap'an'a  dagoriyn-lmi  alag  ru-chu , 1 dwell  apart  from  mv  own 

(II,  2). 


companions 


Somdattale  apani  hatha  ieai,  Somadatta  told  his  story  (II,  9). 

sab  but  aphi  haijtoia , all  things  will  come  to  pass  of  themselves  (page  103). 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


127 


(d)  The  Relative  pronoun  and  its  Correlative  are  declined  as  follows  : 

Who.  That,  lie,  she,  it. 


Bing. 

Nom. 

Obi. 


je,jai,jyai 


so,  tan,  te 
te,  tai , tyai 


Plur. 

Nom.  jo,  je  so,  tau,  te 

Gen.  janaro  tanaro 

Obi.  janan,  jan  (only  as  adj.)  tanan,  tan  (only  as  adj.) 

In  the  nominative  so  can  only  be  used  for  persons,  jo  and  tan  for  both  persons 
and  things,  and/c  and  te  only  for  things.  In  the  oblique  singular  jyai  and  tyai  can 
only  be  used  as  substantives  and  can  only  refer  to  things.  As  usual,  the  oblique  forms 
of  janaro  and  tanaro  are  janarit  and  tarnira.  When  used  as  an  adjective  jo  or  je  and 
so  or  te  are  employed  when  the  noun  in  agreement  is  in  the  nominative  singular  or 
plural  ; je  (or  jat)  and  te  (or  tai)  when  it  is  in  an  oblique  case  singular  ; and  jan  and  tan 
when  it  is  in  an  oblique  ease  plural. 

Examples  of  the  use  of  these  pronouns  are  : — 

ek  adimi  milojo  Bhilan  jaso  dekhi-chhiyo,  they  came  across  a man  who  looked 
like  a Hliil  (II,  2). 

u human  milo  jo  mai-le  ddkun-hai  bachd-chhiyo,  I came  across  that  Brahman 
who  had  been  saved  by  me  from  the  robbers  (II,  2). 

Matang  aur  n wl  bhydl-me  pujii  jo  Mahddeb-jy n-le  Jldtang-kani  batai  rakha - 
chhiyo,  Matanga  and  be  arrived  at  that  mountain  which  Mahadeva-ji  had 
indicated  to  Mat  ana  a (II,  4). 

wl-me  jo  lekhiyo  chhiyo  tc  paro,  what  was  written  therein  that  ho  read  (II,  5). 
je  wi-m&  lekhiyo  chh,  tc  tu  kariye,  what  is  written  therein,  that  do  thou  (II,  3). 
chhyatritia-ko  je  kdm  chh , te  kora  no  chai-chh,  it  is  proper  that  he  should  perform 
that  which  is  the  business  of  knights  (II,  1). 
bafo  chilldt  karo,  jai-le  ui  Paika-ki  nin  tnti  gai,  he  trumpeted  loudly,  by  which 
the  sleep  of  that  hero  was  broken  (I,  1). 

jai-kd  hat-mi  u rU-chhi,  toi-kani  ke  dukh  »i  hiin  pau-chhiyo,  on  whose  hand  it 
remained,  to  him  no  trouble  could  happen  (II,  7). 
jai  bakhat  u mali  hunt  dyo,  at  what  time  he  came  to  the  upper  (ground)  (II,  7). 
sdrh  banh-kh  rukhan-kani,  jo  bay  a bhrd  clihiyd,  jdr-di-bati  ttpari-ber,  having  torn 
up,  even  from  their  roots,  all  the  trees  of  the  forest  which  were  very  big  (1, 2). 
bahaut  adimi  jo  namd-kd  bdman  chhan,  janava-le  bed  chhhri-hdli,  many  men  who 
are  Brahmans  (only)  in  name,  (and)  who  have  abandoned  the  Vedas  (II,  2). 
turn  jan  bhtan-mi  man  lagtt-chlia,  on  what  things  you  are  applying  your  mind 
(page  214). 

(e)  The  Interrogative  pronoun  is  ko,  who  ? which  is  declined  like  jo,  except 
that  in  the  nominative  singular  its  inanimate  form  is  kyd  or  ke.  Examples  are : 

dekhft  ham  dwln-me  ko  baro  chh , let  us  see  who  is  the  greater  of  us  two  (I«  2)  e 
tu  ko  chhai,  who  are  you  (masc.)  (II,  2)  ? 


128 


CENTRAL  PA^ARl  (KUMAUNl). 


tu  ko  chhe,  who  are  you  (fem.)  (II,  6)  ? 

kupa-ko  he  matlab  chh,  what  is  the  object  of  (i.e.  in)  speaking  (page  28)  P , 
tea  jai-ber  he  dekha-chhi,  going  there,  what  does  she  see  (page  53)  ? 
tydrd  galan  janyo  ke-lai  chh , for  what  (i.e.  why)  is  there  a Brahmanical  thread 
on  your  neok  (II,  2). 

(/)  The  Indefinite  pronouns  art;  kwe,  ke,  kai  or  hat,  anyone,  some  one,  anything, 
something.  Ke  can  only  refer  to  inanimate  things.  The  others  may  refer  either  to 
persons  or  to  things.  The  obi.  sing,  is  (animate)  kai  or  kai  and  (inanimate)  ke  or  kya-i, 
and  the  obi.  plur.  kananai  or  (adj.)  kanai.  Tho  genitive  plural  is  kanarai  or  kanarwe. 
Jo-kwe  (Hindi  jb-kbt)  is  * whoever,  ’ and  je-ke  (Hindi  jd-kuchh)  is  ‘whatever.* 
Examples  of  these  are  : — 

, kwe  damn  nai,  let  not  anyone  he  afraid  (page  29). 
wl-ko  kwe  chyolo  nhati,  he  has  no  son  (II,  0). 

kai-kani  tu  yeti  Un  jan  diye,  do  not  allow  anyone  to  come  hither  (II,  5). 
wf-kani  dagariyd  wi-kd  kwe  wd  ni  mild,  he  did  not  find  any  of  his  companions 
there  (II,  7). 

ye  samsdr-me  ke  bdta-ko  ghamat.nl  kai  nianushya-katii  karano  ni  chain,  in  this  world 
it  is  not  proper  for  any  man  to  make  pride  of  (i.e.  in)  anything  (I,  5). 
wi-le  unan-thai  ke  ni  kayo,  he  did  not  say  anything  to  them  (II,  4). 
kai patto  ni  lago,  they  did  not  find  any  trace  (II,  4). 
ke  dukh  ni  hun  pau-chhiyo,  no  sorrow  was  permitted  to  happen  (TI,  7). 
kwe  ghari  yeth-nth phi ra nai  rayo,  for  some  time  he  kept  wandering  (II,  7). 
kai  samay-me,  once  upon  a time  (I,  1). 

je-ke  wi-le  karano  chh,  te  paill  kaicai  diyau,  send  word  beforehand  as  to  what- 
ever is  to  be  done  by  her  (page  5G). 

(g)  As  examples  of  other  pronominal  forms,  we  may  quote  : — 
eso,  yeso,  yaso  (plur.  masc.  yasa),  of  this  kind. 
eso  kari-ber,  having  done  thus  (II,  3). 

ek  yesi  (fern.)  thaur  pnjo,  he  arrived  at  such  a place  (I,  4). 
bahaut  ddimi  yasa  chhan,  there  are  many  such  men  (II,  2). 

Similarly — 

pahdr  jaso  bwSjo,  a load  like  a mountain  (I,  2). 

Bhtlanjaso,  like  a Bhil  (II,  2). 

jasi  syaini  mat  beund  chd-chhyU,  thik  yo  net  chh,  the  woman  whom  I was  wishing 
to  marry,  is  exactly  like  this  one  (page  178). 
uswe  karo,  he  did  so  (II,  5). 

jaswe  Matang  aga-hai  bhair  d-chhiyo,  taswc  nna-le  adimina-ki  bari  bhtv  dekhi,  as 
Matanga  emerged  from  the  fire,  so  (i.e.  at  the  same  time)  they  saw  a great 
crowd  of  men  (II,  5). 
yetuk  kai-ber , having  said  so  much  (I,  3). 
yetukdi-me,  in  the  meantime  (itne-hl-mi)  (I,  1). 

JPachhd-ka  Paika-ko  iardu  katuk  chh , how  much  muscular  strength  is  possessed 
by  the  hero  of  the  West  (1, 1)  ? 

wa,  there ; yd,  here ; eth  (yeth),  hither  ; uth,  thither  ; yeth-nth,  hither  and  thither  ; 
eti  (yeti),  hither ; jab,  wnen ; tab,  ihen,  and  so  on.  * 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


129 


VERBS. 

In  the  general  principles  of  its  conjugation  Kumauni  closely  follows  Hindi ; but 
the  participial  tenses  all  take  personal  terminations,  and  there  is  an  independent  passive 
voice  formed  by  adding  i to  tko  root  (as  in  Khas-kura). 

A.  Auxiliary  Verbs  and  Verbs  Substantive. 

The  Present  is 

Singular.  Plural. 

(1)  chhu,  I am.  chhu,  we  are. 

(2)  clihai,  (fern.)  chhe,  thou  art.  chhau,  you  are. 

(3)  chh,  he  is.  chiton,  they  are. 

When  this  is  employed  as  a verb  substantivo,  except  in  the  second  person  singular, 
the  above  forms  aro  of  common  gender.  Thus,  chhu  is  both  masculine  and  feminine, 
and  chh  means  both  ‘he  is  * and  * she  is.’ 

Whon  this  is  employed  as  an  auxiliary  verb,  the  second  and  third  persons  singular 
have  optional  feminine  forms,  but  aro  of  common  gender  in  the  plural.  Moreover,  when 
used  as  an  auxiliary  the  first  person  singular  is  chhu,  not  chhu,  and  the  second  person 
plural  is  chhd,  not  chhau.  We  thus  get  the  following  paradigm  for  the  Auxiliary  verb  : — 


Singular.  ! 

i 

Plural. 

Masculine. 

Feminine. 

Common  Gender. 

1 . chhH 

chhu 

\ chhu 

2.  chhai  1 

| chhe 

chh  7 

8.  chh  j 

chhya , chhe 

chhau 

The  form  chh  of  the  third  person  singular  has  in  prose  no  vowel,  and  is  pronounced 
together  with  the  final  syllable  of  the  word  which  precedes  it.  Thus,  baro  chh,  he  is 
great,  is  pronounced  barochh,  and  katuh  chh,  how  much  is  it?  is  pronounced  katukchh. 
In  poetry,  as  usual,  the  final  a may  he  pronounced,  so  that  nc  should  have  baro  chha, 
katuka  chha. 


There  is  a negative  verb  substantive  nihdtu  or  nhdtu,  I am  not,  I will  not  be,  which 
is  thus  conjugated  : — 

Singular.  Plural. 

(1)  nhdtu  (fem.  nhdtyu)  nhdtu  (fern.  nhatiyU) 

(2)  nhhtai  (fem.  nhdtye)  nhhtau  ( nhdtd ) (fern.)  nhiitiyau  (- iya ) 

(3)  nhhti  (fem.  nhdte ) nhatan  (fem.  nhatan  or  nat) 

The  Past  changes  for  gender.  It  is  the  same  in  form  whether  it  is  a verb  substan- 
tive or  an  auxiliary.  It  is  conjugated  as  follows : — 


Singular. 

Plural. 

Masco  line. 

Feminine. 

Masculine.  j 

| Feminine. 

].  chhiyi,  chhyu 

I 

chhiyu,  chhyu , I was 

i 

chhiya , chhyd 

chhiyd , ihhyd , we 

were. 

2.  chhiyd 

chht9  thou  wast 

chhiya 

chhiyd 9 you  were. 

3.  chhiya , he  was 

chhi9  she  wns 

chhiyd 

chhiu,  they  were. 

Note  that  in  the  plural  the  second  person  is  chhiyd,  but  the  third  person  chhiyd. 
voi.  ix,  pa  vs  iv.  3 


130 


CENTRAL  PAHARl  (kUMASNI). 

Instead  of  this  verb,  the  perfect  and  pluperfect  tenses  of  the  verb  r&nff,  to  remain, 
arc  very  frequently  employed  as  auxiliaries.  The  perfect,  I have  remained,  is  used  to 
mean  * I am,’  and  the  pluperfect  ‘ I had  remained  * is  used  to  mean  ‘ I was.*  As  the 
conjugation  of  this  verb  is  somewhat  irregular,  these  two  tenses  are  here  given  in  full. 

Perfect  — * I have  remained,’  * I am.’ 


Singular.  Plural. 


Masculine. 

Feminine, 

Masculine. 

Feminine. 

1.  ra-chhu,  or  ran- chliu 

| 1 
j ra i -cl ih uy  or  re -chhu 

j ’ | 

ra-chhu9  or  rau-chhu 

rai-ohhu9  re-chhu . 

2.  ra-chhai 

rai-chhr  J 

ra-chhd 

rai-chhd. 

3.  ra-chh 

rat-chhya  j 

ri  or  rai 

ri  or  ra?. 

In  the  above,  as  shown  in  the  first  person, 
for  rai. 

Pluperfect.—*  I had  remained,’  * I was.’ 

rau  may  be  substituted  for  ra,  and  ri 

Singular. 

i 

! 

Plural. 

Masculine. 

Feminine. 

| 

i 

i 

Masculine. 

j Feminine. 

1.  ra-chhiyfi 

rai-chhiyu 

1 

i 

! 

ra-chhiyti 

1 

j rai-chhiyd . 

2,  ra-chhiye 

rai-chhi 

i 

i 

ra-chhiyd 

i 

| rai-chhiyd. 

3.  ra-chhiyo 

i 

ra  i-ch  hi 

j 

i 

ra-chhiya 

j rai-chhin . 

i 

i 

As  before,  we  may  have  ran  for  ra,  and  re  for  rai.  Any  optional  form  of  the 
auxiliary  may  be  employed.  Thus,  ra-chhyU,  etc.  Similarly,  we  have  the  negatives 
ra-nhhti,  he  is  not,  and  ra-nhatan , they  are  not,  etc.,  etc. 


The  following  are  examples  of  the  use  of  Verbs  Substantive.  Examples  of 
Auxiliary  verbs  will  be  found  under  the  head  of  finite  verbs  : — 

tnyoro  nau  Hatnbdbhav  chh , mat  Magadh  desh-kd  rdja-ko  wajir  chhu,  my  name 
is  Itatnodbhava,  I -am  the  vizier  of  the  king  of  the  Magadha-country  (page  34). 

mat  Asurna-lca  rdjai-ki  cheli  Kdlindi  chhu,  I am  Kalindi,  the  daughter  of  the 
king  of  the  Asuras  (II,  G). 

tu  ko  chhai,  who  art  thou  r (masc.  TI,  2). 
tu  ko  chhe,  who  art  thou  ? (fem.  IT,  G). 

chhyatrina’ko  je  kdm  (masc.)  chh , (that)  which  is  the  business  of  knights 

(II,  1). 

jv  tpdrd  gdlanj anyo  ('em.)  ke-lai  chh,  why  is  there  a Bralimanical  thread  on  your 
*'  neck  (II,  3)  ? 

ham  Teri  orishti-mc  sahar.-hai  nnnd  chhii,  we  are  smaller  than  all  things  in  Thy 
creation  (I,  5) 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


131 


^ ^ ST' 

turn  ko  chhau,  aur  yd  ke-lai  rU-chhd,  who  arc  (vqrb  substantive)  you,  and  why  are 
(auxiliary  verb)  you  dwelling  here?  (page  146).  * 

ye  jahgal-me  bahaut  ddimi  ydad  chhan,  in  this  forest  there  are  many  men  of  this 
kind  (II,  2). 

teri  bat  (fem.)  sSchi  chhan,  thy  words  are  true  (pa"c  172). 
mat  eso  ullu  nhatu,  I am  not  such  an  owl  (page  168). 
toi-ko  ktoe  chyolo  nhdti,  of  him  there  is  not  any  son  (IT,  6). 

mydrd  dagafiyd  rdji  huner  nhdtan , my  companions  will  not  be  consenting  (II,  4). 
jetoar  aur  kardmata-ki  thaili  ab  kabhai  milaner  nat,  the  jewels  and  the  magic 
purse  (fem.)  will  never  be  got  (page  97). 

mat  yeso  sardp  Idyak  ni  chhyU,  I was  not  worthy  of  (incurring)  such  a curse 
(page  121)  (a  woman  speaks). 

jo  lekhiyo  chhiyo,  te  par o,  he  read  what  was  written  (II,  5). 
tcl-kd  g'alon  janyo  (fem.)  chhi,  on  his  neck  was  a Brahmanical  cord  (II,  2). 
jtodn  syaini  chhi,  there  was  a young  woman  (IT,  5). 

rbja-ki  cheli  aur  mat  rdj-mahald-ka  child j d-mc  baithiyd  chhiya,  (a  woman  is 
speaking),  (we,  i.e.)  the  king’s  daughter  and  I were  seated  on  the  balcony 
of  the  royal  palace  (page  101). 

tol-kd  lu hard  bard  sundar  chhiya,  her  clothes  wero  very  beautiful  (II,  5). 
jhnti  baldno,  chuguli  khdno,  gliiis  khdno,  tet-huni  kc  bat  (fem.  plur.)  ni  chhin,  aur 
lagai  sab  abgun-ai  (masc.  plur.)  chhiya,  tolling  lies,  eating  (i.e.,  doing) 
backbiting,  eating  ( i.e .,  taking)  bribes,  were  nothing  to  him,  and  also 
there  were  all  vices  (i.e.,  he  had  every  vice)  (page  215). 
wd-kd  bhitar  uchchd-me  ek  kuuj  chhiyo  ; tca-kd  jdnd-h  uni  siri  chhin  ; uol  kuftj-md 
pliul  aur  ndnd  mind  pat  bichliiyd  chliiyd  ; tea  pal  an  bichhiyo  chhiyo  ; phut - 
dan  dhariyd  chhiya  ; suna-kd  garatod  aur  pahkhh  aur  bahaut  bhali  chlj 
chhin  ; inside  that  place,  on  an  elevation,  was  an  arbour  ; there  were  steps 
for  going  to  it ; in  that  arbour  tlowers  and  various  kinds  of  leaves  were 
strewn  about;  there  there  was  a bed  spread  ; flower- vases  were  set  about ; 
there  were  golden  jars,  and  fans,  and  many  excellent  articles  (page  122). 

B.  Active  Verb.  —The  Infinitive  or  Verbal  Noun  has  two  forms, — a weak  and  a 
strong.  The  weak  infinitive  is  made  by  adding  an  to  the  root.  Thus,  hitan,  to  go.  This 
infinitive  is,  so  far  as  I have  noted,  always  used  in  an  oblique  case.  Thus,  hitana-ko,  of 
going ; hitan- huni,  for  going,  to  go. 

The  strong  infinitive  is  made  by  adding  ano  to  the  root,  with  an  oblique  form  in 
had.  Thus,  hitano,  the  act  of  going  ; hitana-ko,  of  going  ; liitdmi-huni,  to  go. 

Somo  verbs  are  irregular  iu  their  infinitives.  The  roots  d,  come ; ka,  say ; ra , 
remain ; lyd,  bring  ; kha,  eat ; and  all  causal  roots  ending  in  d,  as  dekhd,  to  cause 
to  see,  form  the  infinitives  in  nn  and  iiiio.  Thus,  uuo,  the  act  of  coming ; kuno,  the  act 
of  saying ; ruru>,  the  act  of  remaining ; lyuno,  the  act  of  bringing;  char  iiiio,  to  cause 
to  graze,  to  graze  cattle.  The  u of  the  infinitive  is  often  needlessly  nasalized,  so  that  we 
also  have  lino,  kuno,  etc.  Similarly  causals  of  the  above  five  verbs  and  all  double 
eausals  have  their  infinitives  in  auno  (aUno)  ; thus,  kaiino,  to  cause  to  say ; charauno, 
to  cause  to  feed.  This  aft  is  often  contracted  to  an,  so  that  we  also  have  kauno,  khauno 
and  charaupo. 

VO L.  IX,  PART  IV.  8 


132 


CENTRAL  PAHArI  (kUMAUNI). 


All  other  verbs  whose  roots  end  in  vowels  optionally  nasalize  them  before  the 
termination  of  the  infinitive ; and  the  termination  itself  is  n or  no,  not  an,  ayo. 
Thus : — 

ja,  go,  makes  its  strong  infinitive  jdtio  or  jdno 
di,  give  „ dino  or  dtno 

li,  take  ,,  liV°  or  Ityo 

hu,  become  „ hioio  or  huno 

Similarly,  for  the  weak  forms,  Jdn  or  Jan,  and  so  on. 

It  will  be  observed  that  the  n of  the  infinitive  termination  is  the  cerobral  n,  not  the 
s dental  n.  In  one  instance  (triven  in  the  third  example  below),  I have  come  across  a 
word  in  which  the  n is  dental  ( karan , not  karan).  Wo  can  compare  this  with  the  rule 
in  Panjabi,  in  which  the  « of  the  infinitive  usually,  but  not  always,  becomes  n after  a 
root,  ending  in  r.  In  Kumauni  the  n does  not  necessarily  become  n,  for  in  the  very  first 
example  given  below  we  have  inaran,  not  mar  a n,  and  near  the  end  of  the  examples, 
wo  have  karano,  not  karano. 

The  following  ai*e  examples  of  the  use  of  the  infinitive  : — 

(a)  Weak  forms — 

ye-k'a  mararta-ko  bakhat  ni  ayo,  auryo  ek  baman-kani  bachun-me  marl  ga-chh,  the 
time  of  this  one’s  death  is  not  come,  and  he  has  been  killed  in  saving  a 
Brahman  (II,  2). 

lautana-ki  at,  the  (idea)  of  returning  came  (to  him)  (II,  7). 

tuie  dagari  bhet  karana-ki  lari  ichchlid  chhi,  there  was  a great  desire  of  (i.e.,  for) 
making  a meeting  with  thee  (I,  2). 

wl  jag  a dekha  n-huni  hili-di  Mian,  come  and  sot  out  for  seeing  that  place  (II,  3). 
sastan-huni  baithi  gayo,  he  sat  down  to  rest  himself  (II,  7). 
phni  dhnnan-huni  nasi  ghy'a,  they  went  away  to  search  for  water  (I,  1). 
lakarh  katan-liuni  dhara  jai-rai,  he  (honorific  plural)  has  gono  to  the  top  of  the 
mountain  to  cut  wood  (I,  2). 

goru-bhalsan  charun-huni  ban  jai-ra-chh , he  has  gone  to  the  forest  to  graze 
cattle  (I,  3). 

ialau-me  pant  pin-su  ay  a,  they  came  to  drink  (lit.  for  drinking)  water  in  the 
pond  (I,  1). 

Faehho-ka  Paika-ki  cheli  «»  bakhat  dhdn  kutan  Vagi  re-chhi,  the  daughter  of  tho 
Hero  of  the  West  was  at  that  time  engaged  (in)  pounding  paddy  (I,  .2,  Of.  I,  4). 
apani  dagariyan-kani  dekha  un-su  hpani  khaldi-me  dhari  liyo,  she  put  it  in  her 
pocket  to  show  to  her  friends  (I,  2). 

yd  dwi  Talk  tod  laran-su  tdydr  bhaya,  these  two  Heroes  became  ready  for  fighting 
there  (I,  4). 

tci-kani  nihran  paitha,  they  began  to  kill  him  (II,  2). 
ek  sahar  dekhiu  paitho,  a city  began  to  be  visible  (LI,  5). 
hkhan-bati  dsn  uu  paitha , tears  began  to  come  from  (her)  eyes  (II,  6). 
kaman  paitha,  they  began  to  tremble  (I,  4). 

kai-kani  tu  yeti  tin.  jan  dit/e , do  not  allow  anyone  to  come  hither  (IT,  6). 

dukh  ni  hv.n  pau-chhiyo,  sorrow  was  not  getting  (permission)  to  occur  (i.e.  could 
not  occur)  (II,  7). 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


133 


u Paik  dhurh-huni  jay,  Ihgi  ra-ohhiyo , that  Hero  set  out  to  go  to  the  top  of  the 
mountain  (I,  2). 

btoojo  hphnh  ghar-huni  lyun  Ihgi  ra-ohhiyo , he  set  out  to  bring  the  load  to  his 
own  house  (I,  2). 

(6)  Strong  forms— 

jhuti  baldno , chugull  khdno , ghus  khdno  wi-huni  ke  bat  ni  chhin,  telling  lies, 
backbiting,  and  taking  bribes  were  nothing  to  him  (page  215). 

ye-vlle  mat  tumaro  Uno  chai  rau-ohhyU,  for  this  reason  was  I looking  for  your 
coming  (II,  3). 

tol-kani  dhunano  chai-chh,  to  search  for  hirn  is  proper  (».<?.  we  must  search  for  f 
him)  (II,  4). 

kuwar-kani  anyarh-md  hitano  paro,  to  walk  in  darkness  fell  to  the  prince  (i.e.,  he 
had  to  walk  in  darkness)  (II,  7). 

PachhB-ka  Paika-ko  tardy  Icatuk  chh  parakhayo  chai-chh,  I must  test  how  much 
muscular  strength  the  Western  Hero  has  (I,  1). 

ghamayd  kai  manushya-kani  karayo  ni  chhain,  it  is  not  proper  for  anv  man  to 
show  (lit.  mako)  pride  (I,  4). 

ui-kayi  rwath  dina  ja-chhu,  I am  going  to  give  loaves  to  him  (I,  3). 

kuvoara-le  toi-kh  daghrh  jhyh-ko  kardr  lcaro,  the  prince  agreed  to  go  with  him 
(II,  4). 

mai-lc  batai-bath  jdyh-ko  chhanamandt  suno,  I heard  the  tramp  of  (their)  going 
along  the  road  (page  197). 

mai  ek  siddh-thai  saldh  liyd-huyi  gai-chhyU,  I went  to  a holy  man  to  take  advice 

(II.  6). 

raja  sab  aphyh  waj Iran- kani  aur  naukaray-kayi  santudrh-kh  kindrh  hau  khaunh - 
hunt  li-gayo,  the  king  took  away  his  viziers  and  servants  to  the  sea-shore  to 
cause  them  to  eat  the  air  (page  201). 

bahaut  des  ruyh  layak  chhan , many  countries  are  fit  to  dwell  in  (page  165). 

The  Present  Participle  is  formed  in  the  same  way  as  the  strong  infinitive,  except 
that  the  n is  usually  dental,  not  cerebral.  Thus,  hifano," going. 

The  derivation  of  the  participle  shows  that  the  n,  being  desoendel  from  an  older 
mt,  is  certainly  the  correct  form ; but,  nevertheless,  the  participle  is  frequently  written 
with  an  ^instead,  thus  (incorrectly,  according  to  the  derivation)  hit  a no,  agreeing  with 
the  infinitivo,  with  which  it  is  therefore  liable  to  be  confused. 

The  present  participle  does  not  often  occur  in  the  direct  form,  but  its  oblique  form 
is  extremely  common.  This  obliquo  form  may  bo  either  hitanai  (really  an  old  locative), 
or  hithnh.  Both  of  those  are  frequently  spelt,  as  is  shown  by  the  examples  below, 
with  a cerebral  ». 

This  oblique  present  participle,  hitanai  or  hit  amt,  means  ‘ in  going,’  ‘ while  going,' 
and  is  exactly  equivalent  to  the  English  ‘ a-going.’  It  is  frequently  used  with  the  past 
tenses  of  verb  rSyd,  to  remain,  of  which,  as  has  boon  shown  under  the  head  of  auxiliary 
verbs,  the  perfect  ra-chhU,  I have  remained,  is  equivalent  to  * I am,’  ‘ I shall  he,*  and  the 
pluperfect  ra-chhyS,  I had  remained,  is  equivalent  to  * I was.’  Pinally,  the  past  tense 


134 


CENTRAL  PAfcA.Rl  (KCMAUNI). 


* rayV * is  in  this  connection  employed  in  its  proper  sense  of  * I remained/  ‘ I continue/ 
We  thus  get  the  following  sots  of  forms  : — 

hi  fanai- (or  hifiinh-)  raytt,  I remained  a-going,  I continued  going. 
hifanaira- (or  hi thiiara- )chhu  (for  hitanai  ra-clihu,  otc.),  I am  a-going,  I go,  or 
even,  I shall  go. 

Mfanctira- (or  hithnara-)  chhiiji  (for  hitanai  ra-chhiyU,  etc.),  I was  a-going,  I waa 
going. 

,;r.  I hare  not  met  any  example  of  the  nominative  masculine  singular  of  this  participle 
used  in  its  correct  sonso.  But  the  participle  is  also  employed  as  the  third  person  singular 
of  the  past  conditional  (like  the  Hindi  chaltd,  if  ho  had  gone),  and  of  that  I have  found 
one  instance.  I am,  howevor,  able  to  give  good  examples  of  the  feminine  and  of  the 
masculine  nominative  plural.  The  feminine  of  hitano  is,  as  usual,  hitani,  and  the 
masculine  plural  is  hitand. 


Thus : — 


mat  (fern.)  mart  jdnyU,  ta  hhalo  huno,  if  I had  died,  it  would  have  been  well; 

equivalent  to  the  Hindi  (jo)  mat  mar  jit  tl,  to  hhald  hold  (page  182). 
jab  mat  bagiclia-me  sochani  sochani  phiranai  ra-chhyU , when  I (fem.)  remained 
a-wandering  meditating,  meditating,  in  the  garden  (page  195). 
una-le  adimina-ki  baft  bhir  (fem.)  uni  dekhi,  they  saw  a great  crowd  of  men 
coming  (II,  5). 

Mat  ah  g Mahdd  eb-jya-  kb  bachan  (plur.  masc.)  purli  huna  dekhi- her,  IVIatanga 
having  seen  the  words  of  Mahadeva-ji  becoming  fulfilled  (II,  6). 

As  examples  of  the  oblique  form  we  have  : — 

mat  bin  li-ber  apario  man  bclamunai-rayU,  I having  taken  a harp,  keep  a-diverting 
my  mind  (page  164). 

yeth-uth  phiranai-rayo,  he  remained  a-wandering  hither  and  thither,  i.e.,  lie 
continued  to  wander  (II,  7). 

sbri  rat  bat  karanai-raya,  the  whole  night  we  remained  a-making  words,  i.e,,  we 
kept  conversing  (pages  167,  168). 

tcl-mS  phaiik  chamakanai-rt,  in  it  many  crystals  have  remained  a-glittering,  i.e., 
arc  glittering  (II,  3). 


* ann-pani  chhori-ber  maranu  * kunai-rt,  they  are  saying,  * having  abandoned  * 
(and)  water  we  die  ’ (page  195). 

ek  din  u dik  hai-ber  yeth-vth  janai-rai-chhi,  one  day,  she  being  in  trouble,  was 
a-going  hither  and  thither  (page  182). 


it  lot  meri  taraph  bhali-kai  chanai-rai-chhi,  she  also  kept  a-looking  well  in  my 
direction  (page  80).  ’ 

Compare,  however, — 

jab  u janai-rai-chhi,  ta  mai-ujyani  bhaut  her  chdni,  when  she  was  goin g away 
then  she  looked  in  my  direction  (page  166). 

ek  siddh  ham  karanara-chh  (for  kardn'a  ra-chh ),  a holy  man  is  doing  sacrifice 
(page  198).  ° 

ek  jwdn  ddimi  kh e -a nara -eh h (for  khelunh  ra-chh),  a young  mania  sporting 


STANDARD  tflALECT. 


135 


turn  bahaut  din-bati  phiranara-chhd  (for  phirhnh  ra-chhd),  you  are  a-wandering 
from  («.<?.  for)  many  days  (page  156). 

tu  ke  karhnhra-chhiye  (for  karana  ra-chhiye ),  what  wast  thou  a-doing  (II,  9)  ? 
jab  ham  gau-bati  sahar-me  u uara-chhiyd  (for  iCnh  ra-chhiyd) , when  wo  were 
coming  from  the  village  into  the  city  (page  84). 

The  Past  Participle  may  be  either  verbal  or  adjectival.  The  verbal  past  parti- 
ciple may  be  either  weak  or  strong. 

The  weak  veibal  past  participle  is  formed  by  adding  a to  the  root.  Thus,  hi(a, 
fem.  hiti,  gone.  The  plural  is  the  same  as  the  singular  in  both  genders.  This  form  of 
the  past  participle  is  only  used  to  make  the  perfect  and  pluperfect  tenses,  with  the 
addition  of  auxiliary  verbs:  Thus,  hita-chh,  ho  has  gone;  hiti-chh,  she  has  gone; 
hita -chhiyo,  he  had  gone ; hiti-chhya,  she  had  gono. 

Gausal  verbs,  whose  infinitives  end  in  uno,  form  the  weak  past  participle  in  d. 
Thus,  from  bachuno,  to  preserve  (II.  bachdnd ),  we  have  bachd,  fem.  bachai  or  bache. 

The  following  weak  verbal  past  participles  are  also  irregular  : — 

Weak  Veubal  Past  Pabticiples. 


Infinitives. 

Masculine. 

Feminine. 

runo,  to  remain 

m or  rau 

rai 

kuno,  to  say 

ka  or  kau 

kai 

uno,  to  come 

d 

ai 

lyuno , to  bring 

lyd 

lyai 

jdno,  to  go 

ga  or  gan 

gai 

httno,  to  become 

blia  or  bhau 

bhai 

ditto,  to  give 

de 

di 

lino,  to  take 

le 

ll 

The  strong  verbal  past  participle  is  formed  by  changing  the  final  a of  the  weak 
verbal  past  participle  to  o.  Thus,  hito,  masc.  plur.  hita;  fem.  sing,  and  plur.  hiti. 
This  past  participle  is  employed  only  in  the  formation  of  the  past  tense.  Thus,  hito , he 
went. 

Causal  verbs  form  the  past  participle  in  ayo.  Thus,  bachhyo,  preserved,  fem.  bachai 

or  bachai . The  following  are  irregular  : — 

Strong  Verbal  Past  Participles. 


Infinitives. 

Masc.  Sing. 

Pern.  Sing. 

runo,  to  remain 

ra  yo 

rai  or  re 

kutio,  to  say 

kayo 

kai  or  ke 

uno,  to  come 

ayo 

ai  or  ai 

lyutto , to  bring 

lyhyo 

lyai  or  lyai 

jdyo,  to  go 

gayo 

gai  or  ge 

hutfo,  to  becomo 

bhayo 

bhai  or  bhe 

dirto,  to  give 

diyo  - 

di  (plur.  din ) 

Hina,  to  take 

liyo 

It  (plur.  lin) 

The  adjectival  past  participle  is  formed  by  changing  the  o of  the  strong  verbal  past 
participle  to  iyo.  Thus,  hiiiyo,  gone.  It  is  used  whon  the  participle  is  employed  as  an 
independent  adjective.  Its  feminino  singular  is  hiti  and  its  plural  (both  genders)  is 
We  should  expect  the  feminine  plural  to  be  hiti,  not  hifiyd,  but  this  is  not 


136 


CENTRAL  PAHArI  (KUMAUNI).  * 

bomo  out  by  the  examples  which  I have  collected.  I have  not  come  across  any 
examples  of  adjectival  past  participles  of  the  irregular  verbs. 

As  in  Hindi,  the  past  participles  of  transitive  verbs  are  passive,  and  when  used  to 
form  tenses  must  be  construed  with  the  subject  in  the  agent  oase.  The  verb  lyuqo,  to 
bring,  like  the  Hindi  land,  is  treated  as  intransitive. 

As  the  verbal  past  participles  are  only  employed  in  tho  formation  of  finite  tenses, 
no  examples  of  them  can  bo  given  here.  The  following  are  examples  of  the  use  of  the 
adjeotival  participle : — 

mai-le  dpU-kani  jangal-mi pafiyo  petyo,  I^found  myself  fallen  (i.e.,  lying)  in 
the  forest  (II,  2). 

ttce-kani  ek  lekhiyo  tamit  pair  milalo.  Je  icl-me  lekhiyo  chh,  te  tn  kariye,  you 
will  find  a written  copper  tablet.  Do  what  is  written  in  it  (II,  3). 
nau  kutnar  Mdjbdhan-kani  haritiyo  dekhi-ber,  the  nine  prinoes  having  seen  {i.e., 
considered)  that  Rajaviibana  was  lost  (II,  4). 
doharo  rls-me  bhariyo  rau-chhiyo,  the  other  was  remaining  filled  with  anger 

(I»  !)• 

t oi  kunj-mi  phul  aur  ndnd  ndnd  pat  bichhiya  chhiya,  tea  palan  bichhiyo  chhiyo, 
phul-ddn  dhariya  chhiya,  in  that  arbour  flowers  and  various  leaves  were 
scattered;  there  a bed  was  spread,  (and)  flower-jars  were  placed  (page  122). 
raja-ki  cheli  aur  mat  rdj-mahala-kh  chlutja-nie  bait  high  chhiya,  (w c,viz.)  the 
daughter  of  the  king  and  I (a  woman  is  speaking)  were  seated  in  a balcony 
of  the  royal  palace  (page  101). 

The  Future  Passive  Participle  is  exactly  the  same  in  form  as  the  strong 
infinitive,  with  which  it  is  liable  to  be  confounded.  Thus,  hitano,  old.  sing,  and  masc. 
plur.  hithna  ; fcm.  hi l ant,  it  is  to  be  gone,  it  (or  he)  will  go  ^similarly,  nidrano,  he  is  to 
be  beaten,  he  will  be  beaten. 

Examples  of  the  use  of  this  participle  are  : — 

chhyatrina-ko  je  hum  chh,  te  karano  chai-chli,  that  is  necessary  to  be  done  which  ' 
is  tho  business  of  knights  (II,  1). 

jtodn,  bhalo  dekhano  chdno,  bani  gayo,  he  became  young  (and)  good  to  be  seen 
(and)  to  be  beheld  (II,  5). 

ek  bari  sundar  dekhaiti  chdni  jtodn  syaini  chh/,  there  was  a young  woman  very 
beautiful  to  be  seen  (and)  to  be  beheld  (II,  5). 
ab  hama-le  ke  korayto-cJih,  now  what  is  to  be  done  by  us  (page  198)  ? 
muluk  jitana  chaini,  countries  aro  necessary  to  be  conquered  (i.e.  must  be  con- 
quered) (II,  1). 

toe-le  Mahddeb-jyu-ki  pujd  karani  sikai,  by  him  the  worship  of  Mahadfiva-ji 
was  taught  to  be  done  (i.e.,  I was  taught  how  to  worship)  (II,  2). 
ek  bdt  (fern.)  tuman-thai  hunt  chh,  one  thing  is  to  bo  said  to  you 

<n,  2). 

hamari  khvM  (fern.)  rUni  ya  ni  chhi,  my  wish  was  not  to  be  remained  here  (#.*., 

I did  not  wish  to  remain  here)  (page  201). 

turnon  jhact  aur  maijbeh  ddimijab  ek-bhtth  Kola,  to  ni  huni  bdt  ke  nirau  (for 
rauli),  when  men  like  you  and  me  will  become  (i.e.  get)  together,  then  any- 
thing will  not  remain  not  to  be  become  (i.e.  impossible)  (page  56).  ... 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


137 

The  Conjunctive  Participle  has  two  forms,  a short  and  a loDg.  The  short  form 
is  made  by  adding  i to  the  root ; thus,  hiti,  going,  having  gone.  The  long  form  is  made 
by  adding  her  to  the  short  form  ; thus,  hiti-ber,  going,  having  gono.  It  is  hence  neces- 
sary to  consider  the  irregularities  of  only  the  short  form.  They  arc  followed  exactly  by 
the  long  form.  Passive  verbs  form  tho  conjunctive  participlo  without  adding  i.  Thus 
mari-ber  (for  murii-ber ) having  been  killed.  Compare  mdri-ga-chh,  he  has-been  slain 

(II,  2).  * 

Verb§  whose  infinitives  end  in  xuio  (including  causals)  form  the  conjunctive  parti- 
ciple in  ai  (not  hi  as  we  might  expect).  Thus,  dekhai,  dekhai-ber , having  caused  to  see. 
The  following  are  irregular  : — 

Infinitives.  Short  Conjunctive  Participles. 

runo , to  remain 
kuno,  to  say 
Jcanyo,  to  cause  to  say 
H/jio,  to  come 
lyiino,  to  bring 
jano,  to  go 
huno , to  become 
dino,  to  give 
tino,  to  take 

The  short  form  of  the  conjunctive  participle  is  generally  employed  in  the  formation 

of  compound  verbs  ( q . o.).  The  following  are  examples  of  its  independent  use  : 

it  nan  nun  dekhi  ban  rlsa  hi,  to  them,  having  seen  me,  great  anger  came  (II,  2). 
dpEdpU-kani  nhno  jhni-ber,  achhalai-pachhatai,  hit-  jori,  bind  kari,  ui  syaini 
aur  ui-kh  khwen-the  chhorai-ber,  hphnh  ghar-huni  ghyh,  each  having  con- 
sidered himself  small,  wailing  and  lamenting,  malting  supplication,  having 
got  rid  of  ( i.e . away  from)  that  woman  and  her  husband,  they  went  to  their 
own  house  (I,  4). 

‘ my  am  dagariyh  ye  bat- me  rdji  huner  nhatan  ’ kai,  saying  (in  his  mind) 

* my  companions  will  not  consent  in  this  atfair  ’ (II,  4).  Here  kai  (like  the 
Khas-kura  bhani ) is  used  at  the  end  of  a quotation,  like  the  Sanskrit  iti. 
This  is  very  common.  Similarly  : — 

‘ mero  nuilik  Hdjbdhan  u-i  ehh ’ kai,  saying  ‘that  person  is  indeod  my  lord 
llajavahana  ’ (II,  S). 

Numerous  examples  will  be  found  under  the  head  of  intensive  verbs.  Compare 
also  the  following  examples  of  tho  long  form  : — 

larai  kari-ber  ye-kani  muluk  jitanh  c/iaini,  having  done  lighting,  this  (prince) 
must  conquer  countries  (II,  1). 

Jtdjbdhan-kani  tcT  dekhi-ber  hsaj  bhayo , to  llajavahana,  having  seen  him,  there 
came  astonishment-  (II,  2). 

rhjh-kh  ehyhlh-thai  bhalo  ddimi  samaji-ber,  having  understood  the  king’s  sou 
to  be  a good  man  (II,  2). 

Mdtanga-ki  bat  sw.ii-bei ♦,  having  heard  the  words  of  Matanga  (IT,  4). 
jt  khttsu-khmu  bhhji-ber  Mdtang-thai  gayo,  he  escaping  secretly,  went  to 
Matnnga  (II,  4). 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


rai 

kai 

kaioai 

ai  (see  above) 
hj&i 
j (fi- 
lial 

di  or  di 
li  or  ll 


138 


CENTRAL  PAHARl  (KTT&AUNl). 


pdpinairki  ilurdhsh  dekhai-ber,  having  shown  the  evil  state  of  sinners  (II,  2)f 
tci-lc  dhdt  lagai-ber  kayo,  lie,  having  applied  a shout  (i.e.  with  a shout),  said 
(IT,  8). 

yo  kai-ber  it  ye'h-uth  desau-liuni  nhai-gaylt,  saying  this,  they  went  away,  hither 
and  thither,  to  (various)  countries  (II,  4).  ^ 

Mat ar>g  n>dar  hai-her,  Matanga  having  become  fearless  (i.e.  fearlessly)  (II,  6). 
Mdtang-thal  ai-ber  icl-le  ek  ratn  b/ut-mg  dhari  diyo , having  come  to  Matanga, 
she  offered  him  a jewel  (II,  0). 

ek  bit rh  bota-ka  tali  jabber  kin  pari-gayo , having  gone  under  a big  tree  he  fell 
asleep  (I,  1). 

sutu-ko  tlmilo  ll-ber  bhth  logo,  taking  a sack  of  sat  tit,  he  set  out  on  the  road 

a,  i). 

A Noun  of  Agency  is  formed  bv  changing  the  a//o  of  the  Infinitive  to  ayiyo  or 
ayiyS.  In  two  of  the  following  examples  the  words  huniyo  and  karaniya  have  rather 
the  sense  of  a future  passive  participle  than  of  a noun  of  agency. 

tioe  ja80  baluid  ur  hit  tin  hatai  (liny  a (represented  in  Hindi  by  denewala)  hama - 
le  kwe  ni  dekho,  I never  (before)  saw  anyone  (who  was)  such  a brave 
thruster  aside  of  elephants  as  tliou  (page  135). 
je  huniyo  (Hindi  hvnetcdld)  bhayo  te  liu-chh,  that  w'liicli  is  to  be  will  be  (page 
84)! 

raja-thai  ni  karaniya  harm  karat,  having  got  done  by  the  king  things  which 
should  not  he  done  (Hindi  yo  kdm  tts-ke  na  karne-ke  the , ye  karaye)  (page 


tier. 


224). 

More  often  we  meet  a form  made  by  changing  the  no  of  the  present  participle  to 
Thus,  nifaner,  a goer.  Examples  are  : — 

Pachhd-klt  rauner  Paikit-kit  lagan  me,  in  the  courtyard  of  the  hero  w ho  was 
a dweller  of  {i.e.  in)  the  West. 

kasitr  karaner  jo  ghits  cli  saka-chhiyit,  bachi  ja-chhiya,  fault-doers  avIio  were 
able  to  give  bribes  got  off  (page  224). 

aghin  ke  karaner  chhai,  in  future  (of)  what  w ill  thou  be  a doer,  i.e.  what'  will 
thou  do  ? (page  85). 

myitra  dagariyh  raji  huuer  nhitlan , my  companions  will  not  be  willing  (hone- 
wale)  (II,  4).  /•  . 

turn  toi-katii  ntdri  deld , la  mai-kaui  u Hhaili  milaner  nhiiti , if  you  kill  him,  then 
I shall  not  get  that  bag  (page  100). 

tuvnan  jewar  aur  Icaramata-ki  tliaili  ah  kabhai  milaner  nat,  you  will  never  get 
( milnewdle ) the  jewels  and  tlio  magic  bag  (page  97). 
bhdl  rhja-ko  chyolo  finer  chh,  tomorrow  a king’s  son  is  a comer  (anetoald),  i.e. 
will  come  (II,  3). 

thicdr-ai  dkil-me  hamaro  lhagapanno  malum  hai  jdner  chh,  in-Ur  vcrjT  short 
time  my  swindling  will  become  known  (page  144).  ~ 

kalpa-sundari  jhnaner  snnaner  chh,  Kalpasundarl  (fern.)  ft  learned  aftd  intelli* 
gent  (page  JIG). 


u tati-jalai  jdner  nhati,  j ui-jalai  hot  an  muni  turn  thdri  ni-hold,  lie  \&11  not  go 
until  yqu  stand  lender  the  trees  (page  189).  ■ " ' 


S^ANDAlfe*'  &IALECT. 


J39 


• r * 

The  Old  Present,  which,  as  usual,  has  generally  the  sense  q£  a present  conditional, 
is  thus  conjugated  : — » 


Singular. 

1.  hit's,  I go,  I.  may  go 

2.  hitai 

3.  hit 


Plural. 

hits 

h 

hitau  ; hit  an 


From  runo,  to  remain,  we  have  : — sing.  (1)  rS  or  ran,  (2)  rai,  (3)  raau  or  ran  ; plur. 

(2)  raau  or  rayav,  (3)  rau,  raau  or  ray  an,  run.  Similarly,  kuno,  to  say  : also  causals 
such  as  dekhuuo,  to  cause  to  see. 

From  (lino,  to  give,  wo  have:— sing.  (1)  dyS,  (2)  de,  (3)  de ; plur.  (2)  dean,  diyau, 

(3)  dean,  diyau,  din.  Similarly,  lino,  to  take. 

uno,  to  come,  has  sing.  (1)  S,  (2)  ai,  (3)  an  ; plur.  (2)  hau,  ayau,  (3)  ayau,  un. 
Similarly,  lyuno,  to  bring. 

jano,  to  go,  has  sing.  (1)  js,  (2)  jhwai,  ja,  (3 ) jit,  jau  ; plur.  (2)  jaau,  - jayau, 
(3)  jaau,  jayau  or  jdn  ; similarly,  khuno,  to  eat. 

hnno,  to  become,  sing.  (1)  hs,  hoS,  hau,  (2)  hoai , (3)  ho,  hoau  ; plur.  (2)  hoau,  (3) 
hoau,  httn.  ' . 


The  following  are  examples  of  the  use  of  this  tense : — 

‘mat  eso  ulln  nhdtsjo  teri  batan-me  S,  I am  not  such  an  owl  as  that  I should 
’ come  into  ( i.e . agree  with)  your  words  (pane  1GS). 
dekhs  ham  dioinme  ko  haro  chh,  let  us  see  who  of  us  two  is  the  greater  (I,  2). 
so  ab  ktee  yeso  ttpdy  butai  di  hdlan  jai-le  yo  bdlak  bachi  ja,  aur  ham  hath  yesi 
jay  it  nhaiju  jd  rai-ber  ham  hachi  jff,  so  now  show  some  such  device  by 
which  this  child  may  escape  and  some  such  place  to  which  we  may  go,  and 
where  remaining  we  may  escape  vpage  227). 
turn  katuke  unari  pothi  para  it,  aur  katuke  unari  baton  sun-ait,  however  much 
you  may  read  their  books,  however  much  you  may  hear  their  word 
(page  220). 

katulc  dditni  naukar  dharlt,  jai-le  (lur  dur  jdlai  ye-ko  nan  hb  aur  mastak-di  ye - 
kani  rupai  milait,  how  many  men  did  I appoint  as  servants,  so  that  her  name 
may  spread  to  a great  distance  and  many  rupees  may  he  got  by  her  (pa^e 
73). 


The  Imperative  is  the  same  asf  tbe  Old  Present,  except  in  tin  second  person  of 
which  there  are  several  forms,  which  litay  he  shown  as  iollous  : — 

Singular  hit.  hitiye. 

Plural  hitau,  hitiyd. 

The  termination  iye  is  not  respectful  as  it  is  in  Hindi.  For  the  irregular  verbs  I 
have  noted  : — 

* rtiftff,  to  remain,  and  kit  no,  to  say  ; sing,  rau,  ray  a : plur.  raioau,  rayait,  rayit. 
' ’^1  Similarly  for  kit  no. 

initio,  to  com*,  lyiojo,  to  bring;  sing,  it,  aye,iiye  ; plur.  hau,  ayau,  ayau,  ayd,  a yd. 
Similarly  for  lytnio. 

Ja#,  to  go;  sing,  jd,  jaye,  jaye  ; plur  .jaau,  jayau,  jh.au,  jayau,  jayd,  jit  yd. 
iyyno,  4o  become*  sing*  ho,  hoe,  huye  ; plur.  hoau,  huyau,  hoyd,  hit  yd. 
voi..  ix,  part  ir.4  T * 


140 


CKNTRAXPAnABl(KUMAUNl). 


<Uno,  to  give,  and  lino,  to  take ; sing,  de,  diye,  liye  ; plur.  diau,  diyau,  diyd , diya, 
liyau,  liyd. 

The  following  are  examples  of  this  tense  in  the  second  person  : — 
tn  tna  jd,  do  thou  (maso.)  go  there  (II,  3). 

(lit)  dhairya  kar,  do  thou  (fem.)  make  courage  (II,  6). 

my'ara  akha-me  jhdr  pail  hi  ga-chh,  gdri-de,  a speck  of  dust  has  got  into  my 
eye,  extract  it  (I,  3). 

tn  l tiki  ran,  do  thou  remain  concealed  (page  128). 

Oahgd-kani  yo  sardp  diyo  lei  ‘ tu  l<ti  syaini  hai  jaye  anr  hahut  ddim>n  dagafi 
raye,'  he  imposed  this  curse  upon  the  Ganges,  * thou  also  become  a woman 
and  dwell  with  many  men’  (page  121). 

tn  my ara  hat  klmtan-kani  kholi  de,  do  thou  unfasten  my  hands  and  my  feet 
(page  1G9). 

.i ei-me  tu  jit  ye,  go  thou  into  it  (II,  3). 
t(3  tu  kariye,  do  thou  that  (II,  3). 

ye-katti  tu  swain-in  jan  s tmajiye,  do  not  thou  consider  this  merely  a dream  (II,  3). 
kai-kani  tu  yeti  fin  jan  diye,  do  not  thou  allow  anyone  to  come  hither  (II,  5). 
achlio,  tu-l  li-liye,  good,  thou  verily  take  it  1 1,  4). 

turn  human  larai  dekhi-diyau,  do  you  please  look  on  at  our  lighting  (I,  3). 
hiiman-kani  ni  mar  an,  do  not  ye  kill  the  Brahman  (II,  2). 

(him)  myiirii  dagarit  alag  hit  an , do  you  step  aside  with  me  (II,  2). 

turn  w7  jitgh  dekhan-hnni  hifi  di  hdlau , do  you  come  along  to  see  that  place  (II,  3). 

turn  ke  ni  darau,  do  not  you  fear  at  all  (page  146). 

turn  mai-dagari  hyd  lai  karau . rdjya  lai  liyd,  do  you  both  make  a marriage 
with  mo,  and  also  take  the  kingdom  (II,  6). 
ye-katti  chhitri  diyd  ....  phiri  lautai  diyd,  do  ye  let  him  go,  and  put  him  back 
again  (II,  2). 

u'i-kani  myala-me  jo  chd.nl  u deklii  sakani,  turn  lai  dekhald  ta  dekhiyd,  those  who 
wish  to  see  her  in  the  fair  can  do  so  ; (if)  you  would  see,  then  see  (page  1G5). 
turn  toa-kh  ddimin  dagari  yesikai  mili  jbyd  jesikai  ktee  finnan  pitch  hyd  qq  nr 
aur  jatuk  naki  tumara  pnti  hai  sakali  taluk  kariyd , do  you  mix  with  the 
people  of  that  place,  so  that  no  one  may  recognize  you ; and  do  as  much 
harm  as  can  happen  through  you  (page  224). 
phiri  turn  ghar  ai-jhyd,  then  do  you  (feminine)  come  home  (page  189). 
him  wl-thai  kayd  Id,  * tn  b'ato  batyii  hiilalai  ta  ham  hce-kani  ehhofi  dyfilh  par 
toi-kani  chhoriyd  j an  ; jaswe  kdm  kar*  hitlalo,  toi-kani  lefi  pairai  diya , r'ajb- 
thai  kayd  ki,  * yo  bar-m  juldl  ddimi  chh,  kasik • iTi  nidi  ni  batiino,  wi-kani  tnhri 
lai  diyd' ***  turn  roj  rajai  ki  ehyeli-thai  jimai-rayd,  do  you  say  to  him, 
*(if)  thou  wilt  finish  making  the  (secret)  way,  I (honorific  plural)  will  release 
you  ’ ; but  do  not  release  him  ; as  soon  as  he  shall  finish  the  work  put 
fetters  on  him  (and)  say  to  the  king,  ' this  is  a very  obstinate  man,  he  .<does 
not  in  any  way  disclose  the  (stolen)  property,  kill  him  also.*  * * * do  you 
keep  a-going  every  day  to  tlu  king’s  daughter  (page  103). 

The  Future  is  formed  by  adding  lo  to  the  Old  Present,  but  therJ  are  some 
irregularities. 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


141 


When  the  subject  is  feminine,  lo  becomes  U in  the  singular,  except  in  the  first  person 
in  which  it  remains  unchanged. 

In  the  plural  of  both  genders,  lo  becomes  lit,  except  in  the  third  person. 

The  following  is  the  paradigm.  When  the  femiuine  is  the  same  as  the  masculine  no 
forms  are  given  for  the  feminine. 

I shall  go,  etc. 

Singular.  j Plural. 


Male. 

F«-m. 

MaiC. 

Fein. 

1,  fiifulo 

... 

hi  [ula 

• M 

2.  hiftilai 

fa  {ait  i 

h if  a Id 

... 

3.  hifalo 

hit'll  i 

hit  ul  <\ 

hitalin. 

The  irregular  verbs  closely  follow  the  Old  Present,  with  a few  obvious  contractions. 

The  following  are  examples  of  the  use  of  this  tense  : — 

mat  dei  deSan  hitulo  aur  sgainin-kani  dhudul')  ; jo  mydrii  man  « i jali , tot 
dagari  byd  kari  lyulo,  I will  go  from  country  to  country  and  will  seek  out 
women;  she  who  strikes  my  fancy,  with  her  will  I make  a marriage  (page 
177). 

jab  khup  dhua  tta  paithalo , tab  mat  lai  ye  mandap-rnd  luki  rulo,  aur  tu 
Dikatbarmmd-thai  kaye,  * tu  baro  dhiirtt  chhai,  jib  mydro  rap  pal-lelai  ta 
jitni  ke  ke  karalai,’  when  much  smoke  will  begin  to  come,  then  I also  will 
remain  hidden  in  this  shrine,  and  do  thou  say  to  Vikatavarma,  ‘thou  art 
great  knave,  when  thou  wilt  receive  my  form,  then  who  knows  what  thing 
thou  wilt  do  * (page  125). 

nun  tit hdn  jbgi  bani-ber  jilt),  I shall  come  to  the  cemetery,  having  turned 
myself  into  a Yogi  (page  229). 

ye-kani  ye-kh  baba-ko  riijya  lai  deulo,  I will  also  cause  his  father’s  kingdom  to 
ho  given  to  him  (page  228).  Deulo  is  the  future  of  the  causal  of  ditto,  to 
give. 

phiri  tumari  aiodUbhifi  dekhulo,  then  I (fem.)  will  see  your  combat  (I.  3). 
jai  bakhat  mat  ghat  bajUlo  tol  bakh.it  jalai  wai  bhai  rage,  jab  ghat  bhjali  tahtu 
a gif  that  aye,  until  I (fem.)  shall  cause  the  hell  to  sound,  do  thou  remain 
there,  when  the  bell  (fem.)  willsound,  then  do  thou  come  forward  (page  127). 
marijulo,  I (fern.)  will  die  (page  71). 

eao  kari'ber  tu  Pdtdla-ko  raj  it  hai-jlilai , having  acted  thus,  thou  wilt  become 
the  king  of  Patala  (II,  3). 

j ye  kdm-katji  kari  hhlalai,  aur  yo  but  kai-thai  ni  kaulai,  ta  mat  ftce-katii  ch/iori 
dyulo,  if  thou  wilt  complete  this  business,  and  will  not  tell  this  thing  to  any- 
- * one,  then  I will  release  thee  (page  105). 
tu  Kfipasundari  holt,  aur  kuchh  din  Bikatba rm ma-dagar i ranli,  phir  jab  u 
■*'  lai  Vpahdrbarmma-vie  mill  jhlo,  tu  tci-dagari  bahut  din  jdlai  sukh  kavali , 
thou  (fem.)  wilt  be  Knlpivumdari.  and  for  some  days  wilt  dwell  with 


142 


CENTRAL  PAHARt  (KUMAUNl). 


yikatavarma;  then  when  Jie  also  will  be~at>  sorbed  in  U paharavarma , thou 
Avilt  be  happy  Avith  him  for  many  days*(page  121).  * 

tp  toi-krrni  he  dell,  what  wilt  thou  (fem.)  give  him  (page  118)  ? 
rdji  hat  jail,  thou  (fem.)  Avilt  agree  (page  119). 

je  tu  kauli  te  mat  kari  dyulo,  what  thou  (fem.)  shalt  say,  that  I (fem.)  will 
do  (page  188). 

ban-me  ham  logana-ki  hdr-jlt-kani  ko  janalo,  who  will  know  our  (respective)- 
defeat  and  victory  in  the  forest  (I,  2). 
aphij'a  pur  a nh  an- mi  raalo,  he  will  remain  in  his  old  body  (II,  2). 
ek  dibya-an-toalo  ddimi  hlo,  a man  with  a celestial  body  Avill  come  (II,  6). 
u sab  khai.lelo,  lie  will  eat  them  all  vip  (I,  4). 

bhol  u lai  pakaplo  aur  rneri  syaTiii  lai  pakarili,  to-morroAv  both  be  will  be 
arrested  aud  my  wife  will  be  arrested  (page  97).  Pakafitfo  is  passive  of 

pakarano. 

men  chyeli  eso  kauli,  my  daughter  will  say  thus  (page  72). 
lyara  dagarit  rioi  paithali,  she  will  begin  to  dAvell  with  thee  (page  74). 
dibya  drishli  haijhli,  there  will  be  superhuman  poAver  of  sight  (page  58). 

gau-mi  jai-ber  lariilh,  having  gone  into  the  village  wo  shall  fight  (I,  2). 
jatuk  dukh  ham  di  salcula  tatuk  Iwe-kani  dyulh,  we  (i.e.  I)  shall  give  you  all 
the  sorrow  that  wc  can  give  (page  99). 
turn  diet  jani  rdjya[kara/d,  you  two  persons  will  do  ruling  (II,  C). 
raja  tu m je  kauld  te  hukam  delo,  the  king  will  give  the  order  Avhioh  you  will 
suggest  (page  104). 

jati  jdlai  bolan  muni  turn  thiiri  ni  hold,  until  you  (fem.)  stand  under  the  trees 
(page  189). 

tyar'a  duel  jaiily'u  nanalin  htciilit,  there  will  be  two  twin  children  to  thee  (page 

1G2). 

bardbar  tvmhra  nitna  tin  Inch  lit,  there  will  be  children  to  you  regularly  (page  190). 
sab  but  (fem.  plur.)  dphl  hoi  jhlin,  all  things  will  oome  to  pass  of  themselvei: 
(page  103). 

A.  kind  of  Dubitative  Future  is  formed  by  adding  the  same  suffix  lo  to  the  weak 
oblique  form  of  the  present  paiticiple.  Thus,  hitana-lo,  he  will  probably"  go,  he  pro- 
bably is  going. 

Kxamplos  are  : — 

yo  ke  jadu-hadu  janan  huna-li,'  this  (woman)  will  probably  he  a- knowing  some 
kind  of  magic  or  other  (/.«?.  she  probably  knows)  (page  182). 
u bhfh  gydni  chhan,  so  iuman  mdlitm  clh  u ka  h ana- lit,  he  (plur.  of  resj>ect)  is 
very  Avise,  therefore  is  it  known  to  you  where  he  probably  is  (page  71)  ? 

The  Past  Conditional  tense  is  formed  from  the  Present  Participle,  to  which  per- 
sonal terminatioi  s are  added  directly. 

Thus,  Present.  Participle  hitano,  going,  Past  Conditional  hit  a nit,  (if)  IJiad  gone. 
The  third  person  singular  adds  no  termination.  Thotcuse  thus  closely  agwes  with  tta 
cc r responding  tense  in  Hindi  formed  from  the  present  participle  Avithout  any  suffixes 
at  all  ( challd) . 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


148 


The  following  is  the  paradi^ih  of  this  tense.  When  the  feminine  is  th«vsame  as  the 
masculine,  no  form  is  given  for  the  feminine. 

(If)  I hftt  gone,  I should  have  gone  (if). 


Singular. 

? , 

Plural. 

Maaculine. 

Feminine. 

! 

Common  Gender  exoepfc.  in  3rd  person. 

i 

1.  hifanu9  hifanyil  or  hitani 

i 

hifanu  or  hifanS. 

2.  hifanai 

hifani 

| hifand. 

3.  hifano 

hifani 

1 

1 hifani  (fern,  hitanin ). 

The  forms  for  the  irregular  verbs  are  based  on  the  corresponding  present  participles 
and  require  no  further  explanation. 

The  following  is  an  example  of  the  use  of  this  tense  : — 

mat  mart  j anyu  tabhalohuno,  (if)  I (fetn.)  had  died,  it  would  have  been  well 
(page  182). 

The  Present  Definite  is  properly  formed  by  suffixing  the  present  tense  of  the  verb 
substantive,  in  the  form  employed  ms  an  auxiliary,  to  the  weak  oblique  form  of  the 
present  participle.  Thus,  hitan-chh,  lie  is  a-going,  he  goes.  Generally  this  full  form  is 
Contracted  hy  changing  the  final  n to  a mere  nasal.  Tims,  hita-chh.  This  gives  rise  to 
further  irregularities.  In  the  plural,  the  first  and  third  persons  are  differently  formed, 
the  terminations  being  added  directly  to  the  present  participle.  We  thus  get  the 
following  paradigm  of  the  usual  (contracted)  form  of  the  present  definite. 


I go,  I am  going  (sometimes,  almost  ‘ I shall  go  ’). 


4 Singular. 

Plttral. 

M^aculinc. 

F urnmine. 

Common  Gender  except  in  3rd  person. 

1.  hita-chhu , (- chhu ) or  (more  usual- 
ly) hifu-chhu , etc. 

hifanu . 

2,  hifi-chhai 

hifa-chhe 

hifa-chha. 

3.  hifa-chh 

hifa-chhy  a 

hifani  or  hitani  (fem.  hitanin). 

For  the  various  irregular  verbs  wo  may  quote  the  following  forms 

dekhfi-chhtt,  or  dekhau-chhu,  I cause  to  see  ; 2.  sing.  masc.  dekhti-chhai, 
dekhau-chhai,  3.  sing.  masc.  dekhu-chh,  dekhau-chh,  and  so  on. 
rft-chhn,  or  rau-chhu,  I remain  ; rit-ehhai,  rau-chhai,  and  so  on ; so  ku-chhu 
kau-chhtt,  1 say  ; U-chhn,  I come  ; lyS-chhu,  I bring,  etc. 
ja-chhu,  I go  ; ja-chhai,  etc.  So  cfuT-chhu,  I wish  ; kha-chhu , I eat,  etc. 
hfrchhu,  I become ; hu-chhai , etc. 
di-chhu,  I give ; di-chhai,  etc.  So  It-chhtt,  I take. 
dehht-chhu,  I am  visible;  dekht-chhai,  etc.  A.nd  so  all  passives. 


144 


CENTRAL  PAHAKi  (XUMAUNI). 

The  following  are  examples  of  the  use  of  the  full  form  of  this  tense  : — 

tu  tnai-kani  bhalo  jai  mhnan-chhe , if  thou  (fern.)  lovest  me  (see  below). 
turn  Tcwe  mantra-le  jharano  lai  jhnan-chhd,  do  you  know  even  any  method 
of  exorcising  by  a charm  ? (see  below). 

The  following  are  examples  of  the  more  usual  (contracted)  form  : — 

tol  din-bat i mat  hphnh  dagafiyan-hai  alag  rti-chhu,  aur  dhai •« m - ka ra m-mS  litgi 
rU-chhu,  a ui'  Mahddeb-jyn-ki  tapasya  karu-clihu,  from  that  day  lam  dwelling 
apart  from  my  companions,  and  I am  remaining  engaged  in  religious  aots, 
and  am  performing  austerity  (in  honour)  of  Mahadeva-jl  (IT,  2). 
ui-kani  meat  a din  a jd-chhu,  T am  going  to  give  loaves  to  him  (I,  3). 

* turn  ja-chhd  ta  mat  lai  S-chhu  * ; so  mat-le  kayo  ki,  ‘yeso  ni  hai  sakano  ; tu  mat- 
kani  bhalo  jai  mhnan-chhe,  ta  je  mat  kn-chhu,  te  tu  kar ‘(if)  you  (masc.) 
are  going,  then  I (fern.)  also  am  coming.  Then  I said  that,  ' such  cannot  he 
(see  negative  present,  below)  ; if  thou  (fern.)  lovest  me,  then  what  I am 
saying,  that  do  thou  do  (page  124). 

tab-bati  mat  j ago,  jag  a main  kha-chliu,  since  then  I (fern.)  am  eating,  begging 
fiom  place  to  place  (*.<?.)  1 live  by  begging  (page  114). 
turn  bhra  gydnl  chhau  aur  jo  ye  loka  ka  sukhan-kani  chhhri-ber  paraloka-ko  f hi  ka- 
il o karanh  chanl  unara  upar  turn  bari  ilayd  rhkha-chhd  ; mat  ab  hphjftt  ye  nlch 
kdm  dekhi  bari  dik  chhii,  aur  ye-kani  chhori  diija  cha-chhu , you  (maso.)  are 
very  wise,  and  show  great  mercy  upon  those  who  wish  to  pn  pare  for  the  other 
world  after  giving  up  the  pleasures  of  this  world  : now  I (fern.)  seeing  this  my 
own  low  profession  am  much  troubled,  and  wish  to  abandon  it  (page  72). 
mat  hat  dekhauo  lai  jana-chhu,  I (few.)  also  know  how  to  inspect  hands  (i.e. 

to  tell  fortunes),  (page  117). 
bhil  jaso  dekht-chhai,  thou  appearest  like  a Will  (II,  2). 

yo  barinaki  bat  chh  ki  yesh-gun-whlo  ddimi  hai- her  dakuna-ko  kdm  kara-chhai. 
Aj-bati  tu  * kabhat  yeso  ni  karit,’  ku-chhai  aur  bhalo  ddimina-ki  jasinyat  rti- 
chhai,  ta  mat twe-kani  chliutai  di-chhu,  this  is  a very  evil  thing  that  being  a 
man  possessing  such  qualities,  thou  art  doing  the  business  of  robbers.  (If 
thou  art  saying  (i.e.  wilt  say)  *l“will  never  do  such  a business, ’ and  art 
remaining  (i.e.  wilt  remain)  like  respectable  men,  then  I am  getting  thee 
released  (i.e.  will  release)  thee  (page  135). 
tn  ‘ Kdm-dyapta  ke-lxii  nun  dekhi  dik  chh'  kai  ku-chhe  ? so  tcl-ko  dik  huna-ko 
kdran  yo  chh  ki  tu  wi-ki  syatui  Hati-hai  lagai  hhali  dckhi-chhe,  ye  vile  ten 
rU  kara-chh,  aur  Itce-kani  dukh  dt-chh,  art  thou  (fem.)  saying  that  (kai, 
literally,  saying)  * Why  is  KAmadeva  troubled  at  seeing  me  ? * Now  this  is  tlie 
reason  of  his  being  troubled,  that  thou  appearest  more  beautiful  than  Rati 
his  wife ; for  this  reason  lie  is  making  anger  to  thee  (i.e.  he  is  angry  with 
thee),  and  is  giving  thee  sorrow  (page  123). 
tu  dpu-kaiii  bdki  hatu-chhe , thou  (fem.)  art  showing  thyself  off  too  much 
(page  78). 

jatuk  tu  mat-kani  dckJana  cha-chhe,  tcl-hoi  lai  baki  mat  ttce-kani  dekhhnlt  chop 
chku,  as  much  us  thou  (fom.)  desires!  to  sec  me,  much  more  than  that  even 
do  I desire  to  see  thee  (page  55). 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


145 


je  huniyo  bhayo  te  hu-chh,  that  which  was  to  bo  is  (page  84). 

ab  yo  yeao  kara-chhi , ta  ke  mat  kha-chliu,  ke  mero  parawdr  kha-chh,  now,  (if) 
she  does  so,  what  do  I eat,  and  what  docs  my  family  cat  (i.e.  how  are  we  to 
live)  (page  73). 

unari  pujd  hu-chhe,  their  worship  (fcm.)  takes  place  (page  75). 

inert  mai-kuni  u bahant  bftalo  mana-chhya,  she  loves  my  mother  very  much 
(page  167). 

yo  hpdnd  mdlika-ki  bari  tahal  kara-chhya,  she  does  great  service  to  her  husband 
(page  174). 

ann-pdni  chhori-ber  maraud,  we  are  dying  having  given  up  food  and  water 
(page  195). 

ab  twe-kani  phal  dinti,  now  I (masc.  plur.  of  respect)  give  the  fruit  to  thee 
(II,  3). 


ab  ke  karanu,  what  shall  I (fern.  plur.  of  respect)  do  (page  117)  > 
turn  kwe  mantra-le  jhdrano  lai  j a nan- child  ? ke  "pay  jdna-chlui  ye-kani  bachai 
diyau,  do  you  know  even  any  (method  of)  exorcising  hv  a charm  ? (if)  vou 
know  any  device,  save  him  (page  84).  Here  jdnan-chhd  and  jdnd-chhd  are 
absolutely  synonymous. 

pangal-md  ke  kara-chhd,  what  are  you  doing  in  the  forest  (page  70)  * 
turn  yd-hai  ke-lai  ja-chhd,  why  are  you  going  from  here  (page  165)  ? 
kite  hat  dekhu-chhd , do  any'  of  you  show  your  hands  (to  have  your  fortune  told) 
(pago  177)  ? 

tnaT  kU-chhn  ki  * turn  jan  bat  an -me  man  lagti-chhd  unan-kani  chltori  diyau,'  I say 
that,  ‘ do  you  give  up  those  things  to  which  you  apply  your  mind  * 
(pago  214). 

dakuna-ko  kdm  karanT,  they  practise  the  business  of  robbers  (II,  2). 
mttluk  jitana  chain/,  countries  are  desired  (pres,  pass.)  to  be  conquered  (i.e. 
should  be  conquered)  (II,  1). 

tnaT-kani  ye-kd  npdy  bahant  uni,  to  me  many  devices  of  this  come  (i.e.  I am 
able  to  suggest  many  devices)  (page  ISO). 


m yd  la- md  jo  chant  it  dekhi  sakani , in  the  fair,  whoever  desire,  they  can  see 
(her)  (page  1(55). 

arth-kdm  kdsd  hunt,  ke-le  u ha  rant,  what  sort  of  things  are  wealth  and  plea- 
sure, and  by  what  (means)  do  they  increase  (page  75)  ? 
arth  u chh  jai-kani  ddimi  kamuni,  bar  uni,  aur  saniali  rakhani,  wealth  is  that 
bv  which  men  earn,  cause  to  increase,  and  having  collected  put  by  (page  75) . 

When  the  present  tense  is  preceded  by  a negative,  the  above  forms  are  not  used, 
the  forms  of  the  Past  Conditional  being  used  instead.  Thus,  ni  hitanyU,  not  ni  hitit- 
chhu,  I do  not  go.  Examples  arc  : — 

mat  apdnd  kdkd-kani  bikh  di-ber  mdrdnd  ni  chdnyu,  I (masc. ) do  not  wish  to 
kill  my  uncle  by  giving  liim  jwison  (page  131). 
mat  char  lai  chhU,  ta  yd  ah  uaki  chori  ni  karanyft,  I am  indeed  a thief,  but  I do 
not  commit  a wicked  theft  in  such  a way  (page  85). 
yo  bar-di  jiddi  ddimi  chh , kasik-di  mdl  ni  bat  into,  this  is  a very  obstinate  man, 
in  no  wray  does  he  show'  (where  the  property  (is)  (page  104). 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


146  CENTRAL  PAHArI  (KUMAUNl). 

gydni-ko  vikhay-aukhade  dharam  ni  bigafano,  par  ham  arth-kdman-kapi 
ni  janana,  the  virtue  of  a wise  man  is  not  spoilt  by  worldly  happiness,  but 
I (masc.  plur.  of  respect)  do  not  know  wealth  and  pleasures  (page  75). 

The  Imperfect  is  formed  in  the  same  way  as  the  present  definite,  substituting  the 
past  for  the  present  tense  of  the  Auxiliary  verb.  Thus : 

I was  going,  I used  to  go,  etc. 


Sl>’OrT.AB. 

! 

i 

Plubal. 

Masculine. 

| Feminine. 

Masculine. 

1 i 

Feminine. 

1.  liila-chhiyu,  (-chhyu) 

J 

| 1 

hita-chhiyS(*chhyS) 

2.  hi{a~chhiys 

hifa-chhl 

hifa-chhiyCL 

3.  hifa-chhiyo 

hi  fa  •chh  % 

hifa-chhiya 

hifa-chhin. 

The  various  irregular  verbs  form  their  imperfects  on  the  analogy  of  the  Present 
Definite. 

The  following  are  examples  of  the  use  of  this  tense : — 

jasi  syaini  mat  beam  cha  chhyU,  thlk  yo  usi  chh,  the  woman  whom  I was 
wishing  to  marry  is  exactly  like  this  (one)  (page  178). 
jaso  chyolo  tu  cha  chliiye,  the  kind  of  son  which  thou  wast  desiring  (II,  1). 
blulan  jaso  dekln-chliiyo , he  was  appearing  {i.e.  looked  like)  a Bhil  (II,  2). 
kc  dukh  ni  hnii  pau-chhiyo,  no  pain  was  permitted  to  exist  (II,  7). 
n gainh  bajhia-me  anr  kdbya  paran-me  man  lagU-chhiyo,  anr  rdjya  ki  tarph 
habitat  ni  cha-chhiyo,  he  used  to  apply  his  mind  to  singing  and  musio  and 
reading  poetry,  and  never  used  to  look  in  tho  direction  of  his  kingdom 
vpage  213). 

eka-ko  ndm  suai-ber  doharo  rts-md  bhariyo  rau-chhiyo,  on  hearing  the  name  of 
one  the  other  used  ho  he  filled  with  rage  (I,  1). 

Daadak  jahgala-ka  bich-mc  jo  gar  ja-chhi,  the  river  (fern.)  which  was  going  in 
the  midst  of  the  Dnndaka  forest  (II,  3). 
jai-kh  hdt-m&  u ru-rhhi,  on  whose  hand  it  (fern.)  remained  (II,  7). 
diet  natni  Paik,  ek  Ptira-b  dish -kb  kun-me  doharo  Pachh§-kh  kunh-rne  rau-chhiyh, 
two  famous  Heroes  used  to  dwell,  one  in  the  corner  of  the  East,  and  the  other 
in  the  corner  of  the  IVest  (I,  1). 

ici  ddimi-kani  bahnt  bat  U-chhiii,  to  that  man  many  things  (fern.)  were  coming 
(i.e.  he  knew  many  things)  (page  215). 

kasur  karaner  jo  ghvs  dl  sakd-chhiyh  bachi  ja-chhiyh,  garlba-ko  ktee  ni  hu-chhiyo 
jhg'ajagh  chori  hu-chldn , the  offenders  who  were  able  to  give  bribes  used  to 
get  off,  there  was  no  one  becoming  (on  the  side)  of  the  poor,  here  and  there 
thefts  (fern.)  were  taking  place  (page  224). 

The  Past  tense  is  formed  by  taking  the  strong  form  of  the  verbal  past  participle, 
and  adding  personal  suffixes.  In  the  third  person  singular  and  masculine  plural,  no 


STANDARD  DIALECT.  147 

suffix  is  added,  and  we  have  the  past  partioiple  standing  by  itself.  The  following  is  the 
paradigm : — 

I went. 


9IKOULAB. 


Plural. 


Masculine. 

Feminine. 

' 

Masculiue* 

Feminine. 

i. 

hityU 

hit  a 

1 

2. 

hitai 

hi(l 

hif<l 

j 

3. 

hifo 

hit* 

hi[d 

j hi  fin . 

The  above  is  the  conjugation  of  all  regular  verbs,  both  transitive  and  intransitive. 
But  it  must  be  remembered  that  in  the  case  of  transitive  verbs  the  tense  is  treated 
passively,  while  hitft  (intransitive)  means  ‘ I went,’  mdrft  (transitive)  means  * I was 
killed.*  * I killed  him  * would  be  mai-le  tol-katii  mhro , by  me,  with  reference  to  him,  it  was 
killed ; or  mai-le  u mhro , by  me  he  was  killed.  The  construction  is,  in  fact,  exactly  the 
same  as  in  Hindi,  the  verb  agreeing  in  gender  and  number  with  the  object,  when  the  latter 
is  in  the  form  of  the  nominative,  and  otherwise  being  in  the  third  person  masculine 
singular. 

The  irregular  verbs  base  their  conjugation  on  the  irregular  strong  past  participles 
and  tho  only  form  which  presents  any  difficulties  is  the  third  person  plural  feminine, 
which  is  as  follows : — 

runo,  to  remain,  ray  in  or  rain  ; so  kiino,  to  say,  can  sals  like  dekhuno,  etc. 

uno,  to  come,  ayitt  or  ain  ; so  lyuno,  to  bring. 

jaiio,  to  go,  gay  in  or  gain. 

huno,  to  become,  bhayin  or  bhain. 

ditto,  to  give,  diyin  or  din  ; so  lino,  to  take. 

The  following  are  examples  of  the  use  of  the  past  tense  of  intransitive  verbs : — 
thtodr-dl  dhll  mat  tea  tahalyft,  talai  gahan'a  pata-ko  chlianachhandt  aur  sugandh 
iinh  paithi  mat  jaldi  uthi  gayft,  for  a short  time  I waited  until  the  tinkling 
of  ornaments  and  a fragrant  odour  began  to  come  ; I (then)  quickly  arose 
(page  123). 

mat  mar y ft,  I died  (II,  2). 

mat  juxin  bhayft,  I became  a youth  (II,  2). 

mat  bhalo  hai  gay  ft,  I became  well  (II,  2). 

mat  ek  gtoalh-kh  tea  rayft,  I (fern.)  dwelt  with  a cowherd  (page  113). 
ah  tuman-thai  ay  ft,  now'  I (fem.)  came  to  you  (II,  0). 
dbphari  jdlek  hito , he  marched  till  noon  (l,  1). 

thwhrh  dhll- me  agh-bati  bhair  nikalo,  after  a short  time  he  emerged  from  the 
fire  (II,  5). 

w jhulh-hai  tali  kudo,  he  leaped  down  from  the  swiug  tjl,  8). 

« tobthai  daufi-ber  gayo,  aur  tcl-kh  khutan  paro.  he  went  running  to  him  and 
fell  at  his  feet  (II,  8). 

yeth-uth  pheranai  rayo,  he  remained  a*wandering  hither  and  thither  (II,  7). 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV.  1 “ 


148  CENTRAL  PAHAJtl  (KUMAUNl). 

Bdmdeb  rishi  mjh-thai  byo,  the  saint  Vamadeva  came  to  the  king  (II,  1). 
v khnsn-khmu  bhkji-ber  Matang-thai  gayo , he  esoaping  secretly  went  to 
Matariga  (II,  4). 

wl-htni  pth  lagi,  compassion  (fem.)  touched  him  (II,  6). 

rkni-ki  khabar  suiiana-ki  aur  kpiink  ddimina-ki  bliet  karanai-ki  bari  phikar  rai, 
great  anxiety  (fern.)  remained  for  hearing  news  of  the  queen,  and  for  meeting 
my  own  people  (page  113). 

it  nan  mat  dele  hi  bari  rTs  at,  seeing  me  great  anger  (fom.)  came  to  them  (II,  2). 
kpani  ijk-the  bhitar  bhkji  gai,  she  ran  away  inside  to  her  own  mother  (I,  2). 

(ham)  hot  ana  -kk  phkhk  pakari-ber  dusari  tarapli  nhai  gaya,  aur  kai-kk  hat  ni  ayd  ; 
ghar  jai-ber  ham  lai  nai  dhioai  sin  para,  I (plural  of  respect)  seizing  the 
branches  of  the  troes,  went  to  the  other  side  (of  the  wall),  and  did  not  come 
(/.<?.  fall)  into  anyone’s  hand ; going  into  the  house  I also,  having  bathed 
and  washed,  fell  asleep  (page  86). 

ham  feri  tapasyd  dekhi-ber  bora  kliusi  bhaya,  I (plural  of  respect)  having  seen 
your  austerity,  became  much  pleased  (II,  3). 
mat  aur  u pachhinai  jangal-m&  rai  gaya,  (we,  i.e.)  I and  he  remained  behind  in 
the  forest  (page  112). 

myark  bark  bluig  chhiya  jo  turn  lai  mill  gaya,  I had  great  good  luck  (lit.  there 
were  my  great  fortunes)  that  you  also  wore  met  (by  me)  (page  118). 
tab  dwlyai  gau-huni  bath  lagh,  then  the  two  set  out  on  the  road  to  the  village  (I,  3). 
tluckrk  dinan  jalai  go  yeth-nth  pliirk,  for  a few  days  they  wandered  hither  and 
thither  (II,  2). 

tea  my ara  mifr  kyk,  there  my  friends  camo  (II,  2). 

bahaut  ditr  jalai  miykrk-an ydr-tTi  did  jani  gaya,  for  a great  distance  the  two 
persons  went  in  thick  darkness  (II,  5). 

nan  knmar  bahaut  dik  bhaya,  the  nine  princes  became  much  troubled  (II,  4). 
ye  die  Rdmamahjari  aur  tol-ki  ijk  lai  ica  balaii-gain : u otti  darin  aur  mai-thai 
ftalldh  puclihan-hnni  a in,  on  this  account  Kamamafijarx  and  aho  her  mother 
were  summoned  there.  They  feared  greatly  and  came  to  nie  to  a*k  advice 
(page  91). 

mat  dekhi  u (lari  gain  aur  kkmana  paithin,  they  (fem.)  seeing  me  became  afraid 
and  began  to  tremble  (page  146). 

ici-ka  da  garb  toi-ki  (lagariya  bahaut  syahii  (tin,  with  her  many  women,  her 
companions,  came  (page  165). 

The  following  are  examples  of  the  use  of  the  past  tense  of  transitive  verbs : — 
mai-le  yo  bichar  karo,  I made  this  decision  (page  37). 
mai-le  yo  suni,  I heard  this  (fem.)  (page  37). 

tuma-le  mai-kani  paile  khabar  ke-lai  ni  di,  why  did  you  not  at  first  give  the  news 
(fem.)  to  me  ( page  84)  ? 

nau  knmaran  da  gad  tol-kani  apanh  des-hai  bhair  bhejo,  he  sent  him,  with  the 
nine  princes,  forth  from  his  own  land  (II,  1). 

Matang-thai  ai-ber  wi-le  ek  ratn  bhet-me  dhari  diyo,  coming  to  Matanga,  she 
laid  before  him  a jew<  i as  a present  (II,  6). 
wi-le  kayo,  he  said  (II,  1). 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


149 


mai-kani  mari  diyo,  (they)  killed  me  (II,  2). 

mai-le  dpS-kani  jangal-me  pariyo  pctyo,  I found  myself  fallen  in  the  forest 


(n,  2). 

(mai-le)  ye-kani  nachano,  gaino,  bajo  baj uno,  lekharto  paratio , balano  cholhtju) 
sikhyo,  I (fern.)  taught  her  to  dance,  to  sing,  and  to  play  musical  instru- 
ments, to  write  and  to  read,  to  talk  and  converse  (pago  73). 

una-le  ddimina-ki  bari  bhir  dekhi,  they  saw  a great  crowd  (fern.)  of  men  (II,  5). 

Somdatta-le  hpani  kathd  kai,  Somadatta  told  his  story  (fom.)  (II,  9). 

Mahddeb-jyu-ki  pujd  karani  sikai,  he  taught  me  to  worship  (fom.)  Hahadeva- 

ji  (II,  2). 

Kdlindi-ki  bat  wl-le  mani-li,  he  accepted  the  word  (fern.)  of  Kfilindi  (II,  6). 

Mdtahga-le  ici-kani  ek  mani  di,  Matanga  gave  him  a jewel  (fcm.)  (II,  7). 

wl-le  mastalcdi  lakara  ek-batta  k'am,  aur  ago  halo,  anr  mantr  para,  he  collected 
many  sticks  (plur.  masc-)  and  lit  a fire  (sing,  masc.)  and  recited  charms 
(plur.  masc.)  (II,  5). 

ui-le  ap'nih  khhniya  sat  a talan-me  khiti  diya,  he  threw  the  sattu  (plur.  masc.) 
which  was  his  food  into  the  lake  (I,  1). 

hama-le  rata-ki  bat  jaga  jaga  snnin,  I heard  here  and  there  the  atfairs  (plur. 
fern.)  of  the  preceding  night  (page  86). 

mai-le  wl-Jci  buri  either  i Dharmmrakshitd  dagari  pachhyan  lagai  anr  Kama • 
madjari-huni  toT-ka  hafa-le  mast  chlj  bhejin,  T made  acquaintance  (fern, 
sing.)  with  her  old  maid  servant  Dharmarakshita,  and  by  her  hand  sent 
many  things  (plur.  fem.)  to  Kamamanjari  (page  91). 

ici-Ie  mai-kani  dhanna-ki  pustak  snnain,  he  caused  me  to  hear  (i.e.  taught  me) 
religious  books  (plur.  fcm.)  (II,  2). 

buriya-Ie  mai-thai  yo  bat  kayin , the  old  woman  said  these  things  (plur.  fem.)  to 
me  (page  120). 

ek-cka-le  you  sari,  bat  kaiu,  each  of  them  said  all  these  things  (plur.  fem.)  (I,  4). 


wl-le  gali  din,  he  gave  abuse  (plur.  fcm.)  (page  61). 

mai-le  yo  sab  bat  malum  kari  liyin , I understood  all  those  tilings  (plur.  fem.) 
(pane  120). 

The  Perfect  is  formed  by  conjugating  the  weak  verbal  past  participle  with  the 
present  tense  of  the  Auxiliary  verb.  The  first  person,  however,  is  not  used,  the  first 
person  of  the  Past  being  used  instead,  and  the  third  person  plural  masculine  is  quite 
irregular.  Thus : — 

I have  gone. 


SINGULAB. 

PLITRAL. 

Mns^viline. 

! 

Feminine.  i 

l 

Masculine. 

Feminine. 

1.  ‘ | 

, . V i 

nifyii  i 

hits 

hitd 

| 

2.  liifa-chliai 

hiji-chhe  j 

hita-chh* 

hitimchhi 

3.  hila-ohh 

| hifi-chh 

hi  ft 

hiii-chhan 

) CENTRAL  PAHARl  (KUMAUnI). 

Transitive  verbs  arc,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Past  tense,  construed  passively. 

The  irregular  verbs  employ  the  weak  past  participles  given  on  page  135.  The  only 
a in  which  difficulties  arise  is  the  third  person  plural,  which  is  as  follows 

ruiio,  to  remain,  third  plural  perfect  rat  or  rt.  So  kuno,  to  speak,  and  causal 
verbs  like  dekhuno,  to  show  : uno,  to  oomo,  plur.  «?.  So  lyuno,  to  bring : 
ja no,  to  go,  plur.  gat:  dino,  to  give,  plur.  dt.  So  lino,  to  take. 

The  following  are  examples  of  the  use  of  this  tense : — 

A. — Intransitive  Verbs 

tu  ko  chhai,  ka-bati  d-chhai , who  art  thou,  whence  hast  thou  (masc.)  come 
(II,  2)  ? 

tu  ko  clihd,  ka-bati  ai-chhe,  who  art  thou  (fcm.),  whence  hast  thou  (fern.)  come 
(II,  6)  ? 

ah  tu  ai  gai-chhe,  now  thou  (fern.)  hast  arrived  (page  lib). 
bdlak  kani  bag  U gau-chh,  a tiger  has  carried  off  the  child  (page  229). 
tala  a stiki  ga-chh,  the  tank  has  dried  up  (I,  1).  For  ra-chh , vide  ante,  page  130. 
bdji-kani  jiti  gai-clih,  she  has  completely  won  the  wager  (page  77). 
mat-kani  jabardasti  dpano  khasam  banai-ber  ya  lyai  rai-chh,  having  foroibly 
made  me  her  husband,  bringing  me  here,  she  has  remained  (page  17  G). 
dj  bhet  hai  pafi-chh ; bari  khuH  bhai-chh,  to-day  a meeting  has  occurred  ; 

much  happiness  has  become  (to  me)  (I,  2). 
turn  sust  ke-lai  hai  rau-chhd,  why  have  you  becomo  sad  (and  remain  sad  now) 
(page  56)  ? For  the  use  of  the  perfect  of  rutrb  as  a verb  substantive,  see 
page  130,  ante. 

turn  lai  den  dds  hiti  d-chhd,  you  also  have  come  (here)  after  going  to  various 
countries  (page  IGA). 

bard  phani-wdld  sydp  nikali  rat,  many-liooded  snakes  have  remained  emerging 
(».<?.  continue  emerging)  (page  58). 
yo  ddimi  ka-bati  at,  whence  have  these  men  come  (II,  9)  ? 
bar  bars  hai- gat,  twelve  years  have  passed  (I,  2). 

B. — Transitive  Verbs 

mero  bdb  JPdtdla-ko  raja  Bisnu-le  mart  de-chh,  Vishnu  has  killed  my  father,  the 
king  of  Patala  (II,  6)., 

beUyit  rat  stcain-me  Mahadeb-j yu-le  mat- karri  darSan  de-chh , aur  yo  kau-chh, 
last  night  in  a dream  Mahadeva-ji  has  given  me  a vision  and  has  said  this 
(II,  3). 

mai-le  lai  lut-pit  bahaut  kari-chh , aur  ddimi  bara  dik  kart,  I also  have  done 
much  robbery  (fcm.  sing.),  and  have  made  men  (masc.  plur.)  much  troubled 
(II,  2). 

riu}da-lc  jhuta  sc.ugon  khai  rdkhl,  the  villain  has  eaten  up  (/’.<?.  sworn)  false 
oaths  (masc.  plur.)  (page  105). 

m yard  lagaiyd  (adjectival  past  participle)  phul  tol-le  fofi-ber  Jtamayantikd • 
kani  dt.  lie  has  plucked  fhe  flowers  planted  by  mo  and  given  them  to 
Ramayanfl  (page  119). 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


161 


The  Pluperfect  is  formed  in  the  same  way  as  the  Perfect,  only  the  past  tense  of  the 
auxiliary  verb  being  substituted  for  the  present  tense.  It  is  quite  regular  in  its  conju- 
gation, which  is  as  follows  : — 


Singula  it.  Plural. 


Masculine. 

Feminine. 

i 

' Masculine. 

Feminine. 

1.  hifa-clihiyu  ( chhyU ) 

hi(i-chhiyu , etc. 

hita-chhiya , etc. 

hiti-rhhiya , etc. 

2.  M(a- chhiye 

*— w" 

1 ’ 

hifa-chhiyi 

hiti-rhhiy  x. 

1 

3.  hita-clihiyo 

| liif  i~  chili 

, hita-chhiya 

I hiti-clihWi. 

Tho  irregular  verbs  present  no  difficulties. 

The  following  are  examplos  of  the  employment  of  this  fense  : — 

A— Intransitive 

mat  rani  samet  ai  rau-chhy V,  I had  come  (and  been  there)  with  the  queen  (page  31). 

tit  dj  jalai  Ice  karanit ra-ch hiye  (for  karanit  ra-chhiye),  what  hadst  thou  remained 
a-doing  till  to-day  (II,  9). 

jai  din  fit  biig-bati  gai-clihl , tat  din-di-ha ti  mero  man  lu-i-le  hart  le-chh,  from 
the  day  on  which  thou  (fern.)  hadst  gone  from  the  garden,  from  that  very 
day  thou  alone  hast  robbed  (me  of)  my  heart  (page  51). 

jab  u J?aik  dhurlt-hutu  jan  tag/,  ra-chhiyo,  when  that  Hero  had  set  himself  to 
go  to  the  mountain-top  (I,  21. 

jaswe  Mdtang  hga-liai  bhair  d-chhiyo,  as  soon  as  Matanga  had  come  out  from 
the  fire  (II,  5). 

cheli  dltdn  k titan  lagi  rai-chhi , the  daughter  had  set  herself  a-husking  paddy  (I,  2). 

rltja-ki  cheli  palan-md  se  rai-clihi  aur  saheli  ycth  nth  se  rai-chhin,  the  king’s 
daughter  had  gone  to  sleep  on  the  bed  and  her  female  companions  had  gone 
to  sleep  (and  had  remained  sleeping)  here  and  there  ground  her)  (page  10G). 

adhardt  k'urlt,  jab  unan  tun  ai-chhi,  at  the  time  of  midnight,  when  sleep  (fern.) 
had  come  to  them  (II,  IV 

my  lira  dit-me  bahattf  ghan  hai  ran-chhiya,  many  wounds  were  in  my  body  (II,  2). 

dtei  syaini  dhdn  kutan  Vagi  rai-chhin , two  women  had  set  themselves  a-husking 
paddy  (I,  4). 

syaini  jo  in  batan-kani  stnti  rai-chhin  tcl-klt tnitkh-f hat  ek-bafti  bhain,  the  women 
who  had  been  hearing  these  words  became  assembled  before  him  (page  221). 

B. — Transitive 

u bitmap  milo  jo  niat-le  dakttn-hai  bachd-chhiyo,  that  Brahman  met  me  whom  I 
had  saved  from  the  robbers  (II,  2). 

to*  bhyol-me  pujh  jo  Malta  deb- jyn-le  Mdfahg-kani  batai  rakha-chhiyo,  they 
arrived  at  the  mountain  which  Mahfuleva-ji  had  indicated  to  Matanga  (II,  1). 

C. — Passives  and  Causals 

A passive  voice  is  formed  by  adding  / to  the  root.  Tims  the  root,  of  dekhano,  to 
see,  is  dekh.  Tho  passive  root  is  dekhl  with  an  infinitive  dekhlno,  to  he  visible.  This 
is  conjugated  regularly.  Its  shorter  conjunctive  participle  is,  however,  dekhl,  not 


152 


CENTRAL  PAHARl  (KUMAUNl). 


dekhii.  This  conjunctive  participle  is  often  prefixed  to  the  verb  jhtjto,  to  go,  and  the 
whole  has  then  the  force  of  a simple  passive.  Thus,  dekhl  jityo,  to  be  seen. 

Examples  of  the  use  of  the  two  passives  are  as  follows 

A.  ek  Sahar  lai  dekhln  paitho,  a city  also  began  to  be  visible  (II,  5). 

jab  Suli-me  ye-ko  khasam  chafdilo,  taba  jhnali,  she  will  understand  when  her 
husband  will  be  mounted  (passive  of  causal)  upon  the  impalement-post 
(page  61). 

bhol  u lai  pakarilo  aur  meri  syait.ii  lai  pakarili,  to-morrow  both  he  will  be 
arrested,  and  my  wife  will  also  be  arrestod  (pago  97). 

B.  Kdmamaujari  aur  wt-ki  ija lai  wa  balaii  gen , Kamamanjari  and  also  her 
mother  wero  summoned  (passive  of  causal)  there  (page  94). 

yo  ek  bitman-kani  bachEn-me  marl  ga-chh , he  has  been  killed  saving  a Brah- 
man (II,  2). 

Causal  Verbs  arc  formed,  as  in  Hindi,  by  adding  d to  the  root.  filie  infinitive 
ends  in  uno.  Thus,  dekhuno,  to  cause  to  see,  with  a strong  verbal  past  participle  dekhayo 
and  an  adjectival  participle  dekliaiyo.  So,  liauuo , to  cause  to  become ; khan  no  (from 
Jcha&o,  to  eat),  to  feed.  Many  causals  are  also  formed,  as  in  Hindi,  by  lengthening  the 
root  vowel,  or  in  other  ways,  as  in  maratio,  to  kill. 

As  examples  of  causals  we  may  quote  : — 

mero  riati  goru-bhaisan  chariiii-hnni  ban  jai  ra-chh,  my  grandson  has  gone  to 
the  forest  to  graze  cattle  and  buffaloes  (I,  3). 

dpana  kliwen-kani  dekhaya,  she  showed  them  to  her  husband. 

ye-kani  ye-ka  baba-ko  rajya  lai  deulo,  I shall  also  eause  his  father’s  kingdom 
to  be  given  to  him  (page  228). 

jeke  w't-le  karano  chh,  te  pa  ill  katoai  (infinitive  kauno,  to  cause  to  say)  diyau, 
send  word  (Hindi  kahld  do)  beforehand  as  to  whatever  is  to  be  done  by  her 
(page  56). 

Causals  may,  in  their  turn,  be  made  passive  by  adding  ?.  * Examples  are  given 
above  under  the  passive  {chafdilo  and  balaii  gen).  Again  we  can  have  double  causal 
with  infinitives  in  aiino,  as  in  bolaiino,  to  get  a person  called  (from  causal  boluno). 
Sometimes  the  anno  is  contracted  to  anno,  as  in  itpani  dagariyan-kani  dekhaun-su 
khaldi-me  dhari-liyo,  she  put  it  in  her  pocket  to  show  it  to  her  friends  (I,  2).  Here 
the  double  causal  has,  as  sometimes  happens,  the  sense  of  the  causal. 

D.— Compound  Verbs - 

Compound  verbs  are  formed  much  on  the  same  lines  as  in  Hindi. 

Intensive  compounds  are  made  by  prefixing  the  short  form  of  the*  conjunctive 
participle  of  the  main  verb  to  another  subsidiary  verb  which  is  conjugated  throughout. 
The  most  common  subsidiary  verbs  are  junto,  to  go  ; ditto,  to  give  ; lino,  to  take  ; ruyo, 
to  remain  ; rahhano,  to  place  ; and  hhlano,  to  throw.  Compounds  with  hhlano  often 
have  a completive  sense. 

Thus : — 

aijano,  to  arrive. 

bani  jdno,  to  become. 

bhiji  jdtjo,  to  he  soaked. 


.STANDARD  DIALECT. 


153 


hai  jdno,  to  become. 

jhgi  jdno,  to  halt. 

khai  jdno,  to  eat  up. 

li  jdy,o,  to  take  -away. 

marl  (passive)  jdno,  to  have  been  slain. 

nasi  jaito,  or  nhai  jdno,  to  go  away. 

pari  jdno,  to  throw  oneself  down. 

pwji  jdno,  to  arrive. 

pujai  jdno,  to  escort  to  a place. 

puri  jdrio,  to  heal. 

chhari  ditto , to  release. 

dekhi  dino , to  see  for*  oneself,  to  inspect. 

dhari  ditto,  to  place. 

' di  dino,  to  give  away. 
hiti  ditto,  to  go  along. 
khiti  ditto,  to  throw  to  a certain  place. 
lautai  ditto , to  put  back  again. 
nihri  ditto,  to  slay. 
mani  lino,  to  accept,  agree  to. 
li  lino,  to  take  for  oneself. 

hai  rut.to,  to  continue  to  exist  (Hindi,  ho  rahnd). 

batai  rakhano,  to  show. 

banal  halano,  to  finish  making,  to  complete. 

chhari  hhlaito,  to  abandon  completely. 

dekhi  hctlatjio,  to  seo  suddenly,  to  happen  to  see. 

kai  halano,  to  tell  completely. 

kari  halano,  to  finish  doing. 

Examples  of  the  use  of  these  compound  verbs  are  : — 

phiri  dharati-me  ai  gayo,  he  arrived  afterwards  upon  the  earth  (II,  7). 
mal-kani pvjd-hujd  ai  gai,  worship  and  such  like  things  came  to  me  (i.e.  I. 
learnt  to  worship)  (II,  2). 

jtodn,  bludo  dekhatio  chatto , aur  hfist-pust  batti  gayo,  he  became  a youth,  fair  to 
look  upon,  happy  and  plump  (II,  5). 

ui-le  apana  khaniya  satu  talau-me  khiti  digit : jab  aatu  bhiji  gaxj'a,  sab  sat  it  pitai 
samet  khai  gayo,  he  threw  his  dinner-sa^M  into  the  lake  ; when  the  sat tu 
was  thoroughly  soaked  he  ate  it  all  up,  water  and  all  (1, 1). 
mat  bhalo  hai  gay U,  I became  well  (II,  2). 

chyolo  tero  hai  ga-chh,  a son  has  become  yours  (i.e.  you  have  got  a son)  (II,  1). 
tu  Pdtala-ko  rctja  hai  jiilai,  thou  wilt  become  the  king  of  Patala  (II,  3). 
wa  u jhgi  gay  a , there  they  halted  (II,  5). 

Jama-kit  dut  mal-kani  Jamrdj-thal  li-gayh,  Yama’s  messengers  took  me  away 
to  King  Yama  (II,  2). 
yo  mart  ga-chh,  he  has  been  slain  (II,  2). 

phni  dhunan-huni  nasi  ghyh,  they  went  away  to  search  for  water  (I,  1). 
tab  u nhai  gayo,  then  he  went  away  (II,  2). 

VOL.  IX,  TAUT  IV. 


154 


KUMAUNl. 


ek  buret  both- kit  tali  jai-ber  Hn  pari  gayo , having  gone  below  a big  tree,  he 
threw  himself  down  to  sleep  (I,  1). 

Itgit-mS  pafi  gayo,  he  threw  himself  into  the  fire  (II,  5). 
u Pdtdl-me  pttji  gityit,  they  arrived  in  Patala  (II,  5). 

Malang  tol-kani  dur-jalai  pujai  gayo,  Matahga  escorted  him  for  some  distance 
(II,  7). 

tea  myitrh  glian  purl  gityit,  there  my  wounds  were  completely  healed  (passive) 

\Jl,  2). 

ye-vile  ye-kani  chhitri  diyd,  anr  pliiri  lautai  diyd,  for  this  reason  release  him, 
and  put  him  hack  again  (II,  2). 

tum  hama ri  larai  (lekhi  diyan,  do  you  please  inspeot  our  fighting  (I,  3). 
ici-le  ek  ratn  bhet-me  dhari  diyo,  she  presented  a jewel  as  a welcome  (II,  6). 
tum  tot  jitgit  dekhan-hnni  hiti-di  hdlan,  do  you  come  along  to  see  that  place  (II,  3). 
mal-kani  mhri  diyo,  they  slew  me  (II,  2). 

rhja-le  mnni-ki  bat  mhni  If,  the  king  accepted  the  words  of  the  saint  (II,  1). 
achho,  tn-i  li-liye,  good,  do  thou  verily  take  (it  and  keep  it)  (I,  4). 
myitrh  Sh-mS  baliaut  glum  hai  ran-chhiya,  there  had  been  many  wounds  on  my 
body  (II,  2). 

ict  bhyol-me  pujh  jo  Maliddeb-jyn-le  Mdlahg-kani  batai  ritkha-chhiyo , they 
arrived  at  that  mountain  which  Maliadeva-ji  had  shown  to  Matahga  (II,  4). 
rhnda-le  jlmtii  saugan  khai  rdkhi , the  villain  has  taken  a false  oath  (page  105). 
tu  bitto  banai  halalai,  ta  ham  twe-kani  chhori  dyUlit,  when  thou  shalt  have 
finished  making  the  road  I will  release  thee  (page  103). 
jana-le  bed,  saslr,  anr  dharm  harm,  sab  chhitri  halt,  (men)  who  have  alto- 
gether abandoned  the  Vedas,  the  Scriptures,  and  pious  works  (II,  2). 
tci-le  kumdr  dekhi  lutio,  he  happened  to  see  the  prince  (II,  8). 
ah  mat-le  sab  hdl  aph net  tnman- that  kai-hdlt,  now  I have  completely  told  all 
my  affairs  t,o  you  (II,  2). 

jaswe  kdm  kari  hitlalo  wi-kaiti  beri  pairai  diyd,  as  soon  as  he  shall  have  finished 
doing  the  work  put  fetters  on  his  feet  (page  104). 

Potential  compounds  have  sakano  with  the  short  conjunctive  participle.  Thus  : — 
jatuk  dukh  ham  dl  sakulii  tatuk  twe-kani  dyulii , as  much  sorrow  as  I shall  be 
able  to  give  tlice  so  much  will  I give  thee  (page  99). 
wi-kani  myala-me,  jo  chd.nl , u dekhi  sakanl,  whoever  desire  to  see  her  in  the 
fair  can  do  so  (page  105). 

Completive  compounds  aro  formed  with  halano,  as  explained  under  Intensives. 

Desiderative  compounds  are  formed  by  conjugating  chit  no,  to  wish,  with  the 
oblique  infinitive.  Thus : — 

mat  iipiinit  kiikit-kani  mar  ana  ni  chdnyU,  parantu  wl-kani  chhofi  dink  cha-chhu , 
aur  wi-ko  ddar  satkdr  karitnk  cha-chhu  ; ujo  hirit  mat  thagi-ber  Unit  chha- 
chhyii,  ab  ttsike  ui  link  chdnyu,  I do  not  want  to  kill  my  uncle,  but  want 
to  show  honour  and  respect  to  him  ; that  diamond  which  I was  wishing  to 
take  by  fraud,  now  I do  not  wish  to  take  in  that  manner  (page  131). 

The  verb  chdno,  to  desire,  should  not  be  contused  with  the  verb  chaw,  to  look  at. 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


155 


The  passive  of  chdyto , to  wish,  chdlno,  is  used,  to  mean  ‘ it  is  necessary,’  * it  is  pro- 
per,’ Its  third  singular  old  present  is  chat,  which  is  equivalent  to  the  Hindi  chdhiyi , 
but  the  verb  is  conjugated  throughout.  Thus  : — 

mm-kani  dhairya  karano  chai,  it  is  necessary  for  me  to  make  patience,  (i.e. 
I must  bo  paiient)  (page  178). 

Pachho-ka  Paika-ko  tardn  parakhatio  cliai-chh,  the  muscular  strength  of  the 
Hero  of  the  West  is  proper  to  be  tested  {i.e.  I must  test  it)  (I,  1). 
ghamand  karano  ni  chain  (for  chaino),  it  is  not  proper  to  show  pride  (I,  5). 

, N.B. — This  chain  for  chaino  is  not  uncommon. 

te  karan.10  chai-chh,  that  should  be  done  (II,  1). 

muluk  jitana  chain lt  countries  should  be  conquered  (lit.,  are  necessary  to  be 
conquered)  (II,  1). 

satu-ko  thailo  jo  batifhuni  chaT-chhiyu,  a sack  of  sattd,  which  was  necessary 
for  the  road  (I,  1). 

Inoeptives  are  similarly  formed  with  the  verb  paithano  (not  lag  a no),  to  begin- 
The  oblique  inlinitive  may  be  either  weak  or  strong.  Thus  : — 

ghabarai-ber  kaman  paitJui , being  agitated,  they  began  to  tremble  (I,  4). 
dart  gain  aur  kitmanh  pat  thin  ; ek  buriy'a  kun  paithi,  they  (fern.)  became 
afraid,  and  began  to  tremble  ; ail  old  woman  began  to  say  (page  145). 
wi’-kani  mar  an  paithci,  they  began  to  beat  him  (II,  2). 
ek  ftahar  lai  dckhiu  paitho,  a city  also  began  to  be  visible  (II,  5). 
akhan-bati  asn  Un  pa  it  ha,  tears  began  to  come  from  (her)  eyes  (IT.  6). 

As  examples  of  Permissives  and  Acquisitives  we  have : — 

kai-kani  tn  yeti  Un  jan  diye , do  not  allow  any  one  to  come  hither  (II,  5). 
he  dukh  ni  hnn  pau-chhiyo,  no  sorrow  was  allowed  to  become  {i.e,  could  be 
felt)  (II,  7). 

A compound  indicating  necessity  is  made  by  conjugating  para  no,  to  fall,  with 
the  direct  strong  infinitive.  Thus  : — 

anyhra-mc  hitano  paro,  walking  in  darkness  fell  (i.e.  he  had  to  walk  iu  dark- 
ness) (II,  7). 

N.B. — pa  ratio,  to  fall,  must  not  be  confounded  with  papa  no,  to  read. 


VOL  IX,  PART  IV. 


166 


KUMAUM 


The  following  is  therefore  a summary  of  the  conjugation  of  the  verb  hitano  in  its 
more  usual  forms  : — 

Infinitive  or  Verbal  Noun,  hitano , the  act  of  goiug ; obi.  form,  hi  tan,  hitdnd. 

Present  Participle,  hitano  ; fem.  hitani , going;  obi.  form,  hi  tana,  hiianai;  ( hit  anai-rachhu , hitanaira - 
chhu ),  I am  a-going;  hitanai  ra-chhiyu  ( hitanaira-chhiyu ),  I was  a-going. 

Past  Participle,  Weak  Verbal,  hit  a,  fem.  Strong  Verbal,  hi  to,  fem.  hiti ; Adjectival,  hitiyo,  gone. 
Future  Passive  Participle,  hitano,  fem.  hitani , to  be  gone,  about  to  bo  gone ; masc.  obi.  sing,  and  plur. 
hi  (ana. 

Conjunctive  Participle,  hiti,  hiti-her,  going,  having  gone. 


Old  Present,  1 go,  I may  go. 


Imperative,  Go. 


Singular. 

1 Plural. 

i 

Singular. 

Plural. 

Singular. 

Common 

Gender. 

Common  Gender. 

Masculine.  1 2 3 Feminine. 

1 

hitii 

hifu 

... 

... 

i 

hi  fuld  i ... 

2 

hifai 

hifau 

hit 

hifiye 

hifau 

hifiy.t 

hifai  ai  ! hi  tall 

3 

hit 

hitan 

hifan 

... 

... 

j 

hitalo  ' hi  tali 

I 

Future,  I ahull  go. 

Plural. 

mini  no.  Masculine.  f 

i 

...  [ hituld 


Past  Conditional,  (if)  I had  gone,  I should  have  gone. 


Singular. 

Plural. 

Singular. 

Masculine. 

Feminine. 

Masculine. 

Feminine. 

Masculine. 

Feminine. 

1 hifanu ', 

hif  an  nil 
hitani 

• •• 

hif  anil » 
hit  and 

... 

hit  yd 

... 

2 hitanai 

hitani 

hit  and 

... 

hifai 

; hifl 

3 hifano 

hitani 

hitand 

1 

hitanin 

hifo 

hi{i 

Present  Definite,  I go,  I am  gjing, 


-Negative  Present  Definite,  I do  not  go. 


Singular. 


Singular. 


Plural. 


1  hifu-chhu 


hifanu 


2  hifa-chhai  I hifa-chhe  hifa-chha  ; 


3  hita-chh  hifa-chhyalhitani  (*tifY  hitanin  | ni  hitano 


Masculine. 

Fominine. 

Masculine. 

ni  IviLanU, 
ni  hif  any  u 
ni  hitanT 
ni  hitanai 

i 

ni  hipani 

/ 

ni  hitanu 
ni  hipani 

ni  hifana 

ni  hitano 

ni  hitani 

ni  hitdnd 

STANDARD  DIALECT, 


157 


Perfect*  1 have  gone. 


Singular.  Plural. 

t 


Masculine . 

1 . Feminine.  : 

— * — — 

Masculine. 

Feminine. 

1 

hifyu 

; ' i 

■ i 

i j 

i 

i 

hi  (a  | 

2 

hifa-chhai 

! 1 

hifi-chhe 

j . j 

hita-chha 

hifrchhd 

3 

• 

hifa-clch 

! hifi-clih 

hifi 

hifi-chhan 

i 

1 

Imperfect,  I was  going.  1 Pluperfect,  I had  gone. 


I | i 

Singular.  j Plural.  i Singular,  j Plural. 


Masculine. 

Feminine,  j 

1 

Masculine. 

Feminine. 

Masculine. 

1 ■ ' 

Feminine. 

' Masculine. 

Feminine. 

1 

hifa-chhiyu 

i 

...  | 
| 

hifa-chhiya 

• •• 

! hita-chhiyw 
i 

hifi-nhhiyu  hifa-chhiyS 

hifi-chhiyS 

2 

hita-chhiye 

hita-clihi 

1 € 

hifa-chhiya 

j 

1 

1 

! hifa-chhiye 

hifi-chhl 

| hifa-chhiya 

hifi-chhiyd 

3 

JUfa-chhiyo 

| hifa-chhiya 

I 

1 

hifa-chhin 

\ 

hifa-chhiyu 

i 

hifi-chhi 

i hifa-cKhiya 

hifi-chhin 

Any  optional  form  of  the  Auxiliary  verb  may  be  used  throughout. 

In d ecli liable S. — The  ordinary  negative  is  ni  but  fan  is  also  employed  with  the 
imperative.  Ni,  is  emphatic,  ‘ not  in  any  way.’ 

ye-kh  nmraiyt-ko  bakhatni  hyo,  the  time  of  his  death  did  not  come  (II,  2). 
baman-kani  ni  mdran,  do  not  kill  the  Brahman  (II,  2). 
fan  samajiye,  do  not  consider  (11,3). 

An  emphatic  suffix  (like  the  Hindi  hi)  is  at.  Tims,  tn  stoat n-di  jan  samajiyk,  do 
not  thou  consider  this  merely  a dream  (II,  3).  So  dvi-(y)di,  both. 


168 


KUMATJNi. 


I give  two  specimens  of  this  literary  Kuinauni.  One  is  a folktale  taken  from  the  late 
Pandit.  Ganga  Datt  Upreti’s  Bill  Dialects  of  the  Kumann  District.  The  other  is  a chapter 
from  Pandit  Jwala  Datt  Joshi’s  translation  of  the  Da&akumara  Charita.  I take  this 
opportunity  of  recording  my  indebtedne  ss  to  the  kindness  of  these  gentlemen  in  per- 
mitting me  to  use  these  extracts  from  their  valuable  works. 

[ No.  I.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

CENTRAL  PAIlARl  (lvUMAUNl). 


(Standard  Dialect.) 

Specimen  I. 

(From  the  “Hill  Dialects  of  the  Kumann  Division  ’’  of 
Fandit Ganga  Datt  TJpreti , 1900.) 

ii  ijqq  q^f-wq-fq  vz  n 

# qqq-q  ft  ^rrf^r  &qr,  tjq  ijqq  fq^T-qn-  $q-$,  ftqft  q#t-qn 
grcrr-H  fffen  i qqr-qt  qiq  qfq-qq  qtwft  ftq-$  fffqft  i 
TtT  qqfT-qq  qq-qfe  qq  WIX  qq-3fft  q^t  ZTS  fWT  I qqr 

fqq  qqr-q  qroqT  qq-q  stIt  far  wf-qn  w-^T  q*pir 

qrgqi  w % i ^rrqqT  q*-qfe  qTqqr-a&T  fafqrar  qi^-qrr 

qqt,  qt  qTCT-’ffq  qfs*ft,  *ft-qq  ?TZT  qrnfr  I fftifc  WTqqf  fszt, 
qq  qrci-q  qq-q*fq  qqr  qqt  qrnrr  qiwr  qfr  qqt  fqqt  i qq-% 
qxqqT  qrrfqq  qrg  q*#t-ft  f^fq-f^qi  i qrq  fqfw-qqr  qq  qqj 
qrfq  qqq  qr-qfr  i fair  qq  q^t-qq  qftqr  qqr  qqr  qtCT-qnr  efftr 
q-%  ftq  qi%-qqr  i qg#-q  qq  qq^-qtT  q^qq-qq  qwr-qrr  fqrq 
qqqfq  qiq-q  qqT-%  qTfqr  fqq-q  qrRT  i q^q  q q^ft  ^jfqr-qw,  qq 
qtqtx  qifnr  ^qq-^fq  qfq-qqT  i q wm  qqf  qq  qifq  # qifq 
fqq-q  qq  q^-q  qrot  i qiwt  qq  mfq  fqq-^fq  q^q  qmt  t 
qifq  fq  qrqt,  q ftqT-qrr  qTfrqT  qqt  fqqT z q?ft,  #■-%  qq  Iqr-fqr 
ftq  zfz  qq  h 

qiq  i qq-q  qifq-^r  qq  qqfq-qt  wf-qrr 
^qT  §qiT-qi  q^fqq-q  fiqfq-f^qt  i qq  q^fqq-%  q^f-qrr  ttqr-fqr 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


159 


q*  w $zqr  qiTfq-t!fq  i qTfq-qrfq  qqtiit  fqrft 
^r-qn  wrfrqr  qTqfq  w-q  fH?rc  wrt%  *tt  i qq  q*-f % ^mf* 
qrc  Trfq-qjfq  ^4tHi  fqrst  *t*jfa-qT  qurfw  ^Tfk^r-^rtw 
^nxcf%  qrf^-q  qfr-fqrat  i wr  qq:  f^r  TjTq-wt  qq*  ^ smc 
q4-qrt  qrct  q%q-q  fffz-q*  wf-qn  W-^i  qr-qqrf  i q^-fqr  %f%- 
if  W q^t  I %f%-€  Wt,  *STCT  qNq  ^T^TfT  qfTZq-’ffq 

^TT  #-T*,qiT  ^ ^ J IJT^T-^T  ^TT-^t  WT^T  qq  ^TRTt, 

%f^r-%  i srq  q 5qr  qqFffnr  qrrfq  Tfcrt  tot-w  fN- 

1%  %-qq  i TOf-^st  qqr  qrn  qqn-qrr  wq-qrfHr,  wt  wt^t  wt^t 
f&n9  grrS-qfe  qqrf%-qT  qqrf  q#t  *rrft  qqre  srqt  ^rrqnn 
^m-q  qfr-qT  ^T-irfar  qnfq-Tfwqt  i tjrq-sRt  qqr  q^-qn 

xrf^R-qfe  qqf  i qq-€t  qtwf  qf^q-qfz  ^fq-qT  Ttfqi-fqqt  i qq 
q^t-qiT  qqr-%  *Tft  WlT  ^RTT^t,  ^TT^t  ftWt  qrfqq  qr^TTOt  I qf$q 
^fii-qr  qrat,  *nf  qpq-qn  qq?,  q-ir  qft  qt  q^t-qfe  qfq  TTW  f%qt  | 
3 qqfe  qz  qrrq-fqf  qf%  ^t  i qr  qnw  iiz:  %-q%-w  i q% 

^ ' • • • i 

*orfs!  q-w  i *rrq  qq  w qri  qrir-q*:  w #N-q  ^ ^|-  ^ , 

q^qT-qn  qqr-%  q^rt,  qf  qq-q  qq  ^tqq-fqr  qrr -^q-qrfqr  ^ 

Cv  ^ 

5Tiqi<Rt  l qf-R  qf-qT  qrqqiT  II 

« 

qq  qf-fftr  qTZT  writ  i qrzT-^f  qqq-qrfw  qq*  qfen  fqf%, 

#tq-%  qfeqT-q  qrqr,  gq  qqft  wi  qRq-fqfi-  i qfeqi-w  qmt,  qft 
•nfq  iffq  qqq  qq^r-^j-fw  qqr  i ^?-qrfw  ttzt  f^qn  wfw  \ 
M*  g*fft  fnf%  i ^gqr  i-qr  qff qT-t  ^qr  qh 
qnq^T-qft  qtwt  qrqqn  qrRT-q  qft-qT  ^mm  qrfq-q  qq:-qrt% 

• q 

ttzt  f^n  n 

grq  qf  ^q»  qf  qf^T-^  qqiT  qqT,  m qff  qi-qiT  qifq-% 
qf%qT,  qtq  Wqr,  qnq»f T-^t  fr€r  ^qr  frl  ^qr,  qnqf%  qffq  q 
^fr-fqrqT  l qiq^TT  qT-’ffw  qTZT  ^THTt  I ^cj^-q  qffq  ^I'fll  I 
qnfq-q  qfe-qT  qq?  sK  fq»  qn1  #T  ^1%  qiq  f zqr  ^Tfq- 
’^■’c  qq?  4)fqr-qrr  qf^u  fqqr  Sfz-qqt  i qq;  <f)^R-q 


100 


KUMAUNl. 


TOt,  TOTT  wf*3T-$  wr  iftsw  TO,  WT%-$  I c^dT-%  TOt,  Wt  W 

w ?rrf%-^^t  i to  5f%  tot  whtt,  gt  f%- 

fro  i wjtw  ,— iff  wt  wk  TO-^t  wrfw,  wtw  tot, 

xkr  wttot-wt  ^twt  tow, — wNt-%  frorrfw-wT  wmfw  wfe-w  wk- 

krerr  i fqrfr  tot-wt  tow  wiftr  ^fe-w-%  wrfg-^T  wttot  *§rw- 

WfW  TOTWT  I TO-W  TOt  Wf  TO  fTOT  WTOT  f%TP?T-Wkr  I W TO 
I TO  TOW  %fe  wf%-^T  §W,  W%  WT,  wk  TO-Wft  WTfw 
iftw  TOT  l WWW  ^5 T I TO  TOW-W  TOT  TOT-WfW  t TOTT- 

CV^ 

ftf  TO  TOW-W-%  TOW-%  TOt  WrfW-tT  WWW  HWW  TO  Wtf%  kf*T 

nJ  • 

wft  wt  wrfar  wk  TOt-wrr  to-^  wtf-k:  wttot  wT-¥fw  tot  i 
wtwt  tow-w  w-to  to  to-w  wrk  wrw  WTCWT  WTWTTO-W  wk 
wk  wttott  to  frow-3f  to  ii 

TOTO  wr^-wfw  TOt  TOkfrWT  VWW*.-Wfw  W«TOlf  ft-WT  TOt, 

t towsto:,  to  ^fr  ffe-w  tow-%  tot  w i w totc-w  % TO-wt 

TOTO  ^ WTO-Wfa  wwr  fa  WW  I TO-%  TO  3WT,  TO-%  TOT  TO* 
W I WTWWT-fai  ^fa-W  TO  TO  faff  WT-WT  WTOT  W II 


161 


[No.  I.] 


INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 


CENTRAL  PAHA.RI  (KUMAUNI). 


Specimen  I. 


(Standard  Dialect.) 


{From  the  Dialects -of  the  Kuinaun  District,** 

of  Fanitit  Gang  a Datt  Upreti.) 


PUR  AU  A-  P AC  IIHO  - K A P AI K A X A-  K I 
BAST-  WEST-  OF  HER  O FS-  OF 

1.  Kai^samay-me  dvl  nitmi  Paik, 

A-certain-time-in  two  famous  heroes, 

kun-me,  doharo  Pachlio-ksi  kuaa-me, 

corner-in,  the-other  the-wcst-of  corner-in , 


BIT  ETA. 

MEETING. 

ek  Purab-disa-ka 

one  the-east-direclion-of 

rau-chliivsi.  Eka-ko- 

remain  ing  - were.  One-of- 


nam  suni-ber  doharo  ris-me  bliariyo  rau-cdihiyo,  baur  eka- 

name  heard-having  the-other  anger-in  Jilted  remaining-was,  and  one- 

kaf  ghar-bati  dohara-ko  ghar  bar-barsa-ko  bato  tar  chhiyo. 

of  the-house-from  the-other-of  the- house  ticeloe-years-of  road  distant  was. 
Ek  din  Purabb-ka  Paika-le  kpkna-man-me  thari  ki 

One  day  the-east-of  hero-by  his-own-mind-  in  it  ( fem. ) - was-rcsolced  that 

* PaohhO-ka  Paika-ko  taran  katuk  clih,  parakliano  cliai- 

* the-toest-of  hero-of  muscxdar-strength  how-much  is,  to-test  proper- 

ebb.’  Ap&nii-ghar-bati  samala-ka  lijiya  satu-ko  tbailo, 

is.’  His-own-house-from  provision-for-a- journey -of  for  sattu-of  a-sack, 

jo  batii-liuni  chai-chhiyo,  11- her  bata  logo. 

which  the-road-for  necessary -was,  taken-haeing  on-the-road  he-set-himself. 


Dophari 

jalek 

hito, 

tab 

bata-me 

ui-kaui 

ek  baro 

klino 

Noon 

till 

he-walked, 

then 

the-road-in 

him- to 

a great 

long 

ehitkalo 

gairo 

talau 

mijo. 

Ui-le 

apiitia 

kliauiva 

satu 

wide 

deep 

pond 

was-met. 

Him-by 

his-own 

to-be-eaten 

sattus 

talau-me  khiti-diya.  'Jab  aatu  bhiji-gaya  sab  satu 

the-pond-in  were -thrown.  When  the-sattus  was-completely-wet  all  the-sattus 


pani-samet  khai-gayo.  Phiri  ni-fcajau-ka  najlk  ek-banVbota-ka  tali 

the-water-with  he-ate-up.  Then  that-pond-of  near  a-great-tree-of  below 

jai-ber  ^ 6iu  pari-gayo.  Yetuk-ai-mo  ui-talau-ka  najlka-ki 

gone-having  asleep  he-completely-fell,  So-tnueh-eoen-in  that-pond-of  near -of 

bank-kj\  mirag  kpani-ln\na-lo  talau-me  pain  pin-su  ayit. 

the-forest-of  animals  their-auon^custom-by  the-pond-in  water  drinking-for  came. 

VOL.  IX,  PART  iv.  T 


162 


KCMA.UNX. 


Dekhan  ta  talau  suki-ga-chk,  tah  dohari  thaur 

On-seeing  indeed  the- pond  dried -completely -is , then  another  place  water 

dbunan-huni  nasi-g{\y;\.  Ye  math  Ok  ban  h&ti  lai  phni 

searching-for  they-went-away . This  after  a wild  elephant  also  water 

pin-su  ui-talau-me  ayo.  Apano  sun  p&pi  pin-huni 

dr  in  king -for  f hat-pond-in  came.  llis-own  trunk  water  drinkingfor 

talaun  Mlo.  Pani  ni  p&yo,  ta  ris;\-k&  mariyh 

in-the-lake  was-plunged.  Water  not  tcas-got,  then  anger-of  by-being-struck 

baro  chillat  karo,  jai-lc  ui-Paika-ki  nin  tuti-gai. 

great  trumpeting  was-made,  which -by  that-hero-of  sleep  was-completely-broken. 

2.  Paik-kani  bari  ris  tii.  Ui-le  h;\ti-ko  sun 

The-hero-to  great  anger  came.  Him-by  the-elephant-of  the-irunk 

pakari-ber  Pachlu5-k;\  rauner-P&ik:i-k&  patSgan-me  khiti-diyo.  Ui- 
seized-hacing  the-wcst-of  dweller-hero-of  courtyard-in  was-thrown.  That- 

patagan-me  PacbliO-ka  Paika-ki  cheli  ui-bakhat  dhan  kutan 

courtyard-in  the-west-of  hero-of  daughter  (at-)  that-time  paddy  a-pounding 

lhgi-rai-clilii.  Hati-kani  anaukho  kiro  dekhi-ber 

engagcd-remaincd-was.  The-elephant  ( acc .)  a-st range  insect  seen- haring 

dara-kii  mskriyk  apani-ija-the  bhitar  bhaji-gai.  Tab  ui-ki 

fear-of  on-being-struck  her-own-mother-to  within  ran-away.  Then  lier-of 

rnhautari  bhair  ai,  hati-kani  anaukho  kiro  samaji- 

the-mother  outside  came,  the-elephant  (acc.)  a-st  range  insect  nndcrstood- 

ber,  apani-dagariyan-kani  dekhaun-sfl  &pani-khaldi-nte 

having,  her-own-companions-to  showing-for  her -own-pocket -in 

dhari-livo.  Pachlu'i  ui-din-ai  Puraba-ko  Pnik  lai 

it-was-placed  (and)-taken.  Afterwards  on-that-dny-ercn  the-east-of  hero  also 
bar-bar.sa-ko  bato  gharin-mO  hiti-ber  PaehliB-ki  Paika-ka 

twelve-years-of  road  (a-few)-holf-honrs-in  icalked-having  the-west-of  hero-of 

ghar  pujo.  Ui-ki  clicli -tho  Paika-ko  patto  puchho. 

in-house  arrived.  llim-of  daughter- from  thc-hcro-of  trace  was-asked. 

Clioli-le  kayo,  4 inyarh  baujyu  l&kar&  k&tan-huni 

The-daughter-by  it-was-said , 4 my  (plur.  of  respect)  father  timbers  cutting-for 

dhura  jai-ral,  bar  bars  hai-gal.’  Pfxraba-kb  Paika-le 

to-the-moun tain-top  gone- has,  twelve  years  have-passed * The-east-of  the-hcro-by 

dhura-ko  bato  batai-roSgo,  eheli-le  batai-diyo. 

mountain-of  road  to-be-shoion-was-asked,  the-daughter-by  it-was-shoton. 

Jab  u Paik  dbura-liuni  jan  litgi-ra-cbhiyo,  b:\ta-me 

When  that  hero  the-mouutain-top-to  to-go  engaged-teas,  the-road-in 

dvina-ki  bhet  tiai-gai.  Pa^bbo-ko  Paik  sarh-ban&-k& 

the-two-of  meeting  took-place.  The-west-of  hero  the-whole-forest-of 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


rukban-kani,  30  b&?&  b&r&  chhiy&,  jar-at-bati  upari-ber  unaro 

trees  ( acc .),  tohat  great  great  were , root-even- from  torn-up-having  of-them 

baro  bh&ri  pahar  jaso  bwbjo  apanit-kbwara-me  dbari-ber  apana- 
great  heavy  mountain  like  load  his-oicn-head-on  place-having  liis-oicn - 
gliar-htuu  lyun  l&gi-ra-cbhiyo.  Puraba-ko  Paik  ui-ka  paehliin- 

house-toioard  to-take  engaged-was.  The-east-of  hero  him- of  behind- 


bati  gayo,  ui-ko'  bwdjo  pachbin-hati  kliaiebi-be 

from  went,  liim-of  load  behind-from  pulled-havit 

Tab  Pachh5-k5,  Paika-le  baro  3 or  lagayo, 

Then  the-west-of  hero-bg  great  force  was-applied,  > 
lagayo.  Pachbin  dekbi-ber  kayo,  4 Are,  Pura 

pushed.  Behind  looked-having  it-icas-said , 1 Ah,  eat 

tero  nau  paill-bati  suni-rakha-ehlriyo.  Twe-dagari 

thy  name  first-from  hear  d-continually- was.  Thee -with 


bari  icbchliS  chhi.  Sc 

great  wish  was.  Sc 

bhai-clik.  Ab  turn 

become-has.  Now  you 

ham-dwln-me  ko  baro 
us- two-in  who  great 
ban- mo  ham-logana-ki 
forest-in  us-people-of 
jai-ber  larula.’ 

gone-having  we-shall-Jight.' 


So  aj  bliot 

So  to-day  meeting 


I {plur.  for  sing.) 


kliaiehi-ber,  roki-divo. 

pulled-having,  he-was-stopped. 

lagayo,  apano  bwbjo  aghin 
was-applied,  his-own  load  forward 

‘Are,  Puraba-ka  Paik,  mai-le 
‘ Ah,  east-of  hero,  me-bg 

Twe-dagari  bket  karana-ki 
Thee-wilh  meeting  making -of 

liai-pari-chh.  Bari  khusi 


liai-pari-chh. 

oecurred-is. 

larai 

fighting  n 


Bari  khusi 
Great  happiness 


kari-ber 

made-having 


dekbS 

let -us- sec 


chh.’  Puraba-ka  Paika-le  kayo,  * y5 

is.'  The-east-of  hero-bg  if-was-said,  ‘ here 

har-jit-kani  ko  janalo  ? • Gau-me 

losing- icinning-{acc.)  who  will-know  ? Village-in 


Puraba-ka  Paika-le 


3.  Tab  dwiyai  gau-buni  batii  laga. 

Then  both  village-towards  on-road  tcere-Cugaged. 

unan-kani  ek  buriy&  mili.  Dwina-le  lmriva-tbi? 

them-to  a old-woman  icas-met.  The-two-hg  the-ohl-woman-to 

‘ turn  baniari  larai  dekhi-diyau.’  Buriya-le  kayo 

‘ you  our  Jighting  inspect .’  The-old-wonian-bg  it-was-s 

n&ti  goru-bliaisan  charun-lmni  ban  jai-n-dih. 

grandson  (of-)kine-buffaloes  the- grazing  for  to-tlirforest  gone-is. 

rwata  diua  jS-chhu.  Pliiri  tumari  awal-lthiri 

breads  to-gice  going-I-am.  Afterwards  gour  combat 

Yetuk  kai-ber  buriya  It.  d\  ia  ai  1^  1 * 1 ui 

So-much  said-having  the-old-woman-bg  the-two  heroes  and 
bwbjo  apana-kana-me  dbari-ber  apana-nati-tbe  g; 


bata  laga.  BatjVme 

on-road  tcere-Cugaged.  The-road-on 

Dwina-le  lmriya-thi?  kavo. 

The-two-hg  the-old-woman-to  it-icas-said, 

Buriya-le  kayo,  ‘ mero 

The-old-woman-bg  it-was-said,  ‘mi/ 

uni  ban  jai-n-dih.  Ui-ka  ni 

y-for  to-thrforest  gone-is.  Him -to 

ri  tumari  awal-lthiri  dekliulo.’ 

rards  gour  combat  1-will-see.' 

dvivai  Paik  aur  lakara-ko 

by  the-two  heroes  and  the-wood-of 


combat 


bwbjo  apaiia-kana-me  dbari-ber  apana-nati-tbe  gai,  ui-kani 

load  her-own-shoulder-on  placed-having  hcr-own-grandson-to  went,  him-to 

rw&^&  diya. 

breads  were-given. 

VOL.  IX,  PAKT  IT. 


164 


KUHAUNl. 


4.  Jab  yS  dvi  Paik  wa  laran-su  tayar  blitlyk,  tab 

When  these  ttoo  heroes  there  fighting-for  ready  became , then 

buriyiVka  niiti-le  buriy&,  aur  goru-bhaTsit,  ltikara- 

the- old- woman- of  grandson-by  the-old-woman,  and  t he-  kine-buff aloes  > the-wood - 
ko  bvbjo  sudlut  dviyai  Paik.  npani-gSti-me  dhari-liyk. 

of  load  including  the- two  heroes , his-own-fold-of -sheet-in  were- put, 

Apana-ghar-huni  batii  lago.  Yetuk-ai-me 

His-own-house-t&wards  on-the-road  he-set-himself.  So*  much- even -in 

5dhi  lagi.  Ui-5dbi-me  uri-bor  ek  yesi  tbaur 

a- windstorm  arose.  That- windstorm- in  Jlown-having  a such  place 

pujo  ki  jS  dwi  syaini  dhiin  kutan  l&gi-rai-chhin,  aur 

he-arrived  that  where  two  women  paddy  to-husk  engaged-toere,  and 

ek-syaini-ka  5kha  bhitar  paithi-gayo.  Ui-svaini-le  dohari-tbi 

one-worn an-of  in-the-eye  within  he-penetrated.  That-woman-by  the-second-to 

kayo,  * i n y aril-  Skha- me  jhar  paithi-ga-chh,  gari-de.  ’ 

it-was-said,  * my -eye-in  a-bit-of- grass  pcnetrated-has , extract  (-it).* 

Dosari-lc  kayo,  ‘jo  u jhar  mai-kani  di-deli,  ta 

Thesecond-by  it-was-said,  * if  that  bit-of -grass  me- to  you-will-give,  then 

gari-dyulo.  * Tab  paili-syaini-le  kayo,  ‘ Soli  ho,  tu-i 

I-will-extract{ -it) . ’ Then  the-first-woman-by  it-was-said,  * good,  thou-verily 

li-liye.  * Doliari-syaini-le  jbar,  buriya  aur 

take- for -your self.  * Thesecond-u>oman-by  the-bit-of- grass,  the-old-woman  and 

ui-ko  nati,  goru-bhaTsa,  dviyai  Paik  lakj'uil-ks'i  bwaja-samet, 

her-of  grandson,  kine-buff aloes,  the-two  heroes  wood-of  load-together-voith , 

akha-hai  nikali-ber  apani-khaldi-me  dhari-liya.  Phiri 

the-eye-from  extracted-having  her-own-pocket-in  they-were-placed.  Afterwards 

r&tb-ka  bakhat  apani-kba]di-me*hai  gari-bcr  apj'ina-kbweii-kapi 

night-of  at-the-time  her-own-  pocket-in-from  extracted-having  her-own-husband-to 

dckhaya.  Ui-le  kayo,  ‘ y8  sab  kirn  ham&ra-biralu-kani 

they-were- shown.  Him-by  itzwus-said,  ‘ these  all  insects  our-cat-to 

di-de.  TJ  sab  khai-lelo.  * • In  batnn  dekhi-suni-ber 

give-away.  He  all  will- eat- for-himself'  These  words  seen-heard- having 

dviyai  Paik,  buriya,  aur  ui-k<>  nbti  bhaut  ‘ d&rk. 

the-two  heroes,  the-old-woman,  and  her-gf  the- grandson  much  feared. 

Ghabarai-ber  kiur.an  paitha.  Tab  sabana-le  apS-ap3-kani 

Agitated-being  to-tremble  they-began.  Then  all-by  themselves- themselves  ( acc .) 

ye-samsara-ki  sab-basl  uu-me-hai  saban-hai  nano  jilni-ber, 

this-world-in  all-things-in-from  all-than  small  considered-having , 

pachhatai-pachbatai  hat  jori,  binti  kari,  ui-syaini  aur 

lamenting-lamentina  hands  folding , supplication  making,  that-woman  and 


STANDARD  DIALECT 


166 


ui*k&  khwSn-the  chhorai-b6r,  hpina-ghar-huni  giyi. 

her-of  husband-to  been-released-having,  their-own-house-to  went. 

Apkni-gharan-me  jai-bSr  ek-eka-le  yau  sari  bat  ipana-gharakitran- 

Tlieir-own-houses-in  gone-having  one-one-by  this  all  affair  their-own- kinsmen- 

thS  aur  parausin  aur  ip&ni-isht-mitran-thS  kain. 
to  and  neighbours  and  their -own-loved-friends-to  were- mid. 

6.  Sabana-le  apQ-kani  nano 

All-by  themselves  ( ace .)  small 

dhanyabad  dl-hfir  kayo, 

thanksgiving  given-having  it-was-said. 


samajh  i -b  er , P ara  m r>s  w ar-  k a ni 

considered-having,  Ood-to 

‘ he  Parame£war,  ham  Teri- 
‘ O Ood,  we  Thy- 


srishti-me  saban-bai  ninii  ohhfl.  ’ Ye-samsar-me  ke-bata-ko  ghamand 


creation-in  all-than 

small  are. 

5 This- world-in  any-thing-of 

pride 

kai-manushya-knni 

karano  ni 

chain. 

Ek-hai 

ek  thulo, 

ek-hai 

any-man-to 

to-make  not  is-proper. 

One-than 

one  great , 

one-than 

ek  nkno  chh. 

Paraines  wara-k  i 

srishti-me 

ham  sal) 

ki  rani-kit 

barabar 

one  small  is. 

chhu. 

God-of 

creation-in 

ice  all 

worms- of 

equal 

are. 

FREE  TRANSLATION  OF  THE  FOREGOING. 

THE  MEETING  OP  THE  EASTERN  WITH  THE  WESTERN  HEROES. 

(By  Pandit  Gang  a Datt  Utreti.) 

Once  upon  a time  there  lived  two  renowned  heroes,  one  in  the  extreme  east  and  the 
other  in  the  extreme  welt.  Each  of  these  so  envied  the  other  that  even  the  mention  of  the 
one  inflamed  the  other’s  heart.  They  lived  at  a distance  of  twelve  years’  journey  apart. 
Once  the  eastern  hero  was  impelled  to  test  the  muscular  strength  of  the  other,  so  he 
started  from  his  home  with  a supply  of  necessary  provisions,  sattu  (the  flour  of  parched 
grain)  for  the  purpose.  He  arrived  at  noon  at  a long,  broad,  and  deep  lake,  into  which 
he  threw  all  the  sattu  he  had  in  order  to  soak  it.  When  saturated,  tlio  sattu  was 
devoured  by  him  along  with  the  water  of  the  lake.  Then  he  slept  under  the  shade  of  a 
neighbouring  tree.  In  the  meantime,  according  to  their  wont,  all  the  wild  animals  of 
the  jungle  came  to  the  lake  to  drink  water.  Finding  no  water  in  it,  they  left  the  place 
in  search  of  water,  going  to  other  parts  of  the  jungle.  After  that  a wild  elephant  came 
in  and  plunged  his  trunk  into  the  lake  to  And  water ; hut,  as  there  was  no  water  left  in 
the  lake,  ho  shrieked  aloud  furiously,  which  awoke  the  hero  from  sleep. 

Enraged  at  being  thus  disturbed,  the  hero  caught  hold  of  the  trunk  of  the  elephant, 
and  flung  him  away  into  the  courtyard  of  the  western  hero,  where  his  daughter  was 
husking  rice  at  the  time.  She,  being  frightened  at  the  sight  of  the  strange  animal,  fled 
away  to  her  mother,  who  came  out,  and,  seeing  the  strange  animal,  put  it  in  her  pocket 
to  show  to  her  companions.  Immediately  after  this  the  eastern  hero  arrived  there, 
having  travelled  the  twelve  years'  journey  in  a few  hours,  and  not  finding  him  at  home 
enquired  from  his  daughter  the  whereabouts  of  her  father.  She  said  that  her  father 


166 


KTTMATWl. 


(the  western  hero)  had  gone  to  a certain  high  mountain  peak  to  cut  firewood  twelve 
years  ago,  and  advised  him  to  go  there.  So  the  eastern  hero  started  for  the  place 
( dhurh  or  high  mountain  peaks)  and  met  him  on  the  road  coming  to  his  home  carrying 
on  his  head  a mountain  of  firewood  consisting  of  huge  trees  pulled  up  with  their  roots.. 
The  eastern  hero  went  behind  him  and  catching  hold  of  his  load  obstructed  him,  but 
the  western  hero  extricated  his  load  and  pushed  on,  and  on  looking  baok  and  seeing  the 
eastern  hero  said,  ‘ O,  eastern  hero,  I heard  of  you  a long  time  ago,  and  had  a great 
longing  to  see  you.  I am  very  glad  that  I have  seen  you  to-day.  Let  us  fight  now  to 
see  which  of  us  is  the  stronger.’  To  this  the  eastorn  hero  replied,  * We  are  in  the 
jungle  now,  there  is  no  one  here  to  witness  the  result  of  the  contest.  Let  us  go  to  some 
populous  place  and  engage  there.* 

Then  they  went  on  towards  some  villages,  and  on  their  way  met  with  an  old  woman 
whom  they  requested  to  see  their  combat,  bnt  she  told  them  that  she  would  see  their  fight 
after  she  had  given  bread  to  her  grandson,  who  was  grazing  cattle  in  a jungle.  Saying 
thus  she  took  up  both  the  heroes,  together  with  the  load  of  fuel,  on  her  shoulder,  and 
went  to  give  food  to  her  grandson. 

When  her  grandson  had  taken  his  meal  the  heroes  prepared  for  their  combat ; but 
he,  to  their  amazement,  placed  the  old  woman  (his  grandmother)  together  with  the  two 
heroes  and  the  load  of  fuel,  in  the  fold  of  the  sheet  he  had  wrapped  round  his  body,  and 
started  homewards.  Just  then  a high  wind  arose,  which  drifted  him  away  with  the  old 
woman,  the  two  heroes,  and  the  firewood,  like  a hit  of  grass,  and  caused  them  to  pene- 
trate the  eye  of  a woman  who  was  husking  rice  in  company  with  another.  She  asked 
her  companion  to  pull  the  foreign  thing  out  of  her  eye,  but  the  latter  x’efused  to  do  so 
unless  the  former  gave  her  the  article  to  be  taken  from  her  eye.  To  this  the  first  one 
consented.  So  the  other  woman,  after  having  extracted  the  stulf  (the  old  woman,  her 
grandson,  cattle,  and  the  two  heroes  together  with  the  load  of  firewood  wrapped  up 
in  the  sheet  of  her  grandson)  put  it  in  her  pocket  as  a curiosity.  At  night  she  showed 
it  to  her  husband,  who.  after  satisfying  his  curiosity  with  the  strange  creatures,  told  his 
wife  to  give  them  to  his  cat  for  food.  This  command  of  the  man  so  frightened  the 
woman,  her  grandson,  and  the  heroes,  who  were  used  to  boast  of  their  respective  prow- 
ess, that  they  were  quite  mortified  and  humiliated,  and  began  to  consider  themselves 
the  least  creatures  of  the  world,  and  repent  for  what  they  had  done.  Then,  after  having 
obtained  their  release  from  the  man  and  his  wife,  with  great  humiliation  and  entreaty, 
they  started  for  their  respective  homes.  Eacli  of  them  informed  his  own  kinsmen, 
neighbours,  and  relations  of  what  had  happened  to  them. 

They  all  then,  after  having  concluded  that  they  were  the  least  creatures  of  the 
world,  offered  their  thanksgiving  to  Almighty  God  and  prayed,  saying,  ‘ O,  God,  we  are 
all  mean  creatures  of  Thy  making.’  No  man  ought  to  be  proud  of  anything  in  this 
world,  saying  that  one  is  greater  than  another.  We  are  all  like  worms  in  the  sight  of 
God. 


167 


[No.  2.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

CENTRAL  PAHA  HI  (KUMAUNl). 


(Standard  Dialec±.) 

Specimen  IK 

(From  the  Daeafcuin&ra,  Charfta  of  Pandit  Jtvala 
Datt  Jot* hi,  1802.) 

Tcr^r  fqq  qraqq  qsff  ^Tfr,  ,ftr  ft qrft  fqr  grqt  xftqt  q 
qffi?q  qqt  qftqfr  qft  % q$,  qq  fqrfq  mfqq-€t  % w ^ ?t  qnfsr 
q%  qrfr-qT  ii-qrfai  *rqqr  fsr?wiT  \ TTwr-^r  qfq-fqr  qrq  ?nfq -^t, 
fqq  ^tt  qrfr-qT  ^ ^fK^r  qqfq  ft-qrfq  ^rq^T  qq-%  ik  qwt  u 

*n^T  fq*RT  olpS  qf  q^  qq  fqiTT,  q^T  qq^T-q  TTatT  I qf 

qqq  qq?  qrrk?fq  fqqrt  m qkrq  ?pr7  q*ff  f$fr,  qr  ft-qq  qrwq  graft  i 
TrqqTqq-qrfw  ft  qfk-qT  qraw  qfr,  fk  ft-^r  ft-q  wr  f%  q cfr#? 
qft-qfe  w,  qft^r  swtq*ffi,  qr  ami  qr^q  orqft  q»  p ft 
TTon-qrT  qsrrqn-q  q^tqTfqfft  qqfgr-qr  ft-q  fr  qrfr  fqr  ft  graq-ftr  qffq 
qnfqfq  qran  wq  ^r  qm-qq  qraw  wq,  qqq-%  ftq,  mw,  fk  w , qnf, 
qq  WT%qraf  qfk ^ffq-€t  q»m q»Tft  i *ftfr  qrq  q qqq  graft  f^ftt  i qq- 
qf?;q  gqiq  q^if-qr  ^^ffe  qfm  qrfrw  qk  qifftfft  q^T  fftqrqkf  i 
qfqHfc  qqr  fqq  «mr  ^qffqq-%  qqr  qRi  wft,  qfk  ft-qrfnr  qm 
§ST  I W-ftt  qqq-q  qraft  fft F qram-qrfft  fq  qkt  I qqq  q ftf%  qfe  ft* 
qrrq:,  qfk  q-qrftr  qrk-fqqt  i qrq  If  qqj^  qq  qRT-qfT  ^cT  q-qif%  qq- 
TTq-q  f%-qqT  \ qrHTTq-%  qraftfq T mfq  q-qrr  qrq-^ft  qc<jcT  fq  qiftt, 
qk  ft  qq?  qmqr-qrfq  srqq-q  qrft-qw  i ft  fttft  ft-q*  far  WTfk-fftqT  fk  ft- 
q?fq  qf-qn  qifqq-fqr  fqfqr  fqrfr  fqqr  i qrrqwr  qTTqT  qf^-qfr 
i fqilf  qq q-qrfw qRqfq qq qq: q qqr qnrf-qrfq  sfqq-qqfeqtqiqt, 

Si  G\  • 

«TTTr  qf^-^T  qrfa  ^ %-^1%qT  I qf  qJTTT  fqq  qrqT  q-qrfq  qr 
%-q  qf  rjttt  ^ gft-qqT  qVrqt  %-qf  i f qt%q  q-qrf%  q qrqq  fqqr 


KUMATTNI. 


168 

sts-%sfsrs-%  ssr-fsfti  ft-s  fr-srfs  sf-fs  ssrer  ?3§s,  ^rim^r 
SET-fS  SSTSTCfsfst  I i ft  fss 

sfe  STsttot  ssfsss-%  w fs,  vtTTOT-srs-s  sTfs  ^5  sht  sstss-«J- 
fs  wren  scf^  i ^ s-s  to  tos  stsst  gss-tr  s snff  i to  srs 
gro-tf  s1%  s,  rera  tost  sss  fs^t  11 

St  ft  sfs  shs-%  SSS  %-S  STTO-S  STO-tf  Sift  fST  ffsST 
TTS  STS-S  TOTTO-ST-%  S-SifS  TO^T  TO  ft  sftw  fST  TOT  fir 

TPren  f fs-sT  tot  ?§fs  tot  to  ?s-srf?ir  to  fsf  i tot  ffsT-Tfs 
TOSS  sss-srr  fts-ir  st  to  sffs  ft-ST  tssro  rets  w i ft-s 
ififts  sros-ff,  sh  fts-sf  srefs-siT  *rt  to  i s sf  st  i rets- 
stt  to  sst  to  Itot  s i ft-s  s sis,  sf  re-srfs  to  sfsft 
stst  to  frost  i s ft-s  sfsft  s f s srfro  i toT  srfr-sT 

S TOTS-St  TTST  %-STst  I f-Sifs  S SIS  TO  SSfSS  I StS  TTST- 
st  retst  Sif  T-S  I s # 5TTTT  ^TOT  STSt  I f fts  S SSTt 
SSt  S str  TO  SS  ft  SPTT  TOW-’ffs  f%fe-fs  TOSt  II 

STSS-fs  TO  gfS-ST  SiST-S  ft-STT  TOST  STST-St  TOR!  Sift  I 
ST  St  TO  Stff-ST  f%  reTTT  TOfSST  S STS-S  Tits  ^ST-STSS  4, 
ft-S  TOS-S  % fs  STSt  fH  TOTTS  STTTT  TO  TOS  ftS  ffS  S S^- 
SS^  STfS-ST  STSS-tf  sft  I STSS  sfr  S ft  retS-S  TOT  St  STOSS* 
3ST-S  STSS-SifS  S^-TTSl%fr  I S fts  ft  TOT?:  TTSSTTOTSTfs  TOT- 

v*  ^ 

TOt  sfS-ST  STtcT  fTO  TOT  I TOS-S  TO  STST  SSS-S  ft-Sifs 
gft,  TO  sf  ft-STt  SSt  fs  STSt  I TO  TOS-S  ft  STSt  fs  TOTS 

fs  fss-ir  ft-srfs  gsst  % sir  sVfo-sT  to  stst  sssft  sft 

sfe  l ft  f f S TO  TOS-^fs  5%-?TST  U 

■% 

STTO  tSTO  %-TO  f TOT  fTOT  ?fft  I ft-S  ST  STST-TO  STft 

^ ft-f  st  sfsft  trot  s sst,  sh:  tos  sret  i s^s  sflt 

sreror-srere  ft  sfs  tot  i s^t  sss  ssrrst  fsst  € ststs- 
S sfs-w  I sfs  ^T.  T TOS-srfs  TO  STS  ffst, 

TO  sro:  ^ f?fts  ^ft  i sf  f srfs  w i sttos  stsr-W  srft 

f M 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


169 


far  w ffa  ^fa  fair  i *r^Hit  ^rrergT  trr?t 

*rrr,  ^r^Tt  ^ ^ ^ ^rr^T-ir  ^1%-*TfT  i ^t^t 

ffa-W  TOIT-^fe  *k  faTOt,  fk  5^T5T,  *r€t  ^faft  fk  ^r 

srfa-*Tft  i sjfarofar  % ^fa?  to*  txtwz  *rfr  i ^ *nro 

^rnfiT-%  f t *iifaft  ?rfa  sm-wfe  <3to-^t  ^Tfafro-fa  ^f^  *ffa  ^ 

• • ©^ 

^sqifar  ^far  ^1%  i ^tt  *rfro-^fe  to  ^fa  f^r  %«ifar  ^rrfa 

ggjsf  ^Ifar  fa  \ ft-«RT  *t^T  fTTfT  f ^T  fa^TT,  ^fk  ?T?nft  mfa  % 

ft-ir  *fkr  to*  fafr  n 

TOfa-5"  ft-%  to  Ter  ifc-w*  ^k  faft  i *rw  *ttto-% 
ft-W  ^ ft  i fk  ^rMfe  ffa,  to  ft-*RT  ^faR-wfe  fkr 
§3T  *fk  ft-%  *Rft  fa  if  ^URT^^iT  ^li-fa  kfa  ^Tfafa  ^ I flft 
^t®t  xiTrorot  ttsit  fa^r-<R  'RTfr-^w  i ftfat  xEfkft  «^nfa  I if 
ft-fa  *iT^r  #,  ^k  # i ^TfT  fa*r  wit  if  to  fare-tf 

toto  fanm-’ffa  n-w  i fM«far  If  Ifa-t?;  fts  <3Tfa  fk  ft-% 
If -§*  x?€t  *fift  fa  tf  <rt,  *jt§t  faro  to  to  fa^-ffa-TO5ft 
’ ^rrfafa  *itcto-%  ^rkrt,  fk  ^ fa  ^Tfa  sit  ^fat  ^fk 

to  ft  frfa  fafa-ff  ^fa-%  hitor-st  frer  *rto  i g ^mfat 
faro  ^Rk-ik  If  TOTt  ^ffr  fa-l^  i ft  fwx  TOk^r-fa  tot?-% 
TO  TOTO*  I TO  ^ ^*lfa  SIT  % fvft  TTW  # fTOT  I *TTTO 
SF^fasT**TOT  *TTOT  Wfe  TO  =f*HT  %fa-fT 

^Rlfafa-fa  TO  ft-%  HTfa-fa,  ^-fa  TOT¥-%  ^T^T  faro 
q^T  TTTTO  <fk  ^RTfafa-fa  SH  ^f-WI-i  Vfft  II 

G\ 

50c^nr  i ft-^rr 

htctt^t  ftfa-^r  <dk<u-fa  frra  1 ^ WeT  ^ ^fa-^fa 

^rrft  ft  w?r  ^tto-%  ft-^far  tj^r  ^fa  fa  i ft-lf  ft  ^tttot  fa 
fa  ^-*GT  WT-^f  ^ ffa  fMfifa  TO,  ^PET,  ^ ff  fa 

^ ^Yfaft  1 TTTTO  ft-^Rfa  fltS  TO-TOt  I ^Tf T 

^renTT-*  fazft  TOt  i ^t  fa *rro r ww-W  fak  ^fa-f  f- 
TOt  l ft-^rfa  TOfa*n  ft-^RT  ^ ff  fa  fTOT  I f ^ ^ ^ 

VOL.  IX.  PAKT  IV.  k 


170 


KUMATJNi. 


ten  ^ wHi-ft  f$fr,  ff  *nft,  fk 

wm-’ffar  tfs-*Tft  i ft-%  ft  fwt  f#  wr*r 

*rtfff#  #t-t*  fk  *nrkr  fkrc  ^*nf t 

#t#T  W<?TT  il 

tj?f#-#  ft-#  #5fT  %fk-^T#t  I ft  ^ W*TT-%  ff*T  $ft,  ^fk 

ft-#  wr  *rf#T  ^rft  ffr  fft  *rrf#3T  <i«wrw  f I ^ ft-lf 
wr  fk  ft-^TT  ^5T  qft  I fk  ft-#  *ffft  f#  *3TCT  ^T3T 
*1P3  fWT  ft  7WKI  %-^  I TT^T^T-#  ft-^TT  ^TT^T  3TS-- 

fi^FST  Ttf#  fk  *ffft  f#  fkT^rT  # ^frf%  f#f#-ik 

^t%  *rf#  || 

• nI 

ffk  € ft  srfnt  fte  gf#  wkr-#  ffs-*nn,  fk  #3T-#iftf-  git 

f#  g ^tt^t  srf#  % ^n^nr-fW,  ff  ^rrH,  ft  sif#  ft  w, 

fk  ff  ^nrf^ff  C3TTTT  ^TTf T #f-*rfe  ^5TT#f  I 

^f«IT  ^ II 


171 


[ No.  2] 

INDO'ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Grour 

CENTRAL  PAHARl  (KUMAUNl). 

(Standard  Dialect.) 


Specimen  II. 


(From  the  JJaiakumdra  Char  Ha  of  Pan  flit 
Jtvala  Datt  Joshi,  1892.) 


1. 


Ek 

One 


kayo 

it-icas-said 


din 

day 

ki, 

that, 


Bamdeb 
Vdmadeva 
‘ jaso 

* what-kind-of 
ehydlo  tcro  liai-ga-chh.  Ab 

son  thine  become-has.  Now 

to  karano  chai-cHli, 

that  to-be-done  necessary-is, 

jit&na  oliainl.’ 

to-be-conquered  a re- necessary' 
din-bar  kari-ber  nau 

day-date  made-having  the-nine 
bhair  bhejo. 
outside  it-was-sent. 

2.  Til wark-di nan -j  Slai 
A-few-days-d  nring 


risbi 

the-saint 

ckytilo 

son 

ye-kani 
him  (ace.) 


raja-tbai  ayo, 
the-king-to  came, 
tu  ehs-chbiyc, 
thou  desiring -werest, 

chhvatrina-ko  je 
kshattriyas-of  what 


aur  larai 
and  fighting 

Raja-lo 
The-king-by 
kumaran-dagari 
princes -with 


kari-ber 

done-having 

muui-ki 

the-saint-of 

wl-kani 

him- for 


aur  ui-le 
and  him-by 
taso 

that-kind-oj 
kam  ebb 
business  is 

ye-kani  muluk 
him-to  countries 
bat  mani-li, 
word  was-obeyed, 

apana-des-bai 
li  is  -own-conn  try  -from 


yo 

they 


Bindbyacliala-ksi  jangal-mg 
Vindhyu-mountain-of  forest-in  they-arrived. 


yeth-uth 

hither-thithcr 

Wa 

There 


pbira, 

wandered, 


puja 


milo, 
was -met, 


]o 

who 


Bbllau 
a-Bhtl  (obi.) 


jaso  dckhi-ckhivo,  par 

like  being-seen- icas,  but 


unan 

(to-)  them 

wl-ka 
him- of 


pacliba 

afterwards 

ek  adimi 
a man 

galan 

(on- tin;-)  neck 


janyo 

cblii. 

Rajbalian-kani  \vl 

dekhi-ber 

iisaj 

a- bra  hm  an  ica  l- thread 

was. 

Rdjavdhana-to  him 

seen-having 

astonishment 

bhayo,  aur 

wl-lo 

wi-tbai 

puohlio  ki,  ‘ to 

ko  cbbai,  ka-bati 

beomne,  and 

hini-by 

him-to 

it-was-asked  that,  1 thou  who  art. 

wherefrom 

a-chhai  ? 

Bhil 

jaso 

dckhi-ehhai. 

par 

tyara-giilan 

come~art  ? 

Bhll 

like 

being-seen-thou-art. 

but 

(on-)thy-ueck 

janyo 

ke-lai 

chh  ? * Wi-adimi-le 

raja-ka 

ehyala-thai 

a-brahmanical-thrcad 

what-for 

is  ? * That-man-by 

tlie-king-of 

son  (acc.) 

bhalo  adimi  samaji-bcr  wi-tbai 

good  man  understood- having  him-to 

VOL.  TX,  PART  IV. 


yo  kayo  ki,  ‘ ye-jangal-me 

this  toassaid  (hat,  ‘ this-forest-in 

z * 


172 


KUMATJNl. 


bahaut  adimi  yh.sk  chhan  jo  namh-kh  bhman  ebb  an,  janana-le 

many  men  of-this-kind  are  i oho  name-of  Brahmans  are , tchom-by 

bed,  Sastr,  aur  dharm,  kann,  sab  chhhri-hal?. 


Veda,  Scripture,  and 

religion. 

{religious-)aot,  all 

icere- abandoned- completely , 

aur  dhkuna-ko  kam 

karnni. 

Mybro 

bab 

lai 

inan-Si 

jaso 

and  robbers-of  business  do. 

Uly 

father 

also 

these-verily 

like 

ehbiyo.  Jab-bati 

mat  jwan 

bhayfl. 

mat-le 

lai 

lut-pit 

babaut 

was.  When- from 

1 youth 

became, 

me-by 

also 

robbery 

much 

kari-chb,  aur  adimi 

bhrh 

dik 

karf. 

Esik-ai  ek 

din 

done-teas,  and  men  much  troubled  were-made.  Thus  one  day 

myhrh-dagariyana-lo  ek  bhman  pakaro,  aur  wi-kani  mhrap 

my-companions-by  a Brahman  was- seized,  and  him  (ace.)  to-kill 

paithh.  Mai-le  unan-that  kayo  ki,  “ bhtnan-kani  ni 

they-began.  Me-by  them-to  it-ioas-said  that,  “ the- Brahman  (ace.)  not 

marau.”  Unan  mat  dekhi  bari  vis  ai  aur  mai-kani 

kill."  {To-)  them  me  seeing  great  anger  came  and  me- for 

mhri-diyo.  Jab  mat  maryS,  tab  Jamh-kh  dut 

it-was-killcd-completely.  When  I died,  then  Yama-of  messengers 

mat-kani  Jam-raj- that  li-ghyh.  Jam-rhja-le  kayo  ki,  “ hji 

me  ( ace .)  Yama-king-to  took-away.  Yama-king-by  it-was-said  that,  “ to-day 

yg-kh  marana-ko  bakliat  ni  hyo,  aur  yo  ek-bhman-kani  bach  un- ml 
him-of  dying-of  time  not  came,  and  he  a-Brdhman  {acc.)  saving-in 

mari-ga-chh.  Ye-vlle  ye-kani  cbkari-diya,  aur  ye-kani 

been-killed-gone-is.  Bor -this -reason  him  {acc.)  release-completely , and  him-to 
wa-kh  papinai-ki  durdaih  dekliai-ber  phiri  lautai-diya. 

there-of  stnners-of  evil-state  shown-having  again  cause-him-to-retum-completely. 

Aphna-purhna-ao-ml  yo  raulo.”  Phiri  jab  mai-kani  hpani 

Ris-own-old-body-in  he  will-remain Again  when  ms-to  my-own 

sudli  ai  ta  mai-le  ap§-kani  jangaj-mS  pariyo  phyo, 

consciousness  came  then  me-by  my  self -for  the-forcst-in  fallen  it-was  found, 

aur  myara-an-ml  babaut  ghau  hai-rau-chbiyh.  Wa  myhrh  mitr 

and  my-body-in  many  wounds  become-remained-were.  There  my  friends 

hya  aur  mai-kani  gfcar  li-jai,  w8  myhrh  ghau 

came  and  me  {acc.)  to-the-hoase  having -taken- away,  there  my  toounds 

puri-ghyh  aur  mat  bhalo  hai-gayn.  Ye-pachhin  mai-kani 

were-healed-eompletely  and  I well  became.  This-after  me- to 

u bhmap  milo,  jo  mai-le  dSkun-liai  bacha-ohhiyo.  Wi-le 

that  Brahman  was -met,  who  me-by  the- robber s-from  saved-was.  Him- by 

mai-kani  dharma-ki  pustak  sunain,  aur  Mahad6b-jyu-ki 

nie-to  religion-of  books  were-caused-to-be-heard,  and  JHahddSvaeji-of 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


178 


puja  karani  sikai.  Jab  mai-kani  puja-huja,  ai-gai, 

worship  to-be-done  woe-taught.  When  me- to  worship-etc .,  came-completely , 

tab  u nhai-gayo.  Wi-din-bati  mai  kpki^k-dagariyan-hai  alag, 

then  he  went-away.  * That-day-from  I my-own-companions-from  apart, 

r3-chhu,  aur  dharm-karm-mi  lkgi-rH-chhu,  aur  Mabadeb- 

remaining-am,  and  religion- works-in  applied-remaining-am , and  Mahadeva - 

jyu-ki  tapasya  karS-ohhu.  Ab  mai-le  sab  hal  ap&nh  tuman-thai 

jl-of  austerity  doing-am.  Now  me-by  entire  affairs  of-myself  you-to 

kai-hatf.  JEk  bat  tuman-thai  kuni  cbh,  myark 

wei'e-told-completely.  One  thing  you-to  to-be-said  is,  of- me 

dagkrk  alag  hitau.’ 

with  apart  wove* 


3.  So  dvl  jani  auran-kai  alag  hai-jai,  llatanga-le 

Those  two  persons  the-others-from  apart  having -become,  Matahga-by 

kdwar-thai  kayo  ki,  ‘ beliyk  rat  swain-mi  Mahadeb-jyu-le 
the-Prince-to  it-ioas-said  that,  * yesterday  night  a-dream-in  Mahadeva- ji-by 


inai-kani  darSan  de-chh,  aur  yo  kau-chh  ki,  “ ham  teri  tapasya 

» ne-to  interview  given-is,  and  this  said-is  that,  “ we  thy  austerity 

dekhi-ber  bark  kku£i  bhayS.  Ab  twe-kani  plial  din§. 

seen- having  much  pleased  became.  Now  thee-to  the-fruit  I-give. 

Uttar-di6k-huni  daudak-jangala-ka  bich-me,  jo  gar  ja-ohhi, 


The-northern-direction-to  the-Dandaka-forest-of  middle-in,  what  river  going-was, 

v?i-kk  kiuark  bkyol  ohh.  AVi-me  phatik  chamakanai-rf, 

it-of  ( on- the-) edge  a-mountain  is.  It-in  crystals  a-glittering-have-remained, 

aur  bich-mi  Parbati-kk  pau  chkan.  Tu  wa  jk. 

and  middle-in  Parvatl-of  foot  {-marks ) are.  Thou  there  go. 

Bhyola-kk  ek-tarph  ek  bi'mbar  cbh.  Wi-mO  tu  jaye,  wS 

The-mountain-of  ( on-)one-side  a cave  is.  It-in  thou  go,  there 

twe-kaqi  6k  lekhiyo  tkink  patr  milalo.  Je  wl-mi  lekhiyo 

thee-to  a been-written  copper  plate  tvill-be-fomd.  What  it-in  been-written 
chh,  te  tu  kariye.  Eso  kari-ber  tu  Patala-ko  rajk  liai-jalai. 

w,  that  thou  do . Such  doue-having  thou  Pdtdla-of  king  wilt-become. 

Ye-ka^i  tu  swain-ai  jan  samajiye.  Bhol  raja-ko 

This  ( acc .)  thou  a-dream-merely  not  understand.  To-morrow  a-king-of 


chyfilo  Qner  «hh.  TJ  lai  tyara 

son  a-oomer  is.  He  also  of-thee 

mai  tumaro  3no  ehai-rau-chhyS, 

I your  coming  looking-remained-icas, 


dagkrk 

jklo.” 

Ye- vile 

with 

will-go.'* 

For-  thi s-  reason 

aur 

ab 

turn 

wi  jagk 

and 

now 

you 

that  place 

dekhan-huni  lii^i-di  halau.’ 
seeing- for  moving  oomef 


174 


KTJMATJNdEc 


4.  Matanga-ki  bat 


suni-ber 


kdwara-le  wi-kfc,  daghr& 


Matahga-of  word  "heard* having  the-Prince-by  hitn-qf 


ja^a-ka 

going-of 


karar 

agreement 

dagariya 

companions 

unan-thaT 

them-to 


karo. 

was-made. 
y e-bat-mS 
this- affair -in 
ke  ni 
anything  not 


Par 

But 


yo 

this 


raji 

agreeing 

kayo, 

icas-said, 

nlu  a i -clilii,  u khusu-khusu 

sleep  come-icas,  he  secretly 
nur  u wi-bhyol-niS  puj;\ 


with 

bat  sochi-ber  . v ki,  * * my^r& 

th  ing  considered-having : 1 . th  at,  * * myf 

huner  nliktnn  * kai,  \ wl^Ie 

becomers  ( will-)not-be  * saying,  . . him-by 


aur  adharat  k&r&,  jab  unan 
and  half -night  (at-)  time,  when  (to-)them 

bh&ji-ber  Matang-tliai  gayo. ' Matahgj 
absconded-having  Mdtahga-to  went.  Matahga 

j<»  Mabadeb-jyu-le  Matang-kapi  batai* 
and  he  that-mountain-in  arrived  which  Ala  hade  va-j  l-by  Mdtahga-to 

r&kha-chhiyo.  Ye  bicli  nau  kuaiar  ltajbahan-kani 

placed-was.  This  amid  to-the-nine  princes  Rdjavdhana  ( acc .) 

dekhi-ber  bahaut  dik  bh&ya.  Unana-le  sab  jangaj-ml 

seen- having  much  troubled  became.  Them-by  all  places  forest-in 

dhuno,  par  kai  wl-ko  patto  ni  lago.  Tab  unana-le 

it-was-searched,  but  any  him-of  trace  not  was-discovered.  Then  them-by 

kayo  ki,  * haman  des-desan-m?  wi-kani  dhuuaao  chaT-chh, 

was-said  that,  ‘ (to-)  its  count ry-conntries-in  him-for  to-search  necessary-is, 


shown- 
bar&iyo 
been- lost 

wi-kani 

him-for 
yo 

this 


chai-chli.’ 


necessary-is. 


. rw 

(wa 


Yo 

This 


titma 


aur  lautt-ber  ek-j&ga  ek-batto  lmno 

and  returned-having  (in-)on  e-place  together  to-become 

kai-ber  u yctb-uth  desan-huni  nhai-gaya. 
said-having  they  hither- 1 hither  conntries-to  went -a  way,  \ 

6.  Matang  nidar  hai-ber  bimbar  bhitar  gayo.  Wi-le 

Matahga  fearless  been-haoing  the-cave  within  went.  Ilim-by  there  the-copper 

patr  payo,  aur  wi-me  jo  lekhivo  elibiyo  te  paro,  aur  uswe 

plate  was-fonnd,  and  it-in  what  been-written  was  that  toas-read,  and  so 

karo.  Bahaut  dur  jalai  anyara-anyar-ai  dwi  jani 

it-was-done.  Much  distance  during  in-darkness-very-darkness-ia  the-two  persons 

gay  a.  Pacblu't  unan  ujvalo  milo,  aur  u Patsil-rae  puji-gkyi. 
went.  Afterwards  to- them  light  was- met,  and  they  Pdtdla-in  arrived-completely . 

Maui  aur  dur  jai-ber  unan-kani  ck  tal  mijo,  aur  ek  4almr 

A-little  more  distance  gone-having  them-to  a lake  was-met,  and  a city 

lai  dekhin  paitho.  Wa  u jagi-giiva.  Matanga-le  kuwar-thai 

also  to-be-seen  began.  There  they  stopped-completcUj . Mdtnhga-by  the-JPrince-to 

kayo  ki,  ‘ kai-kaui  tu  yeti  On  jan  diye.’  Ap8 

it-was-said  that,  ‘ anyone  (acc.)  thou  hither  to-come  not  please-to- allow*  Himself 

wi-le  mastak-ai  l&kara  ok-baitu  knra,  aur  &go  balo,  aur-.  mantr 

him-by  much-verity  sticks  together  were-made,  and  fire  was-lit,  and  charms 


175 


”v  STAJBAED  DIALECT. 

pirfc,  •;  aiir  *igirf»S  pari-'gayo.  Thwiri-dhil-ml  igi-bati 

were-recited,\  *&nd  'jhe-ftre-irg  he-f ell^sompletely.  A-sniSll-interval-in  the-fire-from 

bhafr  mkajp,  , Jiijr  jwan,  bhalo  dekliaijo  ohano,  aur  hrist-pust 

oitt  hfrQmerge&K.Qnd  a-youth,  good  to-be-seen  to-be-observed , and  happy-plump 
".ba^i-gayo.-  K3war-l<ani  ye  rlekhi  baro  isaj  bbayo.  Jaswc 

* h ediesame-CoYnpletely.  The-Prince-to  this  seeing  much  astonishment  became.  As 
M&tang  *■  kgi-hai  bbair  a-cliliiyo,  taswc  £aliar-bati  unana-le  adimina-ki 

Mdtmga  the- fire- from  out  oome-was,  so  the-city-from  them-by  men-of 

bayi"  bbif  ap3  ujyini  3ui  dckhi.  Unaril  aghin-bati  ek  bari 

((.•great  ‘crowd  themselves  towards  coming  was- seen.  Of-thcm  before-from  a very 

siiridar  dekliani  ohani  jwan  svaini  chlii.  IVi-kii  lukira  bari 

beautiful  to-be-seen  to-be-observed  youthful  woman  teas.  Her-of  garments  very 
sundar  chbiyi,  aur  gabano  pato  lai  wi-thai  babaut  bhalo  chliiyo. 

beautiful  were , and  ornament  adornment  also  her- to  very  good  ions. 

6.  Matang-tliai  ai-ber  wi-lo  ek  rata  bhet-ml  dbari-divo. 

Matahga-to  comc-having  her-by  a jewel  meeting  -present  ation-in  was-placed-down . ' 

jab  Matanga-lo  wi-thai  puchho,  ‘ tu  ko  ehbe  ? aur  ka-bati 
When  Mdtahga-by  her-to  it-was-asked,  4 thou  who  art  ? and  where- from 

ai-clihe  ? * tab  wi-kb  Skhan-bati  Ssu  Tin  paitlib,  aur  wi-lo  kayo 

come-art  ? * then  her-of  eyes-from  tears  to-come  began,  and  her-by  it-was-said 

ki,  * mai  Asuranb-kb  rijai-ki  clioli  Kalindi  ebbs.  Mero  bab 

that,  4 1 the-Asnras-of  king-of  daughter  Kalindi  am.  Jly  father 

Patala-ko  rkja  Bisnu-lc  miri-de-chh.  "Wi-ko  kwe  cbyOlo  uhiti.  Mai 

Pdtdla-of  king  Vishnu-by  slain-is.  Jlim-of  any  son  is-not.  I 

wi-ki  waas  olihrS,  aur  bbri-dukh-me  olihu.  Thwiri  din  bhbyb 

him-of  heiress  am,  and  much-sorrow-in  am.  A-feto  days  were  (i.e.  ago) 

mai  ek-siddh-thaT  salali  lina-huni  gai-clihyfl.  Wi-kani  mai  dekhi-ber 

I a- saint.- to  advice  taking-for  gone-was.  llim-to  me  seen-having 

tith  i;\gi,  aur  wi-le  mai-tliai  eso  kayo  ki,  “ dliairva  kar, 
compassion  touched,  and  him-by  mc-to  thus  it-was-said  that,  “ courage  make, 

thwarb-dinan-pachbb  ek  dibya-Sii-wilo  adimi  dbarati-bati  Patal-ing 

a-few-days-after  a godlike-body-possessor  man  the- earth- from  Pdtdla-in 

klo,  aur  u twe-dagari  bya  kai*alo,  aur  turn  dvi  jani  mili-ber 
will-come , and  he  tliee-with  marriage  will-make,  and  you  two  persons  met-haoing 

bari-khu$i-le  Patal-mi  rajya  knrala.”  Ye-bbta-ko  ni  sell  ay 

much-happiness- with  Pdtdla-in  ruling  will-do.”  This-icord-of  certainty 

kari-ber  mai  tumaro  Ono  cbai-rai-cliliyn.  So  bphnb-wc  jirna-k  i 

made-having  I your  coming  expecting-remaincd-was.  Therefore  my-own-viziers-qf 

salah  a- la  - ab  tuman-thai  ayfl.  Turn  mai-dagari  bya  lai  karau, 

advice-with  now  you-to  I-came.  You  tne-tcith  marriage  also  make. 


176 


KUMAUNl. 


rajya  lai  liya.’  Matang  Mabadeb-jyu-kd  baclmn  otuk  jaldi  pur& 

ruling  also  do .*  Matanga  Mahadeva-ji-of  the-words  so  quickly  fulfilled 

bund  dekhi-ber  baro  khuSi  bbayo,  aur  Kalindi-ki  bat  wi-le 

becoming  seen-havtng  very  happy  became , and  Kdlindj-of  words  him-by 

mdni-li,  aur  Kuwara-ki  salaha-lo  thwdrd-dinan-paohhd  Matang  aur 

were-accepted,  and  the-Prince-of  advice- tc  it  h a-fcw-days-after  Matanga  and 

Kalindi-ki  bya  dhum-dhdma-le  bbayo. 

Kdlindl-of  marriage  pomp-with  became. 


7.  ltajbabana-ko  Patal-ine  baro  adar-satkar  bbayo. 
Bajavdhana-of  Patdla-in  much  honour-hospitality  became. 

wi-kd  man  Patal  obbori-b5r  dharti-kuni  lautana-ki 
him-of  (in-) mind  Pdtdla  left-having  ihe-earth-to  returning-of 


Pdchhd 

Afterwards 


wi-bakhat 


Matanga-le 


Jai-bakhat  u mali-huni  dyo, 

At-wliat-time  he  above-to  came, 

di.  Wi-ml  yo  karamat 

was-given.  It-in  this  power 

wi-kani  bbiik,  pyas,  tbakai, 

him-to  hunger,  thirst,  weariness,  other  any  pain  not 
Matang  wi-kani  dur-jallai  pujai-gayo. 


ai. 

(idea-)  came. 

wi-kani  ek  mani 
at-that-time  Mdtanga-by  him-to  a jewel 

cblii  ki  jai-ka  bat-mG  u ru-olibi, 

was  that  irhom-of  liand-on  it  remaining-toas, 

aur  ke  dukli  ni  bun  pau-chhiyo. 

to-become  obtaining -was. 
Tb  ward,  dur 


Matanga  him  ( ace .)  a-distance-np-to  caused-completely-to-arrive.  A-short  distance 

ICfiwar-kani  anydrd-mG  bitano  paro.  Pdchhd  bimbara-ka  mukh-thai 

the-Prince-to  darkness-in  to- walk  fell.  Afterwards  the-cave-oj  mouth-to 

pujo,  pliiri  dharti-mG  ai-gayo.  Wi-kani  dagariyd  wi-kd 

he-arrived,  again  the-earth-on  came-complctcly.  Him-to  the-rompanions  him-of 

kwe  w5  ni  ini  (a.  Kwe  ghari  yetli-uth  pbiranai 

any  there  not  were-found.  (For-)somc  space-of-thne  hi ther-t hither  a-tcandering 

rayo,  pdchhd  biSdld-Sahard-ka  bliair  ek  bagicbo  clihiyo,  wS 

he-remained,  af/ei'wards  a-large-city-of  outside  a garden  was , there 

dyo,  aur  sastan-huni  baitUi-gavo.  Tab  ek-tarpb  wi-lc  yo 

he-sat-down.  Then  (on-) one- direction  him-by  this 

fulimi  ek-syaini-kani  li-ber,  aur  baliaut- 

man  a-woman  (ace.)  taken-having,  and  many- 

li-ber  bagicha-mS  jlmld  khcldndra- 
servayits- retainers  (ace.)  associates  taken -haring  the-garden-in  in- a- swing  a-sporter- 

ebb. 

is. 


he- came,  and  resting -for 

dekho  ki  ek  jwan 

was-seen  that  a youthful 
naukar-cbftkaran-kani 


dngard 


8.  Etuk-ai-me  wi-le  Kuwar  dekhi-hdlo.  So  n jhuld-hai  tali 

So-mnch-even  in  him-by  the- Prince  was-seen.  So  he  th e-swing- from  down 

leudo,  am  ui-le  dbal  lagai-ber  kayo  ki,  *iiior^  malik 

jumped , and  him-by  shout  applied-having  it-icas-said  that,  'my  Lord 


STANDARD  DIALECT.  177 

Rajbahan  u-I  chh*  kai,  u wi-tbai  dauyi-ber  gayo,  aur  wi-k& 

RSjato&hana  that-indeed  is r , saying,  he  him- to  run-having  went,  and  him-of 

khutan  paro.  Aur  wl-le  kayo  ki,  * myaril  b&r&  bhagya 

(at-)the-feet  fell.  And  him-by  it-was-said  that,  * my  great  fortunes 

cbhiy&»  jo  tum&r&  dargan  liai-gal.’  ltajbahana-le  wi-ka 

were,  that  your  interview  (plur.  of  respect ) became Rdjavdliana-by  him-of 
g&}an  karakara-kai  agwaj'  h&li,  aur  kayo  ki. 


. (on-)neck  affectionately  embracing  was-accomplished,  and  it-icas-said  that, 

‘ Somdatt,  mai-kani  twe*dagari  mili-ber  bari  kkuSi  bhai-chh.’ 

* Sdmadatta,  me-to  thee-with  met-liaving  much  happiness  become-is .’ 

9.  Phiri  S dvi  jarii  bot-muni  syol-mC  baithi-ghy&,  aur  Kuwara-le 

Afterwards  they  two  persons  a-tree-under  shade-in  sat-down,  and  the-JPrince-by 

wi-thai  puohho  ki,  * tu  aj  jalai  ko  karanara-chhiye,  ya 


him-to  it-was-asked  that , * thou  to-day  np-to  what  a-doer-wast,  here 

ka-bati  a-ehhai,  yo  syaini  ko  chli,  aur  yo  adirni  tyiira 

where-from  come-art-thou,  this  woman  who  is,  and  these  men  thy 

dag&r&  ka-bati  at  ? * Tab  Somdatta-le  apnni  katba  kai. 


Companions  wherefrom  have-come  ? * Then  Somadatta-by  his-own  story  was-said. 


FREE  TRANSLATION  OF  THE  FOREGOING. 

One  day  the  saint  Vamadeva  came  to  the  king  and  said,  ‘ you  have  got  the  son 
whom  you  were  desiring.  Now  should  he  act  like  a knight,  and  fight  and  conquer 
countries.*  The  king  accepted  the  words  of  the  holy  man,  and  having  fixed  an  auspi- 
cious day  sent  fortli  his  son  with  the  nine  princes  to  seek  their  adventures  in  foreign 
lands. 

For  a short  time  they  wandered  hither  aud  thither  and  at  last  they  arrived  at  the 
forest  on  the  Vindhya  Range.  Thcro  they  met  a man  who  looked  like  a Bhil,  but  who 
nevertheless  wore  a Brahmanical  thread  round  his  neck.  Rajavahana1  was  filled  with 
surprise  on  seeing  him  and  asked  him  who  he  was,  where  he  came  from,  and  why,  being 
apparently  a Bhil,  he  was  wearing  a Brahmanical  thread.  The  man,  considering  that 
the  Prince  was  worthy  of  confidence,  replied,  ‘ There  are  many  men  of  this  kind  in  this 
forest,  who  are  only  in  name  Brahmans,  and  who  have  quite  given  up  the  Vedas,  the 
Scriptures,  all  morality,  and  all  religious  acts,  and  whose  business  is  now  nothing  but 
highway  robbery.  This  was  the  kind  of  man  my  father  was,  and  I also,  as  soon  as  I grew 
up,  did  a lot  of  plundering  and  troubled  people  much.  One  day  it  happened  that  my 
fellows  seized  a Brahman  and  began  to  kill  him.  I eallcd  out  to  them,  “ Do  not  kill  a 
Brahman,”  whereupon  they  turned  thoir  rage  upon  me  and  killed  mo.  As  soon  as  I 
died  the  messengers  of  Death  carried  me  off  to  their  king,  hut  Death  said  to  them,  “The 
hour  for  this  man’s  decease  has  not  yot  come,  and  moreover  lie  has  been  slain  while  in 

1 Him  was  tlie  name  of  the  king’*  Ron.  The  name  of  the  man  whom  they  mot  was  Mfttangu,  and  one  of  the  nine 
princes  who  atfompanied  lt&jav&haua  was  named  Somadatta.  All  these  names  occur  frequently  in  what  follows  without 
further  introduction. 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV.  2 A 


178 


KUMATJNl. 


the  act  of  protecting  a Brahman.  Therefore  let  him  go,  and  after  showing  him  the  evil 
state  here  of  those  who  were  sinners,  put  him  back  again  into  his  own  old  body.’* 
■When  I came  to  my  senses  I found  myself  lying  in  the  forest,  with  my  body  covered 
with  wounds.  My  friends  came  and  took  me  homo,  where  my  wounds  healed  and  I 
recovered  my  health.  After  that  I met  the  Brahman  whom  I had  saved  from  the  rob- 
bers. He  read  to  me  the  various  religious  books,  taught  me  how  properly  to  worship 
Mahadeva,  and  departed.  From  that  day  I have  dwelt  away  from  my  former  compa- 
nions, and  have  devoted  myself  to  religious  acts  and  to  austerities  offered  to  Mahadeva. 
Now  I have  told  you  all  my  story.  But  there  is  one  tiling  whicli  I have  to  say  to  you 
privately,  so  please  step  aside  with  me  and  listen  to  what  I have  for  your  private  ear.* 

So  these  two  went  away  from  the  others  and  Matahga  said  to  the  Prince,  ‘ last  night 
Mahadeva  appeared  to  me  in  a dream  and  said,  “ I have  been  muoh  gratified  by  thy 
austerities,  and  now  proceed  to  give  thee  the  fruit  of  them.  To  the  north  of  this  lies 
the  Dandaka  forest.  There  is  a river  running  through  it,  beside  which  is  a mountain  all 
glistering  with  crystals,  and  bearing  the  impress  of  the  feet  of  the  goddess  Parvati.  Go 
thou  there.  Thou  wilt  find  a cave  on  one  side  of  the  mountain.  Enter  it,  and  find 
there  a copper  tablet  bearing  a written  inscription.  If  thou  do  what  is  written  on  that 
tablet  thou  wilt  become  king  of  the  country  of  Patala.1  Think  not  that  this  is  only  a 
dream.  To-morrow  a king’s  son  will  come  hither,  and  he  will  go  with  thee.”  For  this 
reason  I have  been  watching  for  you  here,  and  now  I ask  you  if  you  will  come  with 
me  to  see  this  place.’ 

When  he  had  heard  the  words  of  Matahga  the  Prince  agreed  to  go  with  him,  but 
fearing  that  his  companions  would  not  consent  he  told  them  nothing  about  his  inten- 
tions. At  midnight,  when  they  wore  all  fast  asleep,  he  slipped  away,  and  in  due  course 
they  arrived  at  the  mountain  which  had  been  indicated  to  Matahga  by  Mahadeva.  In 
the  meantime  the  nine  princes  became  greatly  troubled  at  the  disappearance  of  Raja* 
vahana.  They  hunted  for  him  through  the  entire  forest,  hut  could  find  no  trace  of  him 
so  they  agreed  to  go  forth  in  different  countries  to  search  for  him  in  foreign  lands,  and 
to  reassemble  in  a fixed  place.  So  in  this  direction  and  in  that  they  wandored  forth. 

Matahga  courageously  entered  the  cave,  found  the  copper  tablet,  read  what  was 
written  upon  it,  and  acted  accordingly.  For  a long  way  the  two  progressed  further  and 
further  into  the  cave  in  pitch  darkness.  By  and  by  it  again  became  light,  and  they 
found  themselves  in  Patala.  They  went  a little  farther  and  came  to  a lake,  with  a city 
visible  in  the  near  distance.  There  they  halted  and  Matahga  told  the  Prince  to  let  no 
one  approach,  while  he  went,  about  and  collected  a huge  pile  of  sticks  with  which  he 
made  a bonfire.  He  then  recited  a certain  charm  and  jumped  into  the  fiames.  Almost 
immediately  lie  emerged  again,  but  completely  transformed  in  appearance  ; for  he  was  now 
young,  charming,  and  handsome.  It  is  unnecessary  to  dwell  on  the  Prince’s  astonish- 
ment at  this  miracle,  for  no  sooner  had  Matahga  come  forth  in  his  new  shape  than  they 
saw  a great  crowd  approaching  them  from  the  city.  In  front  of  it  was  a very  beautiful 
and  charming  young  woman,  clothed  in  handsome  garments  and  adorned  with  rich  jewelry. 

She  approached  Mstahga  and  offered  him  a gem  as  a present  of  welcome.  He 
asked  her  who  she  was  and  whence  she  had  come.  Tears  began  to  flow  from  her  eyes  as 

1 Ihe  underground  region  where  dwell  the  Nfcgas  or  Snake  demi-goda. 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


m 


she  replied,  * I am  tho  princess  Kalindl,  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  the  Asuras.  My 
father,  who  was  king  of  Patala,  has  been  killed  by  Vishnu,  and  lias  left  no  son.  I am 
his  only  heir,  and  have  been  in  great  trouble.  A few  days  ago  I went  to  a holy  man  for 
advice  and  counsel.  When  ho  saw  me  he  was  touched  with  pity  and  said  to  me, 
“ Daughter,  be  of  good  cheer  ; in  a few  days  a man  clothed  in  a celestial  body  will  come 
down  to  Patala  from  the  earth,  and  will  marry  thee.  Thou  and  he  will  thereafter  reign 
happily  in  Patala.”  Firmly  believing  those  words,  I have  been  expecting  your  arrival, 
and  with  the  advice  of  my  ministers  I have  come  forth  to  welcome  you.  Now,  please 
marry  me,  and  with  me  take  the  kingdom.’  When  Matahga  saw  how  quickly  the  pro- 
mise of  MahadSva  had  been  fulfilled,  he  was  much  delighted.  He  agreed  to  Kalindi’s 
proposal,  and  oh  the  advice  .of  tlio  Prince,  their  marriage  was  celebrated  with  much 
pomp  in  a few  days. 

Rajavahana  was  most  hospitably  entertained  in  Patala,  but  after  a suitable  stay  ho 
thought  it  proper  to  return  to  the  earth.  At  the  time  of  his  departure,  Matahga  pre- 
sented him  with  a wonderful  ring,  which  possessed  the  property  of  warding  off  all 
hunger,  thirst,  weariness,  and  any  kind  of  sorrow,  from  him  who  wore  it  on  his  hand, 
and  also  escorted  him  for  some  distance  on  his  way.  He  had  to  pass  through  the  same 
thick  darkness  as  before  and  finally  came  to  the  mouth  of  the  cave  and  reached  the 
surface  of  the  earth.  Not  being  able  to  find  any  of  his  friends,  he  wandered  about  till 
he  came  to  a garden  outside  a largo  city,  and  sat  down  to  rest  himself.  Just  then  he 
saw  a young  man,  accompanied  by  a woman  and  a number  of  servants  and  retainers, 
sporting  in  a swing  in  one  part  of  the  grounds. 

Simultaneously  the  young  man  saw  the  Prince,  and  leaping  from  the  swing  he 
shouted,  * See,  it  is  my  Lord  Rajavahana.’  So  saying  he  ran  to  him  and  fell  at  his  feet 
crying,  * It  is  indeed  my  good  fortune  that  I have  met  you.*  Rajavahana  embraced  him 
with  much  affection,  saying  as  he  did  so,  * Dear  Somadatta,  happy  indeed  am  I to  find 
you.’ 

So  the  two  sat  under  the  shade  of  a tree,  and  the  Prince  asked  him  what  he  had 
been  doing  since  last  they  met,  where  he  had  come  from,  and  who  the  woman  and  her 
companions  wore. . So  Somadatta  commenced  to  tell  his  story,  as  follows : — 


VOL.  IX,  part  iv. 


2 A 2 


180 


KHASPARJIYA. 

The  Khasparjiya  dialect  of  Kumaunl  is  spoken  in  Fargana  Barahmandal,  and  in  the 
adjoining  pattis  of  Pargana  Dan  pur,  both  of  Almora  District.  The  standard  form 
of  Kumauni  is  the  language  of  the  educated  classes  of  the  town  of  Almora.  This  town 
is  situated  in  Fargana  Barahmandal,  and  Kliasparjiya  differs  from  tho  standard  dialect 
only  in  being  the  language  of  the  uneducated  villagers  rather  than  that  of  tho  educated 
townsfolk  of  the  same  Fargana.  The  estimated  number  of  speakers  of  Kliasparjiya  is 
75,930,  but  these  tigurcs  include  the  speakers  of  tho  standard  dialect  for  which  no 
separate  statistics  have  been  furnished. 

The  materials  available  for  the  study  of  Kliasparjiya  consist  of  (1)  a version  of  the 
Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son,  (2)  a folktale,  and  (3)  the  usual  list  of  words  and 
sentences. 

For  convenience  of  reference  the  paragraphs  of  the  folktale  (Specimen  II)  have  been 
numbered,  and  in  quoting  any  word  occurring  in  it,  the  number  of  the  paragraph  will 
be  appended.  Thus,  dyar  (7)  means  that  the  word  occurs  in  the  7th  paragraph  of 
Specimen  TI. 

Pronunciation. — The  great  phonetic  difference  between  Kliasparjiya  and  the 
standard  dialect,  is  that  the  former  regularly  drops  final  vowels  which  appear  in  the 
latter.  We  have  seen  that  the  standard  dialect  prefers  to  shorten  final  vowels  that  are 
long  in  Hindi.  Kliasparjiya  goes  a step  further  and  omits  them  altogether.  Thus  the 
Hindi  chela,  a son,  becomes  chela  in  standard  Kumaunl,  hut  chyal  in  Khasjiarjiya. 
Similarly  Hindi  bbjhd , a load,  standard  Kumaunl  bojo,  Kliasparjiya  bteaj  (19). 

These  two  words  also  illustrate  another  tendency  of  Khasjiarjiya,  viz.  to  change 
e (not  e)  of  the  standard  to  ya,  and  to  change  o (not  o)  of  the  standard  to  tea.  Other 
Kliasparjiya  examples  are  dyalcli  (standard  dekh),  see;  jyath  (standard  jetho),  elder; 
dyar  (7)  (standard  dero),  a lodging;  and  ghtcar  (standard  ghoro),  a horse. 

In  most  other  respects  the  jihonetics  of  Khasjiarjiya  closely  follow  those  of  the 
standard  dialect,  hut  in  one  jioint  a difference  will  he  observed.  In  the  grammar  of  tho 
standard  dialect,  the  difference  between  the  short  a and  the  long  d,  between  e and  e,  and 
between  o and  a is  carefully  noted.  It  has  not  been  possible  to  make  this  distinction  in 
the  case  of  the  other  Kumauni  dialects,  including  Kliasparjiya,  ivs  no  materials  were 
available.  Thus,  a and  d are  both  written  d,  c and  e are  both  written  e,  and  o and  5 are 
both  written  b.  No  doubt  tho  short  vowels  also  occur,  and  in  most  cases  it  would  not  be 
difficult  to  restore  them.  But  I have  thought  it  best  to  deal  with  the  specimens  as 
I have  received  them,  leaving  the  student  to  ajiply  the  rules  for  shortening  that  obtained 
in  the  standard  dialect,  when  the  jirojier  occasions  arise. 

Number. — Allowing  for  the  dropping  of  a final  short  vowel  the  nominative  plural 
is  formed  as  in  the  standard  dialect.  Thus  in  most  cases  the  nominative  plural  is  the 
same  as  the  singular.  In  the  standard  most,  nouns  in  o form  the  plural  in  h.  In 
Khasjiarjiya  both  the  final  vowels  are  dropped.  Thus  in  the  standard,  we  have  bufo, 
old,  plural  burd  ; and  in  Kliasparjiya  wo  have  bur,  old,  plural  also  bur.  But  the  changes 
of  the  vowel  preceding  the  final  a oF  the  standard  plural,  also  occur  in  Khasparjiya. 
Thus  standard  ch'urd,  a bird,  has  its  plural  chard, . Similarly  Khasparjiya  has  char,  a bird, 


KHASPARJIYA  DIALECT.  181 

'plural  ch&r  ; standard  chelo,  a son,  plural  chyhlh  ; Khasparjiya  chyal,  plur.  chyal  (5)  ; 
standard  bojo,  a load,  plural  bwdjd.  Khasparjiya  btcaj,  plural  buodj. 

In  the  standard,  feminine  nouns  in  i sometimes  form  the  plural  in  iyS  or  iyd,  but 
this  is  considered  vulgar.  ’ This  termination  is  more  common  in  Khasparjiya,  with  the 
final  vowel,  as  usual  commonly  dropped.  Thus,  cheli,  a daughter,  plural  cheliy. 

Sometimes  we  find  the  equivalent  of  the  full  standard  forms  used.  Thus  we 
occasionally  meet  chyald  as  well  as  chyal  ; both  bdkdr  (2)  and  bdkdrd  (4),  goats ; and 
cheliy  a as  well  as  cheliy.  Such  forms  are  no  doubt  due  to  the  influence  of  the  standard 
dialect.  On  the  other  band,  we  occasionally  meet  instances  of  the  proper  vowel  changes 
not  occurring.  Thus  in  Nos.  123  and  124  the  plural  of  bhnl,  good,  is  given  as  bhal,  not 
bhdl ; and  in  the  Parable  we  even  have  bhald  (instead  of  bhdl)  lukur  (standard  bhalh 
luknrd),  good  clothes.  Such  irregularities  are,  however,  quite  exceptional. 

Case. — Here  again,  with  the  same  reservation  as  to  the  elision  of  the  final  vowel, 
the  standard  dialect  is  followed,  so  far  as  the  singular  oblique  form  is  concerned.  In  the 
standard,  masculine  Tadbhava  nouns  in  d,  in  this  form,  change  the  o to  a,  with  the 
necessary  changes  of  the  preceding  voAvel.  In  Khasparjiya,  the  final  vowel  is  elided,  hut 
the  change  remains.  Thus  the  oblique  singular  of  chyal  is  chyal , as  in  sentence  228. 
When  a noun  ends  in  w,  an  a is  added  before  a postposition  to  aid  the  pronunciation. 
Thus,  pismo,  flour  (24),  has  its  accusative  singular  pisuwa-kani  (23). 

In  the  standard,  when  the  oblique  form  singular  ends  in  a consonant,  an  a is  added 
before  le,  the  postposition  of  the  agent.  In  Khasparjiya,  the  corresponding  postposition 
is  l,  and  it  takes  ai  before  it.  Thus  from  kds,  younger,  wo  have  kdsai-l,  the  younger 
(son  said).  Similarly,  in  the  Parable,  bhukhai-l,  by  hunger  ; babai-l,  the  father  (said, 
etc.)  ; chyalai-l  (not  chydlai-l),  the  son  (said,  etc.)  ; matmi-l,  agent  singular  of  man,  mind  ; 
in  the  second  specimen,  maisai-l  (5) ; yharbardtai-l  (9) ; rfsai-l  (15)  ; ldbhai-l  (15)  ; 
and  (sentence  230)  jyaurai-l.  As  a specimen  of  a noun  ending  in  a vowel,  which  there- 
fore does  not  take  this  ai,  we  have  parausi-l  (It). 

In  the  standard  the  oblique  plural  ends  in  an,  and  this  form  occurs  once  in  the 
Parable  in  hdiian-mi,  (sent  him)  into  the  fields.  But  the  usual  oblique  plural  ends  in 
au  or  5,  of  which  the  nasal  is  frequently  omitted,  thus,  an  or  d.  This  remains  unchanged 
before  the  l of  the  agent  case.  Thus,  buketau-l,  with  the  husks;  bauliyd-md-hai,  from 
among  the  servants,  llarely  the  oblique  plural  ends  in  d,  a termination  which  properly 
belongs  to  some  forms  of  the  genitive  plural  (sec  below).  Examples  are  khuta-mi,  on 
his  feet  (in  the  Parable),  and  chhdld-kani  (15),  but  chhdld-kani  (5). 

The  Postpositions  employed  are  much  the  same  as  in  the  standard.  We  may 
note ; — 

. Agent  and  Instrumental,  l. 

Dative- Accusative,  kani,  that,  hunt,  k-lijiy. 

Ablative,  bati,  hai-ber. 

Genitive,  k. 

Locative,  me,  mi,  mail. 

All  these  have  the  same  meanings  as  the  corresponding  words  in  the  standard. 

The  only  postposition  which  requires  not  ice  is  that  of  the  genitive.  In  the  stand- 
ard,  this  is  ho,  or  (masc.  obi.  and  plur.)  kh,  or  (fern.)  hi.  If  the  oblique  form  ends  in 
a consonant  or  d an  a is  inserted  in  the  singular,  as  in  the  case  of  the  agent,  and,  before 


182 


KUMATJNl. 


kh,  this  a becomes  a.  Thus,  chelo,  a sou ; obi.  sing,  chydlh  ; gen.  sing,  chyhla-ko,  ohyhlh- 
Ah,  chyhla-ki. 

In  Khasparjiya,  according  to  the  usual  rule,  ko  and  Act  both  become  k,  but  when 
this  k represents  kd,  an  a is  inserted.  The  feminine  ki  still  retains  its  final  vowel,  and 
an  ai  or  e is  inserted  before  it  in  similar  cases.  Thus,  chyal,  a son  ; gen.  sing,  chydl-k 
(=  chyhla-ko),  chydld-k  ( =chyald-kd ),  and  chyalai-ki  or  chyale-ki  (—chydla-ki). 
Naturally,  before  the  ai  or  e of  chalai  or  chale  wo  do  not  find  the  long  d,  as  it  is  in 
chydl-k  and  chydld-k.  In  the  genitive  plural  also,  in  Khasparjiya,  au  or  d becomes  a 
when  the  A;  represents  kd  or  ki  of  the  standard.  Thus,  cliyalait-k  or  chydld-k  ( —chydlana • 
ko)  ; chydla-k  ( = ch y aland- ka  and  chydla-ki  ( = chyalana-ki) . 

The  following  arc  examples  of  the  use  of  the  Agent  case  occurring  in  the  speci- 
mens. This  case  is  also  used  in  the  sense  of  an  Instrumental. 

wi  parausi-l  ndi-k  taw-mi  lie  lagai-diy,  that  neighbour  applied  tar  to  the 
bottom  of  the  measure  (11). 

kaaai-l  dpan  bab-thai  kay,  the  younger  (son)  said  to  his  father. 
tyard  babai-l  paun-kyol  kari-chh , thy  father  hath  given  a feast. 

, mi  bhukhai-l  maran  Idgi-rayE,  I am  dying  of  hunger. 
jyaurai-l  badau,  bind  him  with  a rope  (sentence  236). 

u und  buketau-l  aur  ddn-biyb-l  dpan  pet  bharau  cha-chhiy,  he  was  wishing 
to  fill  his  belly  with  those  husks  and  berries. 

For  the  Accusative-Dative  we  may  quote  : — 

und  chhald-kani  li-gdy,  lie  took  away  those  skins  (5). 

tni-l  wl-k  chyal-kuni  (nom.  sing,  chyal)  mdri-chh,  I have  beaten  his  son  (sen- 
tence 22&). 

ml-kani  di-de,  give  to  me  (my  share). 

ml  uthi-ber  dpan  bub- thru  jul,  I will  arise  and  will  go  to  my  father. 
ka8ai-l  dpan  bab-thai  kay , the  younger  (son)  said  to  liis  father. 
ghar-hutii  unai-tay , he  returned  to  his  house  (10). 
bliarana-k  (nom.  bharan)  lijiy,  for  the  sake  of  measuring  (11). 

For  the  Ablative  we  may  quote  : — 

nil  yatuk  barsd-bati  tyari  tahal  karan  Idgi-rayU,  I am  serving  thee  from  so 
many  years. 

wi-kmii  gau-haiber  nikdun-k  updy  kara-chhiy,  they  were  making  a device  for 
(lit.  of)  expelling  him  from  the  village. 

As  ablatives  of  comparison,  we  have : — 

khdi.i-haiber  sakar  rwdt  (nom.  sing,  rwat)  mi  Ini,  more  than  eating  (i.e.  more 
than  enough  to  eat)  loaves  are  got. 

wl-k  bhai  apani  baini-hai  baki  lamb  chh , his  brother  is  taller  than  his  sister 
(sentence  231). 

sabd-haiber  bhald  luktir,  clothes  better  than  all,  i.e.  the  best  clothes. 

For  the  Genitive  we  may  quote: — 

Masculine  Nominative  Singular — 

chori-k  mdl,  property  of  theft,  stolen  property  (7). 
pisuwa-k  bwaj,  a load  of  Hour  (19). 

mydr  kakd-k  chyal-, c byd,  the  marriage  of  the  son  of  my  uncle  (sentence  22G). 


KHASPARJIYA  dialect. 


18S 


Masculine  Oblique  Singular — 

un  deid-k  (nom.  de6)  kai  bhdl  (no in.  bhal)  maisd-k  (nom.  mats)  y'a,  at  the 
house  of  a certain  worthy  man  of  that  country. 
adh-rdtd-k  (nom.*  rdt)  pachhitai,  after  midnight  (7). 

toi  udydfd-k  (nom.  udydr ) mwdl-tir  (nom.  mwal),  near  the  mouth  of  that  cave  (7). 
Masculine  Nominative  Plural— 

kai  m<tiad-k  (nom.  mats ) dwl  chydl  chhiy,  of  a certain  man  there  were  two  sons. 
Masculine  Plural  Oblique — 

t ol  batd-k  mydn  jdnatia-h  lijiy,  for  the  sake  of  knowing  the  meanings  of  that 
matter  (11). 

Feminine  Nominative  Singular — 

ndch-kude-ki  (nom.  kud)  dwdj,  the  noise  of  singing  and  dancing. 
yakai-ki  (sing.  nom.  yak)  nai,  the  wooden  measure  of  one  (of  his  neighbours)  (11). 
Feminine  Singular  Oblique — 

Istcare-ki  (nom.  Isioar)  marji-k  birudh,  contrary  to  the  will  of  God. 

With  the  suffix  added  to  plural  nouns,  we  have : — 

bheri-bdkdra-ki  (sing.  nom.  bdkar)  chhdl,  the  skins  of  sheep  and  goats  (5,  14). 
dhepntoa-k  (nom.  sing,  dheptno)  lobhai-l,  through  greed  of  pice  (15). 

As  examples  of  the  Locative  wc  may  quote  : — 
tol  des-ml  akdl  par , a famine  fell  in  that  land. 

i ol-k  taw- par  lisd-k  (nom.  lis)  toil,  owing  to  the  tar  upon  its  bottom  (12). 
hath-mi  munari,  khuta-mi  jwat,  a ring  on  the  hand,  shoes  on  the  feet. 
ghtodr-mau,  on  a horse  (sentence  230). 

‘ From  among  ’ is  nil-hat  or  me-hai,  as  in  : — 

dpan  parausi-mi-hat  yakai-ki  ndi  mdhi , he  asked  for  a wooden  measure  from  one 
of  his  friends  (11). 

uud-me-hai  kasai-l  kay , the  younger  of  them  said  (to  his  father). 

Adjectives- — With  the  usual  proviso  as  to  the  elision  of  final  vowel,  adjectives 
closely  follow  the  rules  of  the  standard  dialect.  Tadbliava  adjectives,  which  in  the  stand- 
ard end  in  o,  in  that  dialect  change  the  o to  a in  the  masculine  singular  oblique  cases, 
and  in  the  masculine  plural.  In  Khasparjiya,  both  the  o and  the  d are  dropped,  but  tho 
elided  a usually  lengthens  (as  usual)  a preceding  a.  Thus  the  standard  bhalo,  good,  has 
its  masculine  oblique  singular  and  its  masculine  plural  bhald , while  Khasparjiya  bhal, 
good,  has  its  masculine  oblique  singular  and  its  masculine  plural  bhdl. 

The  feminine  is  formed,  as  in  the  standard,  by  adding  i ; thus  both  standard  and 
Khasparjiya,  bhali. 

As  examples  we  may  quote : — 

ek  bhal  mais,  a good  man  (sentence  119). 

tel  desd-k  (sing.  nom.  des)  kai  bhdlmaisd-k  (sing.  nom.  bhal  mais)  ya,  at  the 
house  of  a certain  worthy  man  of  that  country  (Specimen  I). 
ek  bhali-syaiiii,  a good  woman  (sentence  12S). 
bhali  syainiy,  good  woman  (sentence  130). 

The  lengthening  of  a in  the  masculine  oblique  is  not  always  observed.  For  instance, 
we  have  bhal,  instead  of  bhdl,  in  Nos.  120-127  of  the  list  of  sentences. 


184 


KTTMATTNl. 


Pronouns* — The  first  two  personal  pronouns  are  declined  as  follows : — 
Sing. 


Plur. 


I 

Thou 

Nom.  mat,  ml 

tu 

Ag.  mai-l , ml-l 

ttoe-l,  twi-l 

Gen.  myar 

tyar 

Obi.  mat,  ml 

twe,  twi 

Nom.  ham 

turn 

Ag.  hamo-l 

tumo-l 

Gen.  hamar 

tumar 

Obi.  hamo 

tumb 

The  forms  hamo  and  tumb  often  have  the  final  6 nasalized.  Thus,  hatnS , turn’d. 

The  genitives  are  declined  like  adjectives.  The  masculine  oblique  singular  and  the 
masculine  plural  of  myar  is  my  dr,  and  its  feminine  is  my  art.  Similarly  tyar,  tydr  and 
tyari  ; hamar,  hamdr,  hamari  or  hamri  ; and  tumar,  tumar , tumari  or  tumri. 

As  examples  of  the  use  of  these  pronouns  we  may  quote  : — 
mi  bhukhai-l  rnaran  lagi-rayU,  I am  dying  of  hunger. 

mi-l  Ikware-ki  marji-k  birudh  pap  kar-chh,  I have  done  sin  contrary  to  the  will 
of  God. 

myar  bob  i cl  nan  ghar-mi  ruchh,  my  father  lives  in  that  small  house  (sen- 
tence 233). 

myar  babd-k  bauliyd-mS-hat,  from  among  my  father’s  servants. 
hamd-kaiii  khan  aur  khaki  karni  chai-chh,  to  us  to  eat  and  rejoicing  is  proper. 
twi-l  Jeabhai  mi-kani  ek  path  laik  ni-diy,  thou  never  gavest  me  even  a kid. 
twe-l  paun-kyol  kari-chh,  thou  hast  made  a feast. 

tyar  bhai  d-chh,  aur  tydr  babai-l  paun-kyol  kari-chh,  thy  brother  hath  come, 
and  thy  father  hath  made  a feast. 

ml  yatuk  barsd-bati  tyari  tahal  karan  Idgi-rayU,  I have  been  doing  thy  service 
from  so  many  years. 

tumb-l  u kai-thai  mol  le-chh,  from  whom  did  you  buy  that  ? (sentence  240). 
tumar  ke  nau  chh,  what  is  your  name  ? (sentence  220) 

tumar  babd-k  ghar-md  katulc  chyal  (nom.  sing,  chyal)  chhan,  how  many  sons 
are  there  in  your  father’s  house  ? (sentence  223) . 

The  Demonstrative  Pronouns  arc  as  follows : — 

This,  He,  She,  It.  That,  He,  She,  It. 

Sing. 


Nom.  yd 

u 

Obi.  yai 

tol 

Gen.  yai-k 

wl-k 

Nom.  yd 

a 

& 

Obi.  yon,  yard,  yand 

un,  mb,  utiS 

Gen.  ycnar 

vnar 

KHASPARJIYA  dialect. 


186 


Yanar  has  masculine  singular  oblique  and  masculine  plural  yandr  and  feminine 
yanari  or  yanri.  Similarly  unar,  undr,  unari  or  unri. 

As  examples  we  may  quote : — 
tyar  yd  chyal,  this  thy  son. 
yd  kye  lyd-ohh,  what  has  he  brought  ? (11). 
yd  rupai  toi-kani  di-diyau,  give  this  rupee  to  him  (sentence  234). 
und-kani  yai-kani  pairdtc , put  them  on  him. 
yai-k  hdth-mi  munafi  pair  aw,  put  a ring  on  this  person’s  hand. 
yai-l  toi  papausi-kani  lobh  ai-goy,  by  this,  avarice  came  to  that  neighbour  (13). 
yanar  ke  matlab  chh,  what  is  the  meaning  of  these  ? 
u uthi-ber  apart  bab-thdi  goy,  he  having  arisen  went  to  his  father. 
toi-k  babai-l  toi-katfi  dyakh,  his  father  saw  him. 
toi  diS-mi  thul  akdl  par,  in  that  country  a severe  famine  fell. 
tnydr  kaka-k  chydl-k  byd  wi-ki  baini  dagari  bhau-chh,  the  marriage  of  my 
uncle’s  son  has  taken  place  with  his  sister  (sentence  225). 

8ab  rupai  jo  U apart  da  yard  lyd-chhiy,  all  the  rupees  which  they  had  brought 
with  them  (9). 

tut  chhdla-k  muni-bat i,  from  under  those  skins  (8). 

uno-l  wi-udydrd-k  miodl-tir  dyar  kar,  they  took  shelter  in  the  mouth  of  that 
cave  (7). 

und  buketau-l  apart  pet  bharatt  cha-chhiy , he  was  wishing  to  fill  his  belly  with 
those  husks. 

unar  kharbapdt  suni-ber,  having  heard  their  foot-tread  (8). 

unri  chhala-kani  bechan-huni  li-goy,  he  took  away  their  skins  for  sale  (15). 

The  Reflexive  Pronoun  is  dpu,  self,  of  which  the  emphatic  form  is  dphi,  even 
himself,  his  very  self.  The  genitive  is  apart,  we  should  expect  the  masculine  oblique 
singular  and  the  masculine  plural  to  be  apart,  but  only  apart  occurs  in  the  specimens. 
The  feminine  is  dpani.  Examples  are  : — 

dpft  pan*  khdn-huni  goy,  he  himself  went  to  eat  {i.e.  drink)  water  (18). 

u dphi  wl-mi  para-chh,  he  himself  falls  into  it  (1). 

apart  sab  mat  phuki  diy,  (he)  squandered  all  his  property. 

jab  n apart  phatn-tni  ay,  when  he  came  to  his  senses. 

wl-l  toi-kani  dpan  hdnan-mi  aunar  charun-huni  lagdy,  he  deputed  him  to  feed 
swine  in  his  fields. 

toi-k  bhai  dpani  baini-hai  lamb  chh,  his  brother  is  taller  than  his  (the  brother’s) 
sister  (sentence  231). 

The  Relative  Pronoun  and  its  Correlative  are  as  follows : — 

Who  That,  He,  She,  It. 


Sing. 

Nom.  jo 
Obi.  jai 
Gen.  jai-k 

Plur. 


so 

tai 

tai-k 


Nom.  jo 

Obi.  jan,  jano,  jand 
Gen.  janar 

VOL.  ix,  part  tv. 


so 

tan,  tand,  tand 
tanar 

2 B 


186 


KUMATJNl. 


Janar  lma  masculine  singular  oblique  and  masouline  plural  janar,  and  its  fem. 
januri  or  janri.  Similarly  tanar , tanar,  tanari  or  tanri.  Examples  of  the  Relative 
Pronoun  are  the  following.  No  examples  of  the  Correlative  occur  in  the  specimens. 
Jo  aurd  upar  khdr  khan-ehh,  he  who  digs  a pit  for  others  (1). 
ft  btoaj,  jafckani  harak  metis  chhdri  go-chhiy , the  load  which  the  other  man  had 
left  behind  (20). 

ck  hhaute  dhandto  mat's,  jai-ki  ek  khnpaj'i  chhiy , a very  simple  man  who  owned 
a single  hut  (2). 

sab  mpai  jo  © dpan  dagdrd  lyd-chhiy , all  the  rupees  which  they  had  brought 
with  them  (9). 

un  chhdla-k  mmii-bati,  jano-kani  it  lyai  rau-chhiy,  from  under  those  skins 
which  he  had  brought  with  him  (8). 

The  Interrogative  Pronouns  are  ko,  who  ? and  kye  or  ke  (neut.)  what  ? kb  is 
declined  like  jo.  The  oblique  form  of  kye  or  ke  is  kai,  and  so  on, 'like  kb.  Examples  are 
kai-k  chyal  ftchh,  whose  boy  conies  ? (sentence  239). 

tu»>o-l  u k ai-thai  mol  le-chh,  from  whom  did  you  buy  that  ? (sentence  240). 

yd  kye  lya-chh,  what  has  he  brought:?  (11). 

yanar  ke  matlab  chh,  what  is  the  meaning  of  these  ? 

The  Indefinite  Pronouns  are  ke,  inanimate,  and  kwe,  both  animate  and  inani- 
mate, declined  as  in  the  Standard.  Examples  are 

kwe  wi-kani  ke  ni  di-chhiy,  no  one  was  giving  him  anything. 
kioe  chhor  dy,  some  thieves  came  (7) . 

TTe  may  also  mention  kai,  a certain,  used  as  an  indefinite  article,  and  not  altered 
in  declension,  as  in  kai  maisd-k  dwi  chyal  chhiy,  of  a certain  man  there  were  two  sons. 
Katvik  is  ‘ how  many  ? ’ and  yatuk  is  ‘ this  many  ’,  * so  many  Je-ke  is  * whatever  ’. 


VERBS. 


A.  Auxiliary  Verbs  and  Verbs  Substantive. — The  conjugation  of  the  Verb 

Substantive  closely  agrees  with  that  of  the  Standard  dialect. 

Thus  Present. 

Sing.  Plur. 

chhfi  chhS 


chhai  (fem.  chhe) 
chh 


chhau 

chhan,  chhand 


When  used  as  an  auxiliary  verb  the  2nd  plur.  is  chhd. 

There  is  a negative  verb  substantive  as  in  the  Standard.  Thus,  ml  laik  nhattt,  I am 
not  worthy. 

The  Past  is  conjugated  as  follows : — 


Sing. 

Plus. 

Masc. 

Fem. 

M wo. 

Fem. 

1.  chhiy 

chhiy 

••• 

2.  chhtyi 

chh% 

chhiy 

• « 

3.  chhiy 

chhi 

chhiy , chhiy  % 

chhin 

KHASPARJITl  DIALECT. 


187 


B.  Finite  Verb.— The  Infinitive  or  Verbal  Bonn  ends  in  n,  and  is  declined 
like  a noun,  as  in  charun-huni,  for  grazing ; nikdun-k  updy,  a device  of  (i.e.  for)  expelling 
(3).  Sometimes,  after  a long  vowel  this  n becomes  a mere  nasalization,  as  in  bhiter 
ja-huni  toi-k  manai-l  ni  hat*,  his  mind  did  not  make  for  going  inside,  i.e.  he  did  not 
wish  to  enter. 

The  Present  Participle  ends  in  a dental  n,  often  carelessly  written  as  a cerebral. 
Examples  will  be  found  under  the  head  of  the  Present  Definite  tense. 

The  Papt  Participle  is  the  same  in  form  as  the  Boot.  Examples  will  be  found 
under  the  head  of  the  various  past  tenses. 

The  Future  Passive  Participle  is  tile  same  in  form  as  the  Infinitive,  and  adds  * 
in  the  feminine,  as  in  khutii  karni  (or  karani)  chai-chh,  rejoicing  is  proper  to  be  made. 

The  Conjunctive  Participle  is  formed  as  in  the  Standard,  as  in  batai-ber , having 
divided ; kari-ber,  having  made.  With  her  omitted,  we  have  bulai,  having  called. 

The  Bonn  Of  Agency  is  formed  by  adding  tier,  as  in  the  Standard.  Thus  (passive) 
kawdiner,  a person  to  be  called. 

The  Imperative  takes  no  termination  in  the  singular,  and  has  au  in  the  plural. 
Thus,  dc , give  thou;  hit,  walk  ; dharau , seize  ye ; diyau,  give  ye  ; liyau,  take  ye  ; tnaran, 
strike  ye.  After  a long  vowel  the  plural  only  takes  to,  as  in  lydto,  bring  ye ; pairatc, 
clothe  ye. 

No  examples  of  the  Old  Present  and  Present  Subjunctive  occur  in  the  speci- 
mens. It  probably  closely  follows  the  Standard  form.  In  the  list,  mar  it  is  ‘I  may 
strike.* 

The  Future  is  conjugated  as  follows  : — 


Sing. 

Plur. 

1. 

mdrui 

maral. 

2. 

tndrlai 

rnarli. 

3. 

mdrauld 

maria. 

In  the  Parable,  we  have,;'®/,  I will  go,  and  kfil,  I will  say. 

The  Past  Conditional  probably  follows  the  Standard.  The  only  example  I can 
give  is  from  the  Parable,  mi  anand  karan,  I might  have  made  merry. 

The  PreBOnt  is  conjugated  as  follows  : — 

Sing.  Plur. 


1.  mdrachh , nidrchh 

2.  marachhai,  mdrchhai 

3.  mdrachh , tnarchh 


mdrnu. 

mardchha,  march hd. 
mdrui. 


It  will  be  seen  that,  allowing  for  the  usual  omission  of  final  vowels,  it  closely 
follows  the  Standard. 

Examples  are  : ruchhai,  thou  remainest  (with  me) ; huchh , it  (the  share)  becomes 
(mine) ; khanchh,  he  digs  (1)  ; parachh,  he  falls  (1) ; ruchh,  he  remains  (sentence  233) ; 
milnl,  they  (loaves)  are  got. 

A Present  Definite  is  formed  with  lagi-rayii,  added  to  the  present  participle,  as 
in  maran  lagi-rdyfl,  I am  dying ; karan  lagi-rayit,  I am  doing  (thy  service);  charautt 
lagi  rattchh,  he  is  grazing  (cattle)  (sentence  229). 
voL.  ix,  part  iv. 


2 b 2 


188 


XUMAUNl. 


Allowing  for  the  usual  omission  of  final  vowels,  the  Imporfoct  is  formed  as  in  the 
Standard.  Thus : — 

kwe  wi-kani  he  ni  di-ohhiy,  no  one  was  giving  him  anything. 
kai  gau-tni  ik  bhaute  dhdnaw  mats  raii-chhiy , in  a certain  village,  a very  simple 
man  was  living  (2). 

janS'kani  swhar  khS-chhiy,  which  the  swine  were  eating. 
npdy  kard-chhiy,  they  were  making  a device  (3). 

The  Past  tense  is  conjugated  as  follows.  We  take  the  Intransitive  verb  hifan,  to 
go,  as  our  example. 


Sing. 

Plitr. 

Ma^c. 

| Fein. 

| Masc. 

1 

Fem. 

hityu , hit 

Ml 

hit 

: 

... 

hits 

h iti 

hit 

... 

hit 

hiti 

hit , hit  a 

hitin,  hili. 

Examples  are : — 

rayU,  I remained,  in  Idgi-rayU,  to  form  the  present  definite  as  explained  above. 
ml  dj  bhaut  durjdnik  gayu,  I went  a long  way  to-day  (sentence  224). 
par,  (a  famine  fell)  ; faith,  he  began,  and  many  other  3rd  singular  masculines. 

For  3rd  singular  feminine  we  have  dai  at,  compassion  came;  wi-kani  ris  ai-gye , 
anger  came  to  him ; rat  pari  gey,  night  fell  (6). 

For  the  plural  we  have  (masc.)  dnand  karan  paith , they  began  to  make  merry ; 
bhdji  gay,  they  ran  away  (9) ; and  (fem.)  tnani  rupai  jeri-gdy,  a few  rupees  stuck 
(12);  mani  dhepwo  mili,  a few  rupees  were  got  (15). 

The  following  forms  have  been  noted  of  the  Past  of  the  verb  jdn,  to  go : — 


Sing. 

PLFB. 

Masc. 

Fem. 

Marc. 

Fem. 

1.  gayu 

... 

9*y 

... 

2.  gaye 

gayi 

g/iy 

Ml 

3.  gSy,  go 

9Vl>  9*y 

gay,  gdyS 

gSyin,  giy 

It  will  be  observed  that  the  3rd  singular  is  always  the  same  as  the  past  participle. 
In  the  case  of  Transitive  verbs  the  3rd  person  is  naturally  the  only  one  used,  the 
subject  being  put  in  the  agent  case. 


khaspabjitA  dialect. 


189 


Examples  are  (including  the  various  irregular  past  participles) : — 

Sing.  masc. — kasai-l  hay,  the  younger  said ; sab  mal  phuki-diy,  (he)  squandered 
all  the  property;  babai-l  wi-kani  dyakh,  the  father  saw  him; 
manai-l  ni  kar,  his  mind  did  not  make  ; ml- 1 ni  taw,  I did  not 
transgress. 

fem. — wi-l  jdjdt  bat-diy , he  divided  the  property ; babai-l  wi-kani  atcal 
ghali  aur  bhuki-chati  liy,  the  father  embraced  him,  and  took  a 
kiss ; wi-l  awdj  suni,  he  heard  the  sound  (of  music). 

Plur.  masc. — parausi-l  dpan  sab  bheri  bdkdrd  mdr-diy,  the  neighbour  slew  all 
his  own  sheep  and  goats  (16). 

fern. — < rfhdndw  maisdi-l  chhdl  gdri,  the  simple  man  removed  the  skins  (5). 

The  Perfect  and  Pluperfect  are  formed  on  the  model  of  the  Standard  dialect. 

Examples  are : — 

Intransitive  Perfect. — jyun  hai  gd-chh,  he  has  become  alive ; mil  gd-chh,  he  has 

been  found ; tyar  bhai  d-ehh,  thy  brother  has  come  ; 
yd  kye  lyd-ohh,  what  has  he  brought  ? (11) ; turn  kasik 
lyd-chhd,  how  have  you  brought  (them)  (13)  r 
Transitive  Perfect. — mi-l  pap  kar-chh,  I have  done  sin  ; wi-l  wi-kani  bhal 

aur  chan  pd-chh,  he  has  got  him  safe  and  sound ; 
(fem.)  twe-l  pauti-kydl  kari-chh,  thou  hast  made  a 
feast. 

Intransitive  Pluperfect. — mari  go-chhiy,  he  had  died ; harai  gd-chhiy,  he  had  been 

lost ; jand-kani  lyai  rati-chhiy,  (the  skins)  which  he 
had  brought  (8) ; jo  U lyd-chhiy,  (the  rupees)  which 
they  had  brought  (9). 

Transitive  Pluperfect. — ® rnpui  jo  wi-l  pa-chhiy,  the  rupees  which  he  had  ob- 
tained (11)  ; je-ke  wi-l  kar-chhiy,  whatever  he  had 
done  (2-1). 

C*  Passives  and  Causals. — These  follow  the  Standard,  and  no  remarks  are  neces- 
sary. As  an  example  of  the  noun  of  agency  of  the  passive  of  a causal  we  may  quote 
kawainer , one  who  is  caused  to  be  said,  one  who  is  called  (Parable). 

D.  Compound  Verb8. — These  also  call  for  no  remarks,  being  formed  on  the  same 
principles  as  those  which  obtain  in  the  Standard. 


190 

[No.  3.] 

1NDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

CENTRAL  PAHAltl  (KUMAUNl). 

Khaspabjiya  Dialect.  District  Almoba. 

Specimen  I. 

# ftqTq?  It  xgra  to  i to:  qtoq  qifftq  'trrow  qqtf  q?q 
ft  qq  qiqnr  qnqrraqf'ft  qfz;  f w ^ fttqrfq  ft-q  i to  to 
qfNfq  qiqfq  ^rraiTT  qfz;  to  i to  ft  qfwzf  qrNr  qjq  qq  tor  qq- 
qtfq  qqq*r  •t-to  i qf  ^stofcjr  qrfto  qroq  qq  qpq  qifar-to  ‘ 
to  srq  tor  qf  xsfv-TRT  qq  ft  %qft  sq  wt*  qf  to  g?  qq?  f q 
qs  i to  qr  ft  wqf  # qTqftqTqr  qf.  ftqr  ftz;  to  tor  ftqrfnr 
^TW  ^T?q*ft  ^ qqTO  I to  Of  off  qfftor  to  ^m- 

fqto  qtofq  wr  *qfto  *qf*r  %f t ^fph  qz;  *wn  qff^q  i to:  ^ 
torff  ^ fftf^to  i qq  or  qpm  q>Tqqt  qnr  to  qrq  «jtt  qqTqr 
fttofqr  qrcftorfqr  ^Firttr  qqnc  tt z toft  to  ft  qto  vtt- 
qnftr  Tf  i ft  qfeqr  qiqq  qqlf  to  to  fttf  to  ffr  qqi  tor  tof- 
fqr  qrfto  toq  sin:  qrqfq  qm  qrr^  i to  to  ft  osrr  ^et^t  qrq-rtor 
to  fTf  i toto r ^wror  qtorftfqt*  qqq  qrTqr  qft-%  i to  or  qfeft 
qroq  qqtf  to  i q*  qq  oi  to  zrf  to  to  qto  tofq  qnq  i qq 
toftr  t qrf  to  <ftffT  ftqr  ftqrfnr  qto  oto  to  qfqr-qTfe  to  i 
to  qjto  to  qrs  qqT  to  qrato  qqfto  fqqq  sin:  qq to  qm  qr?* 
to  to  ft  spc  qjqr  qrqnnk  to  ^nr  i ^ qto  qiqnr  aftfaflUP  qrq 
qqf%q^  qqT  iff  toutoT  qam  to  tofto  tofq  toq  to  to 
Trqft  sto  *qzfft  sqq  km  i to  qtofqi  ^rnr  to  *to  qrto 
to  i ffito  fqr  qqr  ft  qjqr  to  ft^q  to  ^jq  % to  i q?  q? 
ftfei  to:  tor  fttw  I qq  ^ qpq  qfrq  II 

qqT^:  qrqf  ftqr  *33  qjqr  qTq*ft  fwq  i qq  qi  qrq  qqq  qqftqr 
W*n  qrq  q^q  qpq-qrffa  qiST^i  to  i to  to  tonfTiT% 


KHASPABJIYl  DIALECT. 


191 


TTlTifs  t*  frr  tst  tt  sssr  w i Tts  WT  tit  far 

sit  ^ tto  i sitt  tItt  Trfr^  fri^Ti  f«w  $ts  Tftrrfs 

ss  sh  w tto  . i str  Starts  tts  $-ir  i strfa  sHfs  ftn 

SSS  fSTIT  I ST  tW  TT  *It  TTT  sk  ffalfs  TtSIS  TS  I sk  #tS 

®v 

tttts  ttW'  sttt  fttr  tit  frr  tts  st  Tcjs  TrsfTfe  sifr  zm 

TITS  STfS-T^  vk  Sts  Tl^  SIT  sk  fS^HTT  I 7#tS  TT^  skits 

®\ 

srr  TT3  Thu  fsfrr  fa  sms  ^skpff  ssts  tttsss  tits  i tt 

SIT  Tt  STS  St  TTfSTf  STTS  SIT  STS-7TS  ST  TtS  TT  STT  STS 
STI  $TT  Tts  fsfST  Tkr-TTtSE  TffT®  I sk  tIs  TIT  fa  SITTT 

7^  TTTTT  SIT  STTS  T#  sk  TT-fl  ST  5 T tI  3^  f I Tt  3tTT 

fer  ttIs  th«s  tits  sk  ssN  i frits  frr  Tt  sit  s st 

sfr  Stf*T  fST  STS  % StS  sk  ^ Ttfsr  fST  ^ %S  11 

<K 


[ No.  3.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


192 


Central  Group. 

CENTRAL  PAHARl  (KUMAUNl). 

Khasparjiya  Dialect.  District  Almoba. 

Specimen  I. 

(Pandit  Gobind  Prasad  GhUdyal,  1898.) 

Kai-maisa-k  dwi  chyal  chhiy.  Aur  un5-m5-hai  kasai-l 

A-certain-man-of  ttoo  sons  were.  And  them-in-from  the-younger-by 

apan-bab-thai  kay,  * o bab,  apan-jaj&t-mt-liaT  jo 

his-own-fatlier-to  it- was- said,  ‘0  father,  your-own-property-in-from  what 

bit  myar  hu-chh,  u mi-kani  di-de.’  Aur  wl-l  unS-kapi 

share  mine  becomes,  that  me- to  give-away And  him-by  them- to 

apni  jajat  bSt-diy.  Aur  tai-pacbhitaT  kas  chyal 

his-own  property  was-divuled-away.  And  then-after  the-younger  son 

sab  chij  ek-batai-ber  parde£  nhai-goy.  Wi 

all  things  (i \n-)one-collected-having  a-far-country  went-away.  There 

luchpanyaul  kari-ber  apan  sab  mal  pliuki-diy.  Aur  jab 

debauchery  done-having  his-own  all  goods  were-wasted-away.  .hid  when 

wi-l  sabai  phuki-lial,  tab  wi-dc4-mi  thul 

him-by  all-even  was-complet  ely -waste  d , then  that-couutry-in  a-great 

akal  par,  aur  u tan  hup  paith.  Aur  u wi-de4a-k 

famine  fell,  and  he  distressed  to-be  began.  And  he  that-couniry-of 

kai-bhal-maisa-k  yS  jabber  run  paith,'  aur 

a-certain-wortliy-man-of  at-the-house  gone-having  to-remain  began,  and 

wi-l  wi-kani  apan-hanan-mi  sunar  clmrun-huni  la^ay.  Aur 

him-by  him-as-for  his-own-fields-in  swine  feeding-for  he-was-deptited . And 

u uno-buketaQ-1  aur  dan-biyo-1,  janO-kani  sunar  khi-chhiy, 

he  those-husks-wi t h and  berries-with,  which  (acc.)  the-swine  eating-were, 

khuSi  hai-ber  apan  pet  bharan  chi-chhiy.  Aur  kwe 

pleased  become-having  his-own  belly  to-fill  t mshing-was.  And  anyone 

wi-kani  ke  ni-di-chbiy.  Jab  u apan-pham-mi  ay,  wi-l 

him-to  anything  not- giving -was.  When  he  his-own-sense-in  came,  him-by 

kay,  ‘my&r-baba-k  bauliyo-me-haT  katuko-kani  khan-haiber  sakar 

it-was-said,  ‘ niy-father-of  servant  s-in-from  how-many -to  eating-than  more 

rwat  milni,  aur  mi  l)hukliai-l  maran  lf»"i-ray8.  Mi  u^lii-ber 

loaves  are-got,  and  I h tinge,  -by  dying  remain.  I arisen-having 


KHASPARJIYA  DIALECT. 


193 


&.at 

apan-bab-tkai  " jul, 
my-ousn-father-to  will-go , 

I£ware-ki  marji-k  birudh 
God-of  will-of  contrary 
tyar  cbyal  kawainer 


aur  wi-thai  kul  ki,  “ balm,  mi-1 

and  him- to  I-will-say  that,  “ father,  me-by 

tyar  samni  pap  kar-ebb,  aiir  j>liir  mi 

of -thee  before  sin  done-is,  and  any -more  I 

laik  nhatn.  Mi-kani  apan-bauliyij-mU-baT 


thy 

son 

one-voho-is-called 

fit 

I-am-not.  Me  (acc.)  thine-oton-scr cants- in -from 

eka 

barabar 

banai-de.”  ? 

Aur 

ii  uthi-ber 

apan-bab-lkal 

gov. 

one 

equal-to 

make.”  * 

And . 

he  arise  n-liaving 

his-ow  n-fa  ther- to 

ICC  nt. 

Par 

jab 

u bliaut 

tar 

ebbiy,  wi-k 

babai-1 

wi-kani 

But 

when 

he  very 

distant  was,  him-of 

the-Jather-by 

him-as-j'or 

dyakli. 
he-was-aeen. 
wi-kani 
liim-to 
wi-tliai 
him-to 


Tab  wi-kani  dai  ai, 

Then  him-to  compassion  came, 

gbali,  aur  bhuki-cbati 


awal 

embracing 

kav, 

it-icas-said. 


samni 

before 

nbatO.’ 


mi 

I 


kiss 

Isware-ki 

God-of 

t yar 

thy 


was-lhroion,  and 

‘ baba,  mi-1 

‘ father,  me-by 

pap  kar-cbb,  aur  pkir 

sin  done-is,  and  any-more 

Par  babai-1 

I-am-not But  the-father-by 

bbalit  lukur  nikali-ber 

good  clothes  brought-ont-having  bring,  and  them  (ac 

aur  vai-k  bath-mi  munari,  khutii-ini 

and  this-one-of  thc-hand-on  a -ring,  fhc-feet-on 

hamO-kani  khan  aur  kkusi  karni  chal-cbb. 

to-eat  and  rejoicing  to-be-made  proper-is. 

mavi-gb-chhiy,  pbir  jyun  hai-go-ehh ; u 

dead-gone-icas,  again  alive  bccoine-is ; 


aur  daur-ber  jai-ber 

and  run-having  gone-having 

liy.  Auv  chyalai-1 

teas- lake  n.  Bud  the-son-by 

marji-k  birndb  tyar 
will-of  contrary  of-thee 

cbyal  kawainer  laik 

»on  one-tcho-is-called  fit 


apan-bauliyu-lhal 
his-own-sercants-to 
lyfiw. 


aur 


kay,  ‘ sabd-baibcr 

il-tcas-said,  ‘ all-than 

uno-kani  vai-kani  pairaw; 


y» 

this 


us- to 

cbyal 

son 

mil-go-chh.’ 
got-gone-is.’ 

Tabar-lOk  \vi-k 

Tlien-up-to  him-of 

ghara-k  najil 


he 


Tab 

Then 


u 

they 


anand 

rejoicing 


karan 

to-make 


pailb. 

began. 


ay, 

came, 

awaj 

sound 


*.)  this-one 

-to  clothe ; 

jwat  pa  i raw. 

Aur 

shoes  clothe. 

And 

Ki-laik 

ki 

myar 

Because 

that 

my 

harai-gO-chhiy, 

phir 

tost -gone- 

•was. 

again 

ebbiv. 

Jab 

u 

was. 

When 

he 

-bajun-nach 

-kiidc-k 

i 

jvatli  cbyal  ban-mi 

the-elder  son  the-Jield-in 

pujt  wi-l  ga 

the-hoHse-of  near  reached  hini-by  singiny-music-dancing-leaping-of 

mini  Aur  wi-1  bauliyii-ine-lini  yakai-kani  bidai, 

toas-heard.  And  him-by  the-servants-in-of  one  ( acc .)  having-called, 


wi-tbai  puebb  ki,  ‘ yauar 

him-to  it-was-aaked  that,  ‘ of -these 
kay  ki,  ‘tyar  bliai 

it-was-said  that , * thy  brother 

VOL.  ix,  pakt  ly. 


ko  matlab 
toll  at  meaning 
a-chk,  aur 
come-is,  and 


ebb  r ’ Wi-1  v.'i-tbai 
is  ? ’ Him-by  him-to 
1 yii  r-babai  -1  paun-k  yol 

thy-fatlier-by  a-feast 
‘2  u 


194 


KTJMATJNI. 


knri-chh,  ki-laik  ki  xri-1  ivi-kani  blial  aur  chan  pa-chh.’ 
made-is,  because  that  him-by  liim-as-for  t cell  and  healthy  he-found-is* 

Aur  xvi-kani  ris  ai-gye,  bhiter  ja!-huni  ivi-k  manai-1  ni-kar. 

And  him-to  anger  came , within  going-for  him-of  mind-by  no  t-it-w  as-made. 

Tab  Avi-k  bab  bhyair  ay,  aur  wi-kani  botyun  paith. 

Then  him-of  the-father  outside  came,  and  him-to  to-entreat  began. 
Aur  wi-1  apan-bab-thai  jabsib  di-ber  kay  ki. 

And  him-by  his-own-father-to  ansioer  given-having  it-was-said  that , 

‘ dyakh,  mi  yatuk-barso-bati  tyari  tahal  karan  lagi-rayS,  aur 

‘ see,  I this-many-years-f rom  thy  service  doing  engaged-remain , and 

mi-1  kabhai  tyar  kaxxy  ni-taiv.  Twi-1  kabhai  mi-kani 

me-by  ever  thy  saying  not-was-lransgressed.  Thee-by  ever  me-to 

ek  path  laik  lxi-div  ki  mi  apan-dagriyo  dagar  anand 

one  hid  even  not-was-given  that  I my-oion-companiotts  with  rejoicing 

karan.  Par  tyar  yo  cliyal  jo  raniyO  dagar  tyar  mal-tal 

might-have-made.  But  thy  this  son  who  harlots  with  thy  property 

nei-go-clih,  u jassai  a-clih,  tassai  twe-1  xvi-k  lijiy 

having-devoured-gone-is , he  as-even  he-come-is , so-even  thee-by  him-of  for 

paun-kyol  kari-chb.’  Aur  babai-1  wi-thai  kay  ki,  ‘ chyala, 

a-feast  made-is.'  And  the-father-by  him-to  it-was-said  that,  * son, 

tii  barabar  myarai  dagar  ru-chhai,  aur  je-ke  myar  ckh,  u 

thou  always  me-even  with  remaining -art,  and  whatever  mine  is,  that 

sabai  tyarai  ebb.  Yo  tliik  chhiy,  liamfi-1  anand  karan 

all-even  thine-even  is.  This  right  was,  us-by  rejoicing  to-be-done 

aur  khusi  rnanaun,  ki-laik  ki  yo  tyar  bliai  jo 

and  happiness  to-be-celebrated,  because  that  this  thy  brother  who 

mari-go-chhiy,  pkir  jyun  liai-go-cbh  ; aur  harai-go-chhiy,  pbir 
dead-gone-was,  again  alive  become-is ; and  lost-gone-was,  alive 
pai-hai-chh.* 
got-become-is .' 


195 

No.  4.1 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

CENTRAL  PAHlRl  (KUMAUNt). 

KhasparjiyA  Dialect.  District  Almora. 

Specimen  II. 

'Pandit  Gobind  Prasad  Ghildyal.) 

’fkY  qy  ftft  q^  n 

• • 

# qfft  qqy  *fkt  3Rnq  Sfar  qqy  writ?  4k  qpR 
fer  i 

fta»  WH%  ftf%  fta  qyffer  ftqy  sqiqqq  ffaypii 

ff%°  tr  <qqrq  qkPgq  i 

qqy  fqq  srq  ftqy  irfe  qiqyRT  qrw  *ttPt  Tffwq  qftsr 
qftqyPn  qqy  qqq  *ftl  ffq  i qfqqy  qqYqyPir  mPc  fq  i 

<3T  fqqR!  ST^TT  qTqiTCTfqr  qife  4k  qff 

• • 

^qfNiPir  ^ qqnr^prr  p?y  qtq  I 

qTZft  ffafpir  TTcT  q%  qq  4k  qy  q^q  q^  q^mft  Tq  | 

• t a 

qqTTrrrqrr  qf^  S qtT  ftkqy  qT^r  P«yq?:  ^qq  4k  qqP»r  ft 

qqnrrqy  qTaefcR:  qrc  qyr  i 

q 

ft  qqjRrqy  ^qr  ^q^rc  qP*rq*:  qy  *kr  4kr  qtq 

♦ • s) 

4k  flqy  qq  wT^yfqy  gPuqfe  qyftqyPir  qy  *&  CfHfeq  ^tri  ^jfiwqy 

qsT  i 

qqmrqy  4Pk  $\qyqy  q^q^Ttq  ft*  zxfa  ?n%q  qiq  4k 

qnqy  qkt  qyq  fq  4t  ^ qn^rr  ^qr^T  ^nf^q  q €tff 3* 
Wfa  qiq  i 

zmm  4[  qq  qt  kiq  4k  qrfkr  ^ *q  i 


VOt.  IX,  PART  IT. 


2C2 


196 


KTTMAUNt. 


f wf  ft  fkr  xrrfw*t  toto  *tim  qftfroW 

5tt?  jrrf^  i ft  x^ftfro  ft  mm  *ro  ^nnnuT^i  fffro  far  ft 
m mm  mm  croft  fro  x?rf  f^t  i 

ft  3HM  flkr  *4  *rkfr  f^-fro  i ftar  mror 
fcrara  fkr  *rff  to  ifff  xtt*t  i 

tNr  ft  qitfk^rfti  fm  $-fRr  i ft*r  trto  toIT  xp?  ff»  tot 
3TTO  TO  TO  4k  qtfTO  <5Sm?T  I 

fN  to  fft  ^rr^  fff  qiqrkrff  wrsr  ffffT  i 

ft  <st«to  ftro  4k  %w*m  ftf  *r  fNr  xj^tfro 

to  f % TOnrr  tou;  fro  4k  s^k  wTxakrff  TO*rff4  1%-ffr^r  i xr: 

« ^ 

*ftq?T  froNt  ff  ffarff  TOt  WlkN  ffft  l 

f wrt  k^tx;  fter  ft  zmm  ftff  TOfe^fiki  x*nt 
fTO  i fta?  to  fro  i 

^fto  4t«r  WTrkr  qqrelfc  *2^  ftaft  to  4k  fNtkr  fTOr- 
^fkr  ff-ft*r  i 

q-rrot  fkt  to***  I^t  TOTOtt  feqnfe  #qr  x*fr-fro  i toxi  xjrqr 
TOxft  ft  fro  xrrf^T  ^Frrftk  fm  i 

ft  *TTO  XI q?  TO3f  TO  TO  ^ITTO  fxTTOqi  TO  ff  x*kTO  qjff 
xro^kr  fkr  i 

xsfkfr  to  fkr  *rff  fr  ^rmw  to  wrfgf  x;  w^to  tot  ^fx;  x%- 
fkr  i 

3RTR  TO  TO  ^T?T  4k  ffa  ^ TO  #xffftr  TO?  fNr  WT%  xfrfro 
<33-fro  i 

ft  TO^rff  frornnr  ffxifx;  fkr  fterff  xffcr  froro 

Kft  TO  i 

to  ft  TO^rkr  toto  TO^far  fk  ’to  i ff  ft  fMTO^for 
TOUTXR  fffTO  f%f  ^TfJ^f  W ffr  fTO  HTTO  qsftfTO  m*  *TTfv  I 


KHASPARJIYA  DIALECT. 


197 


faf  3PTTW  W ^qf^gR  Wtm 

q^'R  fr^R  TITO  W ^qf^Rffal  ^BTHT  | qT 

$i<t<u  3^rrqr  % *rk  farcre  qrfrqf  *rro  i i % 

qfrfer  qfar  f%fsre  ^ q^  n 


[ No.  4.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


19S 


Central  Group. 


CENTRAL  PAHARI  (KUMAUNI). 

I 

r 

KnAsvAitJiYA  Dialect.  District  Almora. 

(Pandit  Gobind  Prasad  Ghildyal) 

1.  Jo  aurG  upar  kliar  kbau-cbb,  u apbl  wi-rn! 

Who  others  upon  a- pit  digs,  he  himself -even  it-in 

para-cbli. 

falls. 

2.  Kai-gau-im  ek  bbaute  dhanaw  mais,  jai-ki  ek  kbupaj 

A-certain-village-in  a very  simple  man , whom-of  one  hut 

aur  inani  blieri  bakar  clibiy,  rau-cbliiy. 

and  a -few  sheep  goats  were,  dwelling-teas. 

3.  Wi-k  parausi,  jo  AvI-kl  rls  kava -clibiy,  wl-k 

Him-of  the-neighbours,  who  him-of  envy  making-were,  him-of 

dbaiuiw  -pan  deklii-ber,  Avi-kani  gafi-baiber  nikaun-k  upay 

simplicity  seeing,  him  (ace.)  the-village-from  expelling -of  device 

kata -chlii  v. 
making-were. 

A.  Ek  din,  jab  wi-k  blieri  bakara  ban-mi  ebaran 

One  day,  when  him-of  sheep  goats  the-j  angle-in  grazing 

lagi-rau-chbiy,  und-1  uno-kani  ek  bbewan  lau(ai-diy. 

employed-remaining -were,  them-by  them-as-for  a precipice  Ihey-were-driven-down. 
Yasikai  sabS-kani  mari-dey. 

Thus  all-as-for  they-were-caused-to-be-lilled. 

5.  tj  bicbar-dhaniiw-maisai-l  nnS-bberi-bakar5-ki  cbbal  arari. 

That  poor-simple-uuin-by  those-sheep-goats-of  skin  were-skinned, 
auv  unS-clibalo-kani  kai-sabar-ini  beebnn-bimi  li-goy. 

and  those-skins  (ace.)  a-certaiu-city-in  scliing-for  he-took-away. 

(j.  Bat-mi  wi-kani  rat  pari-gey,  aui-  u dbur-mg 

The-way-on  hirn-to  night  befeil,  and  he  the-jungle-in 

ek-utlyar-nu  ray. 
a-cave-in  remained. 

7.  Adb-ratu-ka  pacbbitai  kwe  chliOr  cbori-k  mal  li-b6r 

Half -nig  ht-of  after  some  thieves  theft-of  property  brought  “having 

ay,  aur  uno-I  w?-udyara-k  mwal-tir  dyar  kar. 

came,  and  them-by  thal-cave-of  mouth-near  shelter  was-made. 


KHA8PARJIYA  DIALECT. 


199 


8.  Wi-udyara-k  bhiter  unar  kharbarat  suni-ber  u mais  bliaut 

That -cave- of  inside  their  tread  heard-having  that  man  much 

dar-goy,  aur  wl-l  un-clihala-k  muni-bati,  janO-kani  ft  lyai-rau-chhiy, 

feared , and  him-by  tfwse-skins-of  under -from,  which  (ace.)  he  brought-had, 

apan-lukun-k  upai  kar. 
his-oton-hiding-of  device  was-made. 

9.  Udyara-k  bhiter  clihalS-k  gharbaratai-1  chor  tliari-thari 

The-cave-of  inside  the-skins-of  rattling -by  thc-thievcs  frightened-frightened 

ai-lag,  aur  dara-k  mari  sab  rupaT,  jo  ii  apan 

xoere-cau sed- to-be,  and  fear-of  through  all  the-rupees,  which  they  themsclves-of 
dagara  lya-clihiy,  AvaT  chhori-ber  bhaji-gay. 

with  bronght-had,  there-indeed  abandoned- having  they-ran-away. 

10.  J)hanaw-maisai-l  n rupaT  dhar-liy,  aur  ghar-buni 

The-sitnple-man-by  those  rupees  we  re-taken- possession-of,  and  honse-to 

unai-ray. 

he-returned. 


11. 

rupaT, 

jo  AVL-1  pa-ckkiy, 

uuo-kani 

bliarana-k 

Those 

rupees , 

which  him-by  gotten-were. 

them  lace.) 

measuring-of 

lijiy 

apan-parausi-mi-kaT  yakai-ki 

iiiii 

mani. 

for-the-sake  liis-own-neighbours-in-from  one-of  a-wooden-measure  icas-asked. 

Wi-parausi-l  ui-bata-k  inyau  janana-k  lijiy,  ki 

That-neighbour-by  that- mat  ter-of  meanings  knowin  g -of  for-the-sake,  that 
•yd  kye  lya-cbh?’  nai-k  ^taw-mi  lisj  lagai-tliy. 

‘ this-(man)  what  brought-has  ? * the-measure-of  bottom-on  tar  icas-applied. 

12.  "VVi-dlmnaw-iuaisai-l  rupaT  bhari-ber  nai  di-diy. 

Thatsimple-mau-by  the-rupees  measured-having  thc-measure  gave-(back). 

Par  Avi-k  taAV-par  lisa-k  wil  mani  rupaT  jeri-gay. 

But  it-of  the-bot tom-on  the-tar-of  owing-to  a-feto  rupees  stuck. 

13.  Yai-1  Avi-parausi-kani  lobli  ai-goy.  Wi-1  dliauaw-mais-tliaT 

This-by  that-neighbour-to  avarice  came.  Him-by  the-simple-man-to 

puchh  ki,  ‘ turn  yatuk  rupaT  kai-hal  aur  kasik  lya-chha  ? 9 

it-icas-asked  that,  ‘ you  so-many  rupees  wherefrom  and  how  brought-have  f ’ 

14.  Wi-1  kay  ki,  ‘ apan-bheri-bakarS-ki  chbal  bechi-fcer.’ 

Him-by  it-was-said  that,  * my-own-sheep-goats-of  skim  sold-haoing.' 

15.  Wi-dbanaw-maisa-k  risai-1  aur  dliepuwS-k  lobbai-1  wi-k 

Tha  t-simple-ma  n-of  envy-by  and  pice-of  greed»by  him-of 

parausi-1  apan.  sab  bheri  bakara  mar-diy,  aur  unri-cbhala-kani 

the-neighbour-by  his-own  all  sheep  goats  were-slain,  and  their-skins  ( acc .) 

bechan-buni  li-goy,  par  mbaupate,  kilaik  ki  Avi-kani  uuo-cbbalfi-k 

selling  for  he-took-away,  but  to- no-pur  pose,  because  that  him-to  those-skins-of 

mani  dhepuw  mili. 
few  piee  were-got. 


200 


KUMATJNl. 


16.  Y6-biit-par  risai-ber  w!-l  wi-dbanaw-maisS-ki 

This-matter-on  become- enr  aged-having  him-by  th  at -si  mple-  man  -of 

khupari-kani  ag  lagai-diy.  Wi-k  bbasam  karai-din. 

hut-to  fire  was-applied.  It-of  ashes  were-made. 

17.  piianaw-maisai-1  ckharaun  ek-batai-ber  ek-thail-ml  dbar, 

The-simple-man-by  the-ashes  collected-having  a-bag-in  they-were-placed , 

aur  wl-kani  bechan-huni  li-goy. 
and  it  ( acc .)  selling-for  he-took-aicay. 

18.  Bat-mi  wl-l  apan  tbail  saraka-k  dkikali-laik  dhari-diy. 

The-way-on  him-by  his-oton  bag  thc-road-of  side-on  was-placed. 

ApS  ek-dhar-mi,  jo  najik  ckbiy,  pani  kluin-kuni  go  y. 

He-himsejf  a-spring-to ? tohich  near  was,  water  cating-for  icent. 

19.  Wi-baktai  ek  liarak  mais  laik  upan-pisuwa-k  bwaj  wS 

At- 1 hat-very -time  an  oilier  man  also  his-own-flour-of  load  there 

dhari-ber  pani  kkan-huni  goy. 

put-down-having  water  eating-for  icent. 

20.  Pkari-k  ber  ' wi-1  bhuli-ber  apan  bwaj 

Returning-of  at-the-time  him-by  mistaken-having  his-own  load 

chbari-ber  clikaraun-k  bwaj  uthai-ber  nhai-goy. 

abandoned-having  the-ashes-of  load  laken-up-having  hc-went-away. 

21.  Dhanaw  mais  laik  ay,  aur  wl-l  u bwaj,  jai-kani 
The-simple  man  also  came , and  him-by  that  load , which  (acc.) 

liarak  mais  clihari  go-chhiy,  utbai-liy. 

the-other  man  having-abandoned  gone-had,  icas-lifted-np. 

22.  Wi-bwaj-kani  anakasai  chinan  dekhi-ber,  wl-l  wl-kani 

That-load-to  strange  marks  seen-having,  him-by  it-as-for 
kboy  pisuwa-k  bbari  pay. 

it-was-opened  flour-of  full  it-was-found. 


23.  Tab 
Then 

wl-pisuwa-kn  n i 
t hat-flour  (acc.) 
phir  apan 
again  his-own 


u wi-bwaj-kani  apan-ghar-huni 

he  that-load  (acc.)  his-oicn-honse-to 
bliarana-k  lijiy,  ki  ‘ katuk 

measuring-of  for-lhe-sake , that  ‘ how-much 
parausi-k  nai  matii. 

neighbour-of  measure  mas-asked. 


li-ay.  Wa 

brought . There 

ebb  ? ’ kai-ber, 
is-it  ? ’ said-having, 


24.  VYTi-k  parausi-1,  yo  j:ini-b«“r  ki  * dhanaw-maisai-1 

7 lim-of  neighbour-tty , this  known-having  that  ‘ the-simple-man-by 

apan-khupari-k  clibara-k  badaw  pisuw  pa-chli,*  wi-1  laik 

his -own- hut -of  ashes-of  in-exchange- for  flour  got-is,*  him-by  also 

apan-khupari-kani  ag  lagai-diy.  Par  wi-k  chluiraim  becbapai  no, 

his-own-hut-lo  fire  was-applied.  Rut  him-of  the-ashes  were-sold  not , 


KH  ASPARJ I YA  DIALECT. 


201 


aur  airas  hai-bSr  ghar-huui  pharik  ay.  Aur  je-ke 

and  hopeless  becom  e-having  home-to  back-agoin  he-came.  And  whatever 
•wi-1  kar-chhiy,  wi-k  lijiy  bhaut  pastai. 

him-by  done-woe,  that-of  for  much  lie-repented. 


VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


202 


PHALDAKOTIYA. 

m 

Immediately  to  the  south-west  of  Pargana  Barahmandal  in  Kumaon  lies  the  Pargana 
of  Phaldakot,  which  is  in  the  extreme  south  of  the  district,  being  separated  from 
Pargana  Dhaniyakot  of  the  Naini  Tal  District  by  the  River  Kosi. 

A dialect  entitled  Phaldakotiya  has  beeu  returned  from  both  these  districts.  It  is 
spoken  in  Pargana  Phaldakot  and  in  the  adjoining  villages  of  Pargana  Pali  of  Kumaon 
and  of  Pargana  Dhaniyakot  already  mentioned.  The  number  of  speakers  is  returned  as 


follows,  from  each  district 

Kumaon  11,468 

Naini  Tal  . • * ........  9,440 

Total  . 20,908 


Phaldakotiya  is  practically  the  same  as  the  adjoining  dialect,  Khasparjiya.  This 
will  he  evident  from  the  accompanying  extract  from  the  version  of  the  Parable  of  the 
Prodigal  Son.  There  are  a few  local  peculiarities.  Such  are  the  postpositions  ha-tani, 
used  for  the  dative,  and  maji  used  to  mean  * in.’  The  oblique  form  plural  of  the  relative 
pronoun  jo  is  jann  instead  of  jand.  In  the  verb  phaithan,  to  begin,  the  initial  p has 
been  aspirated.  A somewhat  similar  transfer  of  aspiration  occurs  in  the  Soriyali  dhekand 
for  Standard  dekhano,  to  see,  but  in  phaithan,  Standard  paithano,  not  only  has  the 
aspiration  been  transferred,  hut  it  has  been  also  retained'  in  its  original  position.  In 
the  perfect  tense  the  word  than  is  inserted,  as  in  mi-l  pap  kari-thau-ohh,  I have  done  sin. 


203 


[ No.  6.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

CENTRAL  PAHARl  (KUMAUNl). 

Phaldakotiya  Dialkct.  District  Almora. 

(Pandit  Oobind  Prasad  Ghildyal,  1898.) 

f fir  fw$  i fir  to- 

tot  to  ft  wm  tot  fife  ^ 

ffeflr  fe-f  i ftr  ffa  toFu  ^ttct  fffo-fesi  i fk  st?*t 

fe*T  fe  ftfe  *TFT  f 3T  TO  3^  TOT  TO-fT  HX^SETffe  *f  fft^T  fk 

fr  xrTOfrfef  tsfx  to  wi  ft  qjff-fe*r  i fk  to  ffe  *rt 

ifffar-TOr  ft  xft  wr$  fk  ^ to  #N  i fk 

^ #-%x  ft  f tott  toff-  fr  *kr  wz  i ffa  ffefe  ^mr»ir 

tot  TOkr?fe  TO-fe*r  i fk  *rf fkr  fk  ^twt 

frokr  tot  wffer  *§fro  ^\m  vz  frfro  i fk  f 

ffefe  % ff  fefro  i fk  to  ^ "rum  ftw  It  ffe  to  «nxr 

to*r  4klrft  frfro  ?rN%  tot  ^tttt  trtft  i ft  tost  wm 

^nkr-x^  i ft  ^fe-fx  ^tto  Tirofa  fkr  fk  ftfmfe  fkr  TOt 

to  ffe  qxTOrxfer  tot  wH%-tt  ctot  xfmfw  to  ^fxffe  i fk 

« 

ft  fro  to  fkr  tot  fa  xf  i ffeflr  tttto  fHFr4faffe%  to 
tot  *3r-$  ii 


VOL.  tX,  PART  IV. 


2d2 


204 


[ No.  6.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

CENTRAL  PAHARl  (KUMAUNl). 

PhaiidAkotita  Dialect.  District  Almora. 

(Pandit  Gobind  Prasad  Ghildyal,  1898.) 

Kai-maisa-k  dwi  cbel  clibiy.  Aur  unau-maji-bai  naunai-1 
A-certain-man-of  two  sons  were.  And  them-in-from  the-younger-by 
apan-bab-h5-tani  kay,  * aho  bab,  apani-jaijat-maji-hai,  jo 

his-own-fat  her-to  it-was-said,  * O father , thy- own-property-in- from,  what 

/V 

myara-bata  au-chh,  u mi-kani  di-de.’  Aur  avI-1  unau-kani  apani 

(in-)  my-share  comes,  that  rne-to  give-away.'  And  him-by'  them-to  his-own 

jaijat  bati-diy.  Aur  babat  din  ni  hau-chhiy  nan  cb6l 

property  was-divided-out.  And  many  days  not  became  the-younger  son 

sab-kucbh  ek  batyai-bcr  parde£-huni  nbai-goy,  aur  av5 

everything  together  collected-having  a-far-country-to  went -away , and  there 

luclipanyol-mai  rai-bcr  sab  mal-tal  pliuki-diy.  Aur  jab 

debauchery-in  remained- having  all  goods-chattels  were-squandered.  And  when 
avI-1  sabai  phuki-hal,  AATi-mulk-mai  barb  akal  pari-goy, 

him-by  all  was-entirely-squandered,  tliat-country-in  a-great  famine  fell-down, 
aur  u tang  baun  pbaitb.  Aur  u jai-ber  AA'i-mulk-mai 

and  he  poverty-stricken  to-be  began.  And  he  gone-having  that-counlry-in 

kai-bbala-maisa-k  wa  raun  pbaitb.  Wi-1  Avi-kani  apan-liahau-inai 

a-certain-gentle-man-of  there  to-remain  began.  Him-by  him-as-for  his-own-fields-in 

sunar  charaun-huni  lagai-diy;  aur  u unau-bagelau-1  aur  dana-biyau-1 

swine  feeding-for  he-was-deputed  ; and  he  those- hnsks-by  and  grain-berries-by 

janu-kani  sunar  khS-chhiy,  kbusi-1  apan  pet  bharan 

which  ( acc .)  the-swine  eating-were,  happiness- with  his-own  belly  to-Jill 

cha*chliiy ; aur  kvve  Avi-kani  ke  ni  di-chhiy.  Aur  jab  u 

wishing-was ; and  anyone  him-to  anything  not  giving-was.  And  when  he 

apan-hoS-mai  ay,  avI-1  kay,  * myara-babu-k  bauliyau-mlji-hai 

his-own-senses-in  came,  him-by  it-was-said,  ‘ my-father-of  servants-in-from 
katuk  khan-hai  sakar  rwata  pauni,  ml  bhukai-1  maran  lagi-rayS. 
how-many  eating-than  more  loaves  obtain , I hunger-by  to-die  engaged-ant. 
Mi  uthi-bSr  apan-bab-kani  jaul,  aiu*  Avi-ba-tani  kaul,  “ aho 

I arisen-having  my -own-fat her -to  will-go,  and  him-to  1-will-say , “ O 

bab,  mi-1  PararneSwarai-ki  ichcbha  chbori-b§r  tyara  sam^i  pap 

father , me-by  God-of  wish  abandoned-having  thee-of  before  sin 


PHAIiDAKOTIYA  DIAliliC'J'. 


2(15 

kari-thau-chh ; aur  mi  phir  tyar  chel  kauii  ]aik  ni  rayG ; mi-ka*i 

done-ia ; and  I again  thy  son  to-say  worthy  not  I-waa ; me  ( aoc .) 

apaoj-bauUyau-maj  i-hai  6k  jas  banai-d6.”  ’ 

ihine-oion-ser van 1 8-in- f rom  one  like  make.”  * 


206 


PAOHHAL 

The  word  Pachhai  means  “ western  ” and  this  dialect,  which  is  also  closely  con- 
nected with  Kliasparjiya,  is  spoken  in  Pargana  Pali,  in  the  south-west  of  the  Alinora 
District  on  the  borders  of  the  districts  of  British  Garhwal  and  Naini  Tal.  The 
number  of  speakers  is  reported  as  95,750.  In  the  west  and  north-west  of  this  Pargana 
the  language  is  Garhwali,  in  the  Salani,  Rathi,  and  Lohbiyali  dialects. 

Two  specimens  arc  given  of  this  dialect.  The  first  is  an  extract  from  a version  of 
the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son,  and  the  other  is  a folktale  taken  from  Pandit  Ganga 
Datt  TJpreti’s  Hill  Dialects  of  the  Kumaiin  Division.  The  principal  points  which  may 
be  noted  are  the  following  : — 

The  tendency  which  we  have  observed  in  the  standard  dialect  of  substituting  to 
for  l (see  p.  115)  is  strongly  represented  in  (lie  second  specimen.  Thus  we  have 
samaw  for  samal,  provisions;  jahaw  for  jangal,  a forest;  and  hatouk  for  halnk  (Ilindi 
halka'),  light.  The  letter  n is  often  substituted  for  r.  as  in  lakaijio -han't,  Standard  l ok  (tra- 
it u n i,  for  wood;  I an  ill  a,  Standard  laeula,  we  shall  fight. 

There  is  a general  tendency  to  shorten  long  vowels.  Thus  we  have  apan  for  dpan , 
own  ; bub  for  bdb,  a father;  maji  for  maji,  in  ; akh  for  akh,  an  eye  ; and  many  other 
examples.  Similarly,  chel,  a son,  becomes  chyal  ; chhbt,  small,  becomes  chtcat,  ; and  mi, 
in,  is  shortened  to  a simple  m. 

The  most  common  suffix  of  the  dative  is  ha-ti,  equivalent  to  the  Khasparjiya 
that.  Instead  of  the  Standard  liuni,  we  have  lutni,  and  haker  instead  of  liaiber.  The 
oblique  singular  of  the  demonstrative  pronoun  n is  tee,  not  id. 


INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

CENTRAL  PAHARl  (KUMATJNl). 


PachhAi  Dialect. 


District  Almo&a. 


Specimen  I. 

(Pandit  Gobind  Prasad  Ghildyal,  1898.) 

? mi  ml  miz  SAr  m SAi  i mx  %-*r 

^ttt  fhror  mmfm  mrmm  qTfe-f^r  i ^ At  f^r  fa  *fer  »rt 

mmz  mfmx  trT%sr  m-m  qfa  sr^TgqArfaF 

^ *j 

mm  tnrnzrm  i mx  m?  m xfi  mfxAz 

% t*nr  *n?  ^qr^r  ^ ^ ^ ri^  w-qs  i mx  * q ^ *rra- 
qrqr  mm  i rt  q*r  qqrfa  irca^fafa 

x|TPIP«  f%f^RT  MiilT'M  ! mX  ^ ^ mX  ^fafa 

?qffei  mfsjm  mm  vz  mm  m%rfwz  i qr  m qqrfa  % fa 
fafaq  i mx  «rq  m ^rrmr  mm  t^r  qre  mx  qigqr  farqg 
As^qfsr%  qygqr  Ar%  At  ts  xfffa  ^ If  m$m  mx*$  \\  m 
qfa-qr  mm  *nm  mx  %¥Tfa  At  m mr  A qr^- 

jqrqr  mm  #it  ^rr  arc  mwfm  ttc  mm  i mx  m fmx  mx  mm 
qreqr  Ita  fa  wf  i Wqrfa  qro*n  faqqrg  Ar^At%  qqrqr  tostIt 

I 


208 


[ No.  6 0 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Grow* 

CENTRAL  PAHARl  (KUMAUNl). 

Paohhai  Dialect.  District  Almora. 

Specimen  I. 

(Pandit  Gobind  Prasad  Ghildyal,  1898.) 

Kai-adima-k  dwi  chyal  cbhiy.  Ar  unu-maji-kai  ckliwatai-1 

A-certain-man-of  two  sons  were.  And  them-in-from  the-younger-by 

apan-bab-bi-ti  kay,  * i-baba,  jajat-maji-kai  jo  bit. 

his- own-father  do  it -was- said,  * 0 -father,  t he-properly-in- from  what  share 

mai-kani  milacbb,  u mai-kani  di-de.’  Ar  we-1  unra  blcli-m 
me- to  is-got , that  me-to  give-away.'  And  him-by  of-them  between-in 

apni  jajat  biti-diy.  Ar  bbaut  din  ni  ba-cbbiy,  nan-cbyalai-1 

his-own  -property  was-dioided.  And  many  days  not  become-were,  the-younyer-aon-by 

sabai-kucbh  yak-bat  kari-ber  pardeS  clialai-gay,  ar  wati 

everything  together  made-having  a-far-country  it-was-yone-away,  and  there 

lunarupanl-rnaji  raliai-ber  apan  sabai  mal-tal  urai-diy. 

debauchery-in  remained- having  his-own  all  goods-chattels  were-squandercd. 

Ar  jab  u sabai-kucbh  kkarcb  kari-baitli,  we-deS-m  bar 

And  when  he  everything  expenditure  made-had,  that -country -in  a-great 

akal  j>ar,  ar  u tan  ban  baitli.  Ar  u we-deSa-k 

famine  fell,  and  he  poverty-stricken  to-be  began.  And  he  that -country -of 
kai-matabara-k  dagar  jai-ber  rakan  lag,  ar  we-1 

a-certain-rich-man-of  near  gone-having  lo-remain  he-began,  and  him-by 

we-kani  apan-patalS-maji  sunar  cliarina-k  lijiy  patkyay.  Ar  u 

him-as-for  his-own-fields-in  swine  feeding-of  for-the-sake  it-was-sent.  And  he 
unu-bagat-ar-dano-1,  janu-kani  sunar  klii-chbiy,  kbu^i-1 

those-husks-and-berries-with,  which  ( acc .)  the-swine  eating-were,  joy-with 

apan  pet  bbaran  ckaki-ckbiy.  Ar  kwe  w6-kani  ke  ni 

his-own  belly  to- fill  wishing-was.  And  anyone  liim-to  anything  no* 

di-chhiy.  Ar  jab  u apan-hos-m  ay,  we-1  kay, 

giving-was.  And  when  he  liis-own-senses-in  came,  him-by  it-was-said , 

‘ myar-babu-k  milmatu-naukarU-maji-bai  katuk  kkan-liai  bhaut  rwa$ 

* my-father-of  hired-servants-iu-from  how-many  ealing-than  more  loave . 

pauni,  ar  mai  bbukai-1  marnu.  Mai  utki-ber  * apan-babu-k 

get,  and  I hunger-by  die.  I arisen-having  my-own-father-Oj 

& 


pachhA?  dialect. 


209 


dagar  jaul,  . ar  we-ha-ti  kaul,  “ y§  baba, 

near  will-go,  and  him-to  I -will-say , “ O father , 


ichhya-k  baki, 
will-of  against , 

tyar  chyal  kakan 

son  to-call 


ar 

and 


tyar 
of-thee 
laik  ni 
Jit  not 


sarn^i  pap  kar-chh. 
before  sin  done-is. 
clihau.  MaT-kani 

am.  Me  (ace.) 


xnaji-hai  eka-k  barabari  banai-de.”  * 

in- from  one -of  equal  make”  * 


mai-1  Paramg4wara-k 
me-by  God-of 

Ar  mai  pliirai 

And  I again 

apan-  mib  natu-naukarS- 
thine-own-hired-sercants- 


VOL.  tfc,  PART  JV. 


I No.  7.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


2X0 


Central  Group. 


CENTRAL  PAllARl  (KUMATJNI). 


Pachhai  Dialect. 


District  Almoea. 


Specimen  II. 

( Pandit  Oanga  J>att  Upreti,  1900.) 

m faro  3 ft  TOfro  w fen,  tqr  to  qnr  ffurr  ft  Tffaft, 
xtf to  m ^ht  ft  Tffrot  i ifar  ftqrqr  *r  *rfar  to 
ftTOT  WT5T  <£TT3T  wrer  % to  qrc  to  3T  TOS  ft  i tot  fro  qf 

f TO  ft  WTT  ^ qfTO  ^tT  ftfc#  I W 

to  qfe  tttto  q?  ^sr  qrf^  to,  wt  ftqrfar  to  to  ^r$Pu  ^fer, 
to  i ftofa  tot  froft  tto  i to*t  tqrfft  to  toto  to  *tr  ?ro 

fTO  I TO  ’STTO  TTTTO  Si  t crPTO  faST  I TO  tqr  TTTTO  fttfar 

to  to  to  % crtoi  Trwt  *rrg  qTftr  ft  fro  i f ?ttto  TOHr  tot  fte 
TOI  ft  TO  I qoqR  TO  *pft^  ?fz  TO^  W TOTTO  Tt^T  faf  TOT  % 
TOTO  TOfft  ffafft  TOTO,  ?TO  TO*#t  3IW  ^rfa  TO  TOfar  ^ftTOfft 
TOT  \ ^3  qfro  ft  cTTTO  qTfft  fWft  TO  TOfa  Trfft  ^TO,  5*T 

crrfft  fWft  mro  q-RT  TOfft  fafror,  far!  to  fttro  frorc  to%,  # 
fwrl  *r  ft  fa?  fN  ft  n 

ftqrfft  ftfa  sfzft  far.qfar  ttrr  i ft  ftrr  <3fen  Tit%r  Trfft  q? 

vj  » 

to  to%  ^t  qfro  q»  ft q?  q»  faro  toto  fro  1 % ^ 

<\  • 

ftldT  T q*l”cT  ^ ftftf  far  qfir  ^ftT  ^i{ui  ^TfeSf  I Ti(d  qftl 
ftqr  toto  fro  ^r % to  to^t  TOfr  TOfft  to  qrfft  fftftT  TOfft  ft  1 

to  TOf  far  to  «itt  ft  1 Trfft  qrf^r  tqr  *?kqr  ^ ^nrfnr  %c 

« 

^r to  ^’iror  ^frof  qrf%  1%^t  ^ f^r  1 q?iqr  qr  qfro 

f fror  TO^f  qq?  to^:  wf  tot:  ir  q%  h fffe  to  qfro  fro 
to  to,  tfqr  fffH  tot  far  tot  gfa  1 ^farcr  to, 


pachhAi  dialect. 


211 

'nr  sitoit  si  fifH  sift’,  ^ 

srofir  tos  ^ fro  i to  toNt  ^ to  qfarmff  w 
*f^:  srrosr  3sr  tot  sifsr  sr%  *rfe  tot%  to  ^tt  ^ ij^cf 
to&  to  % iito  to  tor  *t  to  tort  to  ^fnr  *rf  t^j  \ to*t 
t*t  i to  to*r  tot  % qfro  to,  to^i  siftr  MfW  ^rN  to 
mfa  fro  ; to  m^tor  toN  toto  wlr  tor,  tjto  to  ^Tfron 

TO,  ^ trfTOT  tT  TO,  ‘TO  qTOT  TORT  1 TOT  <TO 

qfsr  *ft  ifw  w,  n TOfe  fai  zf%  $ i tost  iffc 

to$  i *r%  ^fsr  %$  i to  g If  to  to  W ?ito’  i tot^r  tost 
to  to,  ‘*i  to  *t  toIt  '?k  fsm  *Rftr  w\  %*ro,  *rf  if  wf^n  IMsr 
sp}^  ii 

#t!r  tot  4fafsi  tot,  to  q%  i?z  % i ft§  to!  sr 
si%  TTfrr  to  f*R  TOf<  toi  3i1%  %,  %v  fsmw  i sr 

to,  ‘«rc  •nf?T  *rR  to  ^iis fa  to  srrcra  if^rfa  ftz  %^fa  srrg,  qwT 
gn  to!  far  to  *Rfa  snisn’  i *ito  tot  qfro  <*r  #tl  t*#F  srftr 
wiri  *r  ^r  tow  wttor  to  f^,  tow  wrf?r  wfw  tot  Tte  f^  11 

sr  ft  to  TOfw  to  *sfw  toitt  tot  to  w ^nfcr  w 

Nj  « 

^f%  Tft^»  SfuT  w wt  q^r  ^ to  ^rrfcr  tvinr  ’srr^r  f% 

wt^t  ’ftsr  to  i vrrfr  Ir,  wff?rr  ^ ^nfh 

^ihf  to  to  TOfnr  #t  to^it  ^rt^  Irf^  to  ^ 
^fro  ftrihc  to  to^t  to  % *rfw  ^r  !f»n  irfa  to, 
‘to  fv^T  ’qsr  muftr  to,  i ^r  to,  *t  tort 

zto  TOf^n  ^fsr  ?r  to  TOfg’  i ^ *rfrr  ^ €t  to  ^rrf^ 

^ sr  to  (^  *R  ««fh  to  ^ ifr?)  to¥  ^ to^tt 

ft  iiTff  tiilro  toT^t  i fro  to  ^fnr^5r 

,*I%f^-lf  !TT%  tr  TORI  TOT  I ^ TO  f^I  TO  TO 

farff  ^to  faro  srfar  frot,  ^ tot  *^rfro  i^t  ^^1’  1 ** 

#f!  sifw  #f  tor  to  ^ toItt  ^fi 

TOT,  TO  TO’H  ^ TTO  I TO  mfsr  TO5  TOTO  ^TO 

^ 2 F^>  - 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV.  1 h - \. 


212 


KTJMAtTKl. 


^Nrf  ^ fgs  TOfar  w&m  ^ f*f*r 

% Sfar  ^ rffH  fft  %t  sm  tot  i to*t 

«tott  gfsr  to  ifft^T  toN  vmm  xrftsi  $ to*tt  f*rn*f 

tTciPu  TO  II 

*r|%  toj  qrf%  ttot  TOf^r  totr  *&  ^tfro*r  to,  ‘toto  j 
to  arc  fiqrfe  tt  TO*f  I to  #T  i t >*fro  tot  1%  TOfal 
^ i ^ % tot  to  ^r  % ^7^9  ^^7?tr  fa  fafe  9 to 

fro  m*n  9*f  11 


213 


[ No.  7.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


Central  Group. 

CENTRAL  PAHARl  (KUMAUNI). 


PachhAi  Dialect. 


District  Almora. 


Specimen  ll. 

(Pandit  Ganga  Datt  Upreti,  1900.) 


1.  Kwe-dina-mc 
1.  Gertain-days-in 
rahachhiyo,  dusar 
was-dwelling,  fhe-other 
na  suni-bor 


dwi  gahin  paik 
two  famous  heroes 
pa4chima-ka 
West-of 
jal-chhiyo. 


Yek 

One 


chhi  y a. 

were. 

kuna-me  rahachhiyo. 

corner-in  icas-d  welling. 


purba-kii  kuna-me 
East-of  corner-in 
Yek  yeka-k 
One  one-of 


Yeka-k 


dhyal 

house 


duhara-k  dhyal-hai-ber 
the- name  heard-having  burning -was.  One-of  house  the-other-of  house-from 

bara-barsha-k  bat- me  chhi.  Yek  din  purba-k  paika-k  man- me 

tweloe-years-of  road-on  was.  One  day  the-East-of  hero-of  mind-in 
liankar  utli,  ‘ dhl,  pa4ehima-k  paika-k  jor  tola.’ 

envy  arose , ‘ let-me-see,  the-JVest-of  hero-of  strength  let-me- weigh.' 

Apan-ghar-bati  samawa-k  bvvaj  badi-ber,  jo  we-kani  bat-pan 

Jlh-own-honse-froni  provision-of  load  tied-haoing,  which  hini-to  the-road-on 


kha-hani 

chai-chhiy, 

gay. 

Dhopari  tak 

liitne 

rahay. 

eating-for 

necessary -was. 

he-went. 

Midday  up- to 

a-walking  he-remained. 

Bat-m 

we-kani  bare 

lamb 

cliakaw  nr 

gair 

tal 

mil. 

The-way-on 

him-to  a-great  long 

broad  and 

deep 

lake 

mas-met. 

We-1 

apan-samawa-k 

bwaj  we 

-tal-m  laphai-diy. 

Jab 

wt'-k 

Him-by  his-own-prooision-of 

load  that-lake-in  was-thrown. 

IV hen 

him-of 

bhiji-gay, 
was-moiste ned, 
pl-diy. 

teas -drunk- up. 


tab  we-1 

then  him-by 

W6-tnla-k 
That-lake-of 


samaw 
the-provision 
pani 

(and)  water 

46-gay.  Yatuk-m  wo-kai 

he-went-to-sleep . Th  e-mea  ntirne  - in  it-of 

janawar  rojai-ki  char  we-tal-m 

beasts  day-of  custom  (in)  t hat -lake- in 


satu 

flour 


muii 

under 


kkali  dyakli  duliari 
empty  having-seen  another 


we-tal-m 

that-lahe-in 


pani 

water 


jag  paiji 
place  water 
p?-haui  yek 

drinking-f or  a 


we- tala- k sabbai 
that-lake-of  all 
nagichai  yek  hot. 

in-neighbourhood  a tree 

naglchai-bati  janawa-k 

the- neigh  bo  urh  ood-from  t he-f orest -of 

pani  pi-hani  ay  a,  tal 

water  drinking-for  came , the-lake 

khoj-hani  gaya.  Unu-pachhin 

seeking -for  ihey-went.  Them-afler 

janaivi  hati  ay,  tliun  pani 
wild  elephant  came. 


trunk  water 


214 


KUMAUNl. 


p?-hani 
drinking-for 
jorai-l 
force -with 

was-broken. 


tal-m  glial, 

the-lake-in  was-thrust, 
chinat  pari, 

scream  was-emitted, 


pa^i  ni-inil, 

water  not-was-found , 
jai-chirigarai-1 
which-scream-by 


risai-bgr 

enr aged-ha  ving -become 

w8-paikai-ki  nin 

that-hero-of  sleep 


2.  We-kani 
2.  Mim-to 
liati-k 

the-elephant-of 

laplmi-diy. 

it-was-thrown. 

uklioAV 
a-mortar 


nin  tuHye-ki  bari  ris  uthi.  We 

sleep  breaking-of  great  rage  arose.  That 

sun  pakari-ber  pa6chima-k  paika-k 
trunk  seized-having  the-  West-of  hero-of 


ris  utliiya-maji 
anger  rising-in 
klioi  bhiter 
courtyard  within 


We-kkoi  bhiter 

That-courtyard  within 

kutan  pai-rechhiy. 
to-pound  engaged-was. 


Ave-bakhat 
(at)  that-time 
Hati-kani 
The-elephant  (acc.) 


we-paikai-ki 

that-hero-of 


chaili 

daughter 


dyakki-ber,  dara-k  mari  apani-mii-kani 

seen-having , fear-of  through  lier-own-mother-to 

uni-ki  ma  bhyar  ai.  Hati-kani 

her-of  the-niother  outside  came.  The-elephant  (acc.) 

jani-ber  apan-dagara-k  lainiyo-kani 

considered-having  herself -of- wit  h-of  icomen-to 


yek  anakaSe  kir 

a strange  insect 

bhiter  bhaji-ge.  Tab 

within  she- fled- away.  Then 

yek-taura-k  naye  kir 

a-manner-of  new  insect 

dikha-hani  khaleti-m 

showing -for  pocket-in 


dbari-diy.  Yatuka-k  pachliin  Ave-din  purba-k  paik,  bara-barsha-k 

it-was-put.  So-mtich-of  afterwards  (on)  that-day  the-Easl-of  hero , twelve-years-of 


bat  kwe-gkari-me  kiti-ber  paschim-paika-k  gbar-hani  gay, 

road  a-few-hours-in  tcalked-having  the-  IV ester  n-hero-of  house-to  went, 

chaili-hS-ti  paikai-ki  kbabar  puclibi.  Chaili-1  kay 

daughter-to  the-hero-of  news  was-asked.  The-daughter-by  it-was-said, 
bab  bara-barsha-bati  dhur  lakana-hani  jai-rah-cbh,  woti 

father  twelve-years-from  the-mountain  wood-for  gone-lias,  there 

Dhur  ja-hani  bat  batai-diy.  Jab  purba-k  paik  dliur-hani 

The-mountain  going-for  road  was-sliown.  When  the-East-of  hero  the-mountain-to 


Ave-k 

him-of 

‘ myar 

( my 

j&AVO.’ 

go.' 


gay,  paSchima-k  paik  laik  sare-jaiiaA\a-k  thul-thul-bOtS-kani 

went,  the- West-of  hero  also  the-whole-forest-of  great-great-trees  (acc.) 

jare-bati  upari-ber  unar  barai  gudlmw  bapai-ber  dhai-dunar 

the-roots-from  torn-up-having  of-them  a- great  load  made-having  a-mountain 

ja£  munawa-m  dhari-ber  apan-ghar-hani  a-raya.  Bat-m 

like  the-head-on  placed-having  his-own-house-to  coming -was.  The-way-in 

bhet  hai-ge.  Tab  purba-k  paik  Ave-paclibin  gay,  gudhaw-kani 

the-meeting  occurred.  Then  the-East-of  hero  him-behind  went,  the-load  (acc.) 

pachhina  khaicbi-ber  tbamr-diy.  Jab  paSchima-k  paikai-1  sakar 

from-behind  pulled -having  he-was-impeded.  When  the-West-of  hero-by  great 


pachhA?  dialect. 


215 


jdr  lagay,  gudbaw  khaichi-ber  aghila  gay,  aur  pachhina 

force  was-applied,  th e-load  dragged-having  forward  he-went,  and  backwards 

dyakhi-ber  kay,  ‘are  purba-k  paika,  mai-1  tvar  nab  paili-batf 

looked-having  it-waa-aaid ,'  ' O East-of  hero , me-by  thy  name  before-from 

suni-rakh-chh,  tg-dagari  bliitakanai-ki  bari  taki  cbh.  Aj  bbeti 

heard-haa-been,  thee -with  meeting-of  great  longing  is.  To-day  meeting 

pa-chb.  Bari  kbu£i  bai-clih.  Ab  tu  maT  lanai  karu, 

obtained-is.  Great  happiness  become-ia.  Now  thou  I fight  let-us-make , 

dba?,  ko  saku-clib.’  Purba*k  paikai-1  ya£  kay, 

let-ua-aee,  who  (of -us)  able- we- are.'  The-East-of  hero-by  thus  it -was- said, 


« yg-ban-me  hamari  bar-jit-kani 

‘ thia-foreat-in  our  loaing -winning  ( acc .) 


jaula, 

we-ah all- go, 


waT-kani  lanula.* 

there  we-shall- fight.' 


ko 

who 


dekbal  ? 
will-see  ? 


Gau-me 

The-village-in 


3. 

3. 

bai. 

became. 

lanai 

fighting 

kay, 


Dwlyai  jbana 
The-two  persons 
Dwiyai*jhan§-1 
* The-two-men-by 


gau-ma]i  gaya, 
the-oillage-in  went , 

buri-h5-ti 

the-old-woman-to 


yek  buri 
an  old-woman 
kav  ki, 

it-was-said  that, 


dagari 

bhct 

with 

meeting 

‘tu 

bamari 

* thou 

our 

jituclih.’ 


ko 

who  ( of-ua-two ) ne-conquer. 
goru  bhaig  cbara-hani 


Buriyai-1 

The-old-woman-by 
ban  ja-rauchh. 


dyakhi-de,  dhai, 
watch , let-us-see, 

* myar  nati 

it-was-said , ‘ my  grandson  cattle  buffaloes  feeding-for  th  e-forest  gone-has. 

We-kani  rot  d&-hai?i  jami,  pachha  tunwlwI-jhanS-ki  lanai-kani 
Him-to  bread  giving-for  I-am-going,  afterwards  yon-two-pcrsons-of  the- fight,  (acc.) 


dyakliula.’ 

I-will-see.’ 

]akan5-kai 

the-woods-of 

jai-ber 

gone-having 


Yatuk  ka-ber 

So-much  said-having 

bwaj  sudi,  apan-kana-m 
load  with,  her-own-shoulder-on 

rot  tli. 

bread  was- given. 


buriyai-1 

the-old-woman-by 

dbar-di, 
having-placed, 


dvviyai-paiko-kani, 
the-two-heroes  (acc.'), 

apan-nati-kani 
her-own-grandson-  to 


4.  Jab 
4.  When 
bufiya-k 

the-old-woman-of 
lakanS  bwaj 

woods(-of)  load 

apan-  dliy  al-hapi 
his-own-house-to 


divi  paik 

the-two  heroes 
nati-1 

grandson-by 
sudi, 

with, 

gay.  Yatuk-m 

went.  So-much-in 


watani 

there 

buri, 

the- old- woman, 


lanai-hani  tayyar  haya,  tab 

fighting-for  ready  became , then 

goru  b haisa  <l\vi  pailc 

cattle  buffaloes  the-two  heroes 


apan 

hi8-own 


gati 

garment-fold 

bari  bliari 
a-orcat  heavy 


bliiter 

within 

dbancliaw 

wind-storm 


buriya-k  nati  urliai-ber  yeso-jag-kani  gay, 

the-old-woman-of  grandson  carried-off-having  auch-a-place-to  went , 


gbal-li, 

having-taken, 

ai, 

having-come, 
ki  jatani 
that  where 


216 


XUlIATJNt 


dwi  sasani 
two  women 
gliun 

bit -of -grass 
* myar-akb 
‘ my-eye 

kay, 

it-was-said, 


ukhow  kutag  pai-rachhi,  ar  y5k-6aini-k 
a-mortar  to-pcmnd  eng  aged -were , and  one-woman-of 

3as  pansi-gay.  We-!»aini-l  duhari-^aini-h5-ti 
like  entered.  That -worn  an-by  the-other-woman-to 

bliiter  gliun  pansi-gachli,  gar-d8.’ 

within  a-bit-of- grass  entered-has,  take  { -it) -out ' 

tukar  mai-kani  d8li, 

piece  me-to  yon-will-give , 

yo  bat  mani.  Uni-1 

word  was-agreed.  Her- 
buri  sudi, 


* we-ghuna-k 


this 


* that-bit- of -grass-of 
garnu.’  U-Saini-1 

I-will-take-out .*  That-woman-by 

[buri-k  nati  ar 

\the-old-icoman-of  grandson  and 

sudi,  lakanS  bwaj  sudi, 

with,  the-woods  {of)  load  with, 


guru 


akh  bhitfi 
eye  within 
kay, 

it-was- said, 
Duhari-1 

The-other-by 

ta  tab 
then  then 
gbun-kani 
t he -bit-of -grass 
bhaisau 


the-old-woman  with,  the-Catlle  buffaloes 
dwi  paiko-kani]  gari-ber, 

the-two  heroes  (<*cc.)]  taken- out-having, 

khaleti-m  dbar-li.  Phir  rat-hani  uni-1  kbaleti-inai  gari-b6r 

pocket-in  was-placed.  Again  night-at  her-by  pocket-from-in  taken-out-having 

apan-khasm-kani  dikhay.  We-1  kay  ki,  ‘ in-sab-kirS-kani 

her-oum- husband- to  it-was-shown.  Him-by  it-was-said  that,  ‘ these-all-insects  {acc.) 

di-diyo.  U sab5*kani  klia-deli.’  In-kwIrO-kani 

give-away.  Me  all  {acc.)  will-eat-up:  These-talks  {acc.) 
paik  ar  buri,  uni-k 


hamar-biraw-kani 
our-cat-to 

dyakhi-sun  i-ber 
seen -heard  -having 

dari-gaya,  ar 
feared,  and 

apu-kani 
themselves  {acc.) 

pasta  n pai-raya, 

to-lament  became-engaged, 

we-iaini-ar-uni-k-khasin-lia-ti 
that-woman-and-her-of-husband-to 
Apan-dliyala  puj  i-ber 

Their-own-homes  arrived-having 
apana-mitur5-ha-tani  kay. 
their-own-friends-to  were-told. 


dwi 

the-two  heroes 

dari-ber 
feared -having 

samsara-k 

the-world-of 

ar 

and 


and  the-old-woman,  her-of 

kapan  pai-raya. 

to-tremble  became-engaged. 

sab-cliijn  lia-bcv  cbliwat 

all- things  than  small 

hat  jori-ber 

hands  folded-having 


nati  bhaut 
grandson  much 

Tab  sabn-1 
Then  all-by 

samaj  i-ber, 
under stood-having, 

binti  kari, 

petition  was-made. 


chhuti-bcr  apan-gliar-hani  gaya. 

escaped-having  t heir-own-houses- to  went. 

y8-sab-kwira  sabS-1  apana-par64-me 
these-all- events  all-by  their-own-ueighbours-among 


5.  Sabu-1  apu-kani 

5.  All-by  themselves  {acc.) 
liy,  ya  kay,  * Bhagwan, 
t oas-taken,  this  was-said,  ‘ God, 


liawuk  samaj  i-ber 

light  considered-having 
ham  tyar-sishti-m 
we  Th  y-crea  tion-in 


Bhagwana-k 

God-of 

saban-hai 

all-than 


chhau.  Ye-dliarti-m  kai-1  sl’ki  ni  karani  chaini.  Yek 
This-earth-on  anyone-by  pride  not  to-be-made  is-proper.  One 


nau 

name 

nan 

small 

hai 

than 


are. 


PACHHll  dialect. 


217 


ySk  ba;(  yek  hai 

one  great , one  than 

Icir  ja&a  chbafi.’ 

ineecte  like  are.* 


ySk  chhwat  huchh.  Bhagwana-ki  6ish.ti.-m  bam 
one  small  is.  God-of  creation-in  we 


[For  a free  translation,  vide  ante,  p.  165.) 


2 r 


▼Ol.  I*,  TAXt  17, 


218 


kumaunT  of  naini  tal. 

The  District  of  Naini  Tal  lies  immediately  to  the  south  of  the  District  of  Almora. 
The  language  of  the  educated  classes  of  the  town  of  Almora  has  been  taken  as  the 
Standard  form  of  Kumauni,  and  thence  the  town  of  Naini  Tal  is  distant  only  about 
forty  miles,  as  the  crow  tlics.  As  may  be  expected  the  Kumauni  of  the  District  of 
Naini  Tal  closely  resembles  the  Standard.  Natives  of  Naini  Tal  count  no  less  than  six 
forms  of  the  language  in  this  small  district,  each  of  which  is  named  after  the  patti  in 
which  it  is  spoken.  Thus,  besides  the  admitted  standard,  they  mention  Phaldakbtiya 
spoken  in  Pattis  Dlmniyakot  and  Chauthan,  along  the  banks  of  the  river  Kosi,  Chhakha- 
tiya  spoken  in  Pargana  Chhakhata,  ltamgarhiya  spoken  in  Pargana  Eamgarh,  and  Rau- 
ChauhhaTsl  spoken  in  the  east  of  the  district,  especially  in  Pattis  Bau  and  Chaubhainsi. 
Of  these  Phaldakotiya  is  an  overflow  of  that  dialect  from  the  Phaldakot  Pargana  of 
Almora,  and  has  been  dealt  with  above  (pp.  202  if.).  The  others  hardly  differ  amongst 
themselves  and,  including  the  Standard  as  spoken  by  the  educated,  and  also  the  mixed 
“ Bazar!  ” dialect  of  Naini  Tal  Town,  may  all  be  considered  as  forms  of  Itau-Chaubhaisi. 
The  estimated  numbers  of  speakers  of  these  various  sub-dialects  are  as  follows  : — 


Phaldakotiya  ...........  9,440 

Ban-ChaubhaTsi — 

Rau-Chaubhaisi  proper  ...  ....  6,875 

Standard  of  Naini  Tal  .......  18,047 

Chhakhatiya  ........  25,800 

Ramgarhiya  .........  3,957 

Bazar!  ..........  2,000 

56,679 


Total  . 66,119 

I am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  Mr.  W.  B.  Cockburn  for  the  version  of  the  Parable 
of  the  Prodigal  Son  in  Rau-ChaubhaTsI  which  follows.  It  will  be  observed  that  it  closely 
agrees  with  the  Standard  Kumauni  of  Almora.  We  may  note  the  following  points: — 

In  the  grammar  of  the  Standard  dialect  I have  been  able  to  distinguish  between 
the  short  it,  e and  o and  the  long  a , e and  o respectively.  No  materials  for  making 
such  a distinction  exist  in  the  present  case,  and  I therefore  give  the  text  as  it  was 
received  by  me,  both  a and  a being  represented  by  a,  e and  e by  e,  and  o and  o by  o. 

We  may  note  the  following  divergencies  from  the  Standard.  The  word  mats, 
a man,  of  the  Standard  becomes  tnatS,  and  this  seems  to  point  to  a general  tendency  to 
pronounce  s like  sh,  as  in  Bengali.  Tn  the  Standard  we  noted  that  the  change  of  e 
to  yo  before  o is  considered  vulgar.  This  change  regularly  occurs  in  Rau-Chaubhaisi, 
in  which  we  have  chyolo,  a son,  and  jyothb,  elder.  The  Standard  tendency  of  a to 
become  a before  a is  reproduced  in  the  present  dialect  in  words  like  gala,  on  the  neck, 
and  bhdld  (nom.  plur.  masc.),  good.  Similarly,  as  in  the  oblique  genitive  of  the  Standard, 
we  have  jSioard-kd  sdmani,  before  God.  Before  le,  the  suffix  of  the  agent-instrumental, 
nouns  take  ai,  as  in  ndnai-le,  by  the  younger ; chydlai-le,  by  the  son  ; babai-le,  by  the 
father.  Beside  hilni,  for,  we  have  suni,  as  in  tci-suni  jdphat,  a feast  for  him. 

The  2nd  plural  imperati  ve  ends  in  au,  as  in  halau,  put  ye.  We  may  also  note  the 
regular  insertion  of  h in  thiyo,  taken,  and  in  other  forms  of  the  same  verb. 


219 


[ NO.  8.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Groufv 

CENTRAL  PAI1A  R I (KCTH  ATJXt). 

Rau-CiiaubuaisI  Dialect.  District  Naixi  Tal. 

(W.  B.  Cockburn , Esq.,  1898.) 

qqr  ^ iran  wi  ft  wt^tt  ff^T  i qiq  % qiq  if  qrft 

fm  qqT  *fkt  qiq  ftq  i qq  ft%  ^r^rrt  fwt  qiq  qrk  kft  i 
WIT®  ffq  q*T  *fr*TT  xETT#  % qTqft  qTqT  HT  qqfft  qrft 
fq  H qT^t  qTqt  qk  Tr  W%T  qTqqT  TTTq  qfqqift  if  frfqi  kft  | 
qq  q?  qq  fifa  ft  WTHT  q§T  HtR  qqnq  q-ft  fk  ft  qrfq 
qqt  -3m  q#t  I fk  qqr  ^TTqjT  TfqxqiT  q?:  qft  fk  ft%  ft 
qffq  qr^T  if  if  qq  ffft  I fk  q qqq  qquqq  qrfq 

• G\ 

# %T  q^  HTW  qfffft  qqq  q^T  iqffeqT  I fk  ftqfftl  % fq 

G\ 

ffft  i qq  q ^sfqr  qrrq  f ft%  qrf t fqr  «ttu  qTqiqrr  qrqfqr  qknq 

if  ^DHT  if  ft^T  ’fiTT^TT  fk  WTfT  % qiq  ^IW[  fk  If  H#  % 

q*q  qifq  Tf  I q ^Tq^T  fNq  q wr  qk  qqq  if  4Wt 

C\  S|  Cis  ©\  Oy 

fq  fkq  Irq  t*qrr  qrr  qiqfq  qfk  qqTTT  qiqfq  qrq  qrc$  \ 
qiq  if  qqqf  qq  fq  kf  fa  qqk  qfrqr  qf  q i qqrfa  qrqqt  ht^T 
qrert  qfqr  qq  % i qq  q qqt  qk  qm^T  qrq  if  qft  i q?qr  qq 
q 15  fwfr  ftqjT  qiq%  ffafa  qfa  faff  qk  I qk  ftqt  qiqi 
qq  faff  ^fk  qfa  *#t  i qq  qnq  q q?ft  fNq  q%  hhttt  qrqfq 

Trhc  %s^ki  qrr  Hiqfq  qiq  qtT  ^ qqft  qftqt  omen 

•>> 

ft*q  5qTcf  i qr  ftqrr  wtm  % ^xmr*\  q q»qt  ht^t  f »iwt  ^fqrr 
^rrfr  ^rk  qqrf%  qqrft,  ftqq  qiq  h qk  if 

qqrcrr  i ^uqRT  qi^  qk  ^fq  qr^-  i ft  *ftk  ^ft^t  nk 
qfeft  qqq  q^ft  % qw  ¥T  qf^ft  Ikk  fqfq  qw  i qq  qqq^ 
’fq  qrrq  qrf  \\ 

qr  fhft  qqtst  q^t€t  qpgr  if  kfr  i qrq  qr  qfet  qrr- 
qq  q^ftqr  *rft  ft^  qkft  qiqft  qft  i qq  ft®  qqr 

voc  IX,  PART  IV.  2,2 


220 


kumaunI. 


srt  % tot  ^ i far  srtrT  §to  «<ki  ^nrfaf  ^ruro 

wfk&  %§  far  <3?  *jfa  gro#  §to  i *r  ^r  ^pifr  $ xrfa  to  *ftax 
fa  tot,  % ^ #fafr  srnrr  to  § *hx  ft^fa  to*  \ to 
w^r  fa  totott  to  if  TOt  qg^r  tot  sifa  3r&  *lfa 
^rfa  to"  Rift  r$:  fa  ^fafr  to%  ?#t#  ^Nrfar  to^  to  tort  fit  TOt 
m fa  fa^  ire*  W *nw  <nfa*r  Rfa  TOt  ^ i to  sftft  *fi 
wt^t  ^ro  ^ *tfa  tot4  toto«t  W t§fro  *ft%  #t  ^fa  <»iito 
tow  i to  ^fa°  TOfr  xQRrr  *^?r  ftsf  rkt  ^ttst  to 
to  #t  w Rt*  w i ^^fa  fwt  far  to  anx  to5*!  wfa  *ifa  TO*rf 

si 

%%  far  Rift  h *rfa  *rfaft  farfx  w to  to  *ifrort  farfa 

Cv 

fafar  *T5  II 


221 


[ No.  8J 

JNDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

CENTRAL  PAIlARl  (KUMAUNl). 


Rau-ChaubhaIsi  Dialect. 


Distjiict  Naxni  Tab. 


(jf,  B.  Cockburn,  Esq.,  1898.) 


Rk-kai-maiSa-ka-  dwi  1 chyala  chhiya. 

A-certain-man-of  two  sons  were. 


N;inai-l6  apana-bab-thai 

The-younger-by  his-own-f ather-to 


kayo  ki, 

it- was- said  that , 

wi-l&  unaro  hiso 

him-by  their  share 

apano  bano  sab 

his-oum  share  all 


‘ baba,  inyoro  ban  ma-kani  di-de.’  Tab 

* father , my  share  nie-to  give-away Then 


ban  kari-diyo.  Thware-din  pacblia  nana-chyiilai-le 

division  was-made.  A-few-days  after  the-younger-son-by 

ekattho  karo,  aur  dCir-des-sn  bato  lagG, 
together  was-made,  and  a-far-country-to  way  was-adopted , 


aur  wa  jai-bfer  apano  inal  bahiyati-me  phuki-diyo.  Jab 

and  there  gone-having  his-own  property  debauchery-in  was-squandered.  When 

u sab  phuki-cliuko  wi-jaga  baro  bliari  akal  paro,  auT 

he  all  had-squandered-completely  in-that-place  a- very  heavy  famine  fell,  and 
wi-kani  tangi  un  paitbi.  Aur  u ck  6ahara-ksi  raisa-ka  ghar 

him-to  want  to-come  began.  And  he  a the-city-of  lord-of  ( to-)the-house 

gayo,  aur  wi-le  wi-kani  bara-mi  6unar  charun-mi  lagai-diyo. 

went , and  him-by  him-as-for  the-field-in  swine  feeding-for  he-was-appointed. 
Aur  u unan-khusyalan-kani  khai-ber  pet  bbaran  cbS-chhiyo 

And  he  those-husks  ( acc .)  eaten-hacing  the-belly  to-fdl  wishing-was 

janan  4unar  kha-cbhiya.  Aur  kai-lo  •wi-kani  ke  ni-diyo. 

which  the-swine  eating-were.  And  anyone-by  him-to  anything  not-was-given. 


Jab  u-kani  pham  ai, 

When  him-to  sense  came , 

katukuk-naukaran-thai  khana-su 
how-many-servan  ts-to  cating-than 

jan  huna-la,  aur 

over-and-above  are-becoming,  and 

uthi-ber  apana-bwaujyu-pai 

arisen-having  my-own-j ather-to 

“ bwaujyu,  mai-le  I$wara-ka  samani  aur 
"father,  me-by  Ood-of  before  and 

mai  etuk  laik  ni-rayn  ki  tuinaro 

I so  Jit  nol-remained  that  your 


wi-le  kayo  ki, 

him-by  it-was-said  that, 

rota  huna-la, 

loaves  are-becoming, 

bkukai-lo  maran 
hunger-by  dying 

aur  unan-tbai 
and  him-to 

tumara  samani  pap 

you-of  before  sin 

cliyolo  kai-jn. 

son  I-mny-be-called. 


max 

I 

jO-lo, 

unll-go, 


‘ myara-baba-ka 
* my -father- of 
aur  khyara-18 
and  wasting-by 
lagi-rayu.  Mai 
am. 

ka-lo 

I-will-say 

kar-chh. 

done-is. 


I 

ki, 

that, 

Ab 

Now 

Ma-kai?i 

Me 


222 


KUMAUNI. 


a pa  n 6 bhard-walo  naukar 
yonr-own  hired  servant 
gayo.  Parantu,  jab  u 

went.  Hut,  when  he 

dekhi-lhiyo,  aur  dai 

he-was-seen , and  compassion 

bhukki  Uii.  Tab 

kiss  icas-taken.  Then 


banai-dS.”  * Tab  u utho,  aur  Spauu-bab-tbaT 

make."  * Then  he  arose,  and  his-own-fat  her-to 

dure  clihiyo  wi-ka  babai-le  wi-kaiji 

distant  was  him-of  the-father-by  liim-as-for 

ai,  dauro,  gala  lagai-lhiyo,  aur 

came , he-ran,  (on-)the-neck  he-was-attached,  and 

cbyalai-le  kayo,  * bwaujyu,  mai-le  turnara 
the-son-by  it-was-said,  * father,  me-by  you-of 


samani,  am*  I4wara-ka  samani  pap  kar-clih,  aur  tumaro  cbyolo  kai-juna-ko 
before , and  God-of  before  sin  done- is,  and  your  son  being -called-of 

yogya  nhatS.’  Par  wi*ka  bwaujyu-le  chakaran-tkai  kayo, 

worthy  I-am-not.*  But  him-of  the-father-by  the- servants- to  it-was-said, 


‘bhal-bai  bhala  lukura  lyao,  auv 

* good-than  good  garments  bring,  and 

munari  halau,  auv  khutan-me  jwata 

a-ring  put,  and  feet-on  shoes 

khusi  karau.  Yo  mybro  cbyolo 

happiness  make-ye.  This  my  son 

harai-ga-chhiyd,  phiri  mili-ga-chli.’ 

lost-gene-was,  again  found-gone-is.' 

lag§. 

it-was-begun. 

Par  wi-ko  jyotho  chyolo  bara-mC  . 

But  him-of  the-elder  son  the-fietd-in 


yai-kani  pairao ; wi-ka-hath-ml 

this-one-to  clothe ; him-of -hand-on 

halau,  aur  japhat  karau,  aur 

put,  and  a-feast  make-ye , and 

mnri-ga-chhiyo,  ab  jyunO  bai-ga-chh ; 
dead-go  ne-was,  now  alive  become-is ; 
Tab  unan-le  chain  karan 

Then  them-by  ease  to-make 

clihiyo.  .Tab  u lauto,  aur 

teas.  When  he  returned,  and 


ghara-ka  najik  ayo,  wi-le  gano  nachano 

the-hoase-of  near  came,  him-by  singing  dancing 


suno. 

was-heard. 


Tab  wi-le 
Then  him-by 


ek  naukar  balai  aur  puclihb, 

a servant  liaving-called  and  he-was-asked, 

kayo  ki,  ‘ tyoro  bhai  ai-ga-elih, 
it-was-said  that,  * thy  brother  arrired-is, 

ke-le  ki  u guni-kusali  ai-ga-ebb.* 

because  that  he  in-good-state  arrived -is.' 


‘ yo  ke  bat  clili  ? ’ Wi-le 
£ th  is  what  th  ing  is  ? * Him-by 

aur  tyara-baba-lc  japhat  kari-chh 
and  thy-father-by  a-feast  made-is 

Tab  ti  gusso  bhai  aur 
Then  he  angry  becoming  and 


gliar  bhitar  ni-gayo.  Yai-wile  wi-ko  balm  bhair  ai  aur 
the-house  within  not-went.  This-for  him-of  the-father  outside  coining  and 

wi-kani  manye.  Tab  wi-le  jabab  di-ber  apana-bab-thaT 

him-to  it-was-remonstrated . Then  him-by  answer  given-having  his- own-fat  her -to 

kayo,  * dekli,  etuk-baras  ja-le  mai-le  teri  tahal  kari,  kabhaT 
it-was-said,  * see,  so-many -years  during  me -by  tliy  service  was-done,  ever 

tyoro  kai  ni-talo.  Tab-le  twl-lc  ma-kani  kabhaT 

thy  saying  not -was-di sobeyed.  Nevertheless  thee-by  me-to  ever 


RAU-CHAUBHAISI  DIALECT. 


223 


€k-bakara-ko  patho  lai  ni-dinS,  jai-ie  mai 

a-goat-of  kid  even  not-was-given , which-by  I 

nyuto  dy§.  Par  jaswe  tyoro  yo  ckyolo  a-clih, 

a-feast  may-give.  But  jilst-as  thy  this  son  arrived-is, 
pataran-m§  phuki-chli,  twi-le  wi-suni  japliat 

harlots-on  were-squandered,  thee-by  him- for 


apana-dagarin-kani 

my-own-compamons-lo 

jai-le  teri-kamai 
t ohom-by  thy-earnings 


wl-le  wi-thai 
him-by  him- to 
aur  uiai-tliai 
and  me-to 
tyar 

rejoicing 


kayo, 
it-was- 
jo  ckh, 
t chat  is, 

karnil 

sliould-have-made 


* chyala, 
‘ son, 


tu. 

thou 

tyorai  clih. 
thine-ecen  is. 
aur  khusi 
and  happiness 


karai-ckh.’ 
got-made- is' 
myara-dagara 
me-of-with 
cliliiyo  ki 

was  that 


tyoro  bhai 
thy  brother 
mili-ga-chh.’ 

got-is.' 


mari-ga-ckhiyo,  pbiri  jyuno 
dead-gone-ioas,  again  alive 


a-feast 

ta  rbjc 

indeed  daily 

Yo  bujln 
This  proper 

rnanyunS,  ke-le  ki 

should-have- celebrated,  because  that 
bai-ga-chh  ; harai-ga-chhiyo,  phiri 
become-is ; lost-gone-was,  again 


Tab 

Then 

bkaye, 

least, 

ham 

we 


KUMAIYA. 


Adjoining  the  Rau  and  Chaubhainsi  Pattis  of  Naini  Tal,  lies  the  Kali  Kumaun 
Pargana  of  the  Almora  district,  the  dialect  of  which,  spoken  by  37,696  persons,  is  named 
Kumaiya. 

The  name  “ Kumaun  ” is  said  to  be  a corruption  of  Kurmachala,  the  old  name  of 
Kanadeo,  a peak  situated  w ithin  this  pargana.  It  is  here  that  Vishnu  is  said  to  have 
resided  for  three  years  while  in  his  Kurma,  or  tortoise,  incarnation,  and  to  have  been 
worshipped  by  Indra,  Narada,  and  the  Rishis.1 

The  Kumaiyi  dialect  is  practically  the  same  as  Rau-Cliaubhaisi,  as  will  appear  from 
the  annexed  extract  from  a version  of  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son.  The  only  special 
peculiarity  is  the  non-use  of  the  cerebral  letters  n and  /. 

We  may  note  the  following  points  in  wrliich  Kumaiya  departs  from  the  Standard. 
The  cerebral  letters  n and  l have  disappeared,  n and  l taking  their  places.  Thus  we  have 
dpno,  own,  not  dpno,  and  akal,  a feminine,  not  akal. 

The  postposition  kd  of  the  Genitive  oblique  masculine  is  liable  to  be  dropped.  Thus 
we  have  kai  mama  for  kai  mansd-kd,  of  a certain  man  (there  were  two  sons) ; ui  mulkd 
for  ui  mulka-kd,  (with  a certain  banker)  of  that  country.  Note  how,  although  the  kd 
has  been  dropped,  the  d (=  Standard  «)  inserted  before  that  postposition  is  retained. 

Instead  of  the  Dative  postposition  kani,  we  have  khan , as  in  charaun-khan,  for  feed- 
ing. The  postposition  sit,  with,  may  be  noted.  Its  use  extends  throughout  the  country 
westwards,  as  far  at  least  as  Kashmir,  where  it  appears  under  the  form  sfity. 

In  the  pronouns,  we  may  note  the  oblique  plural  mid  instead  of  unan. 

In  the  verb  substantive  chhiyd  is  contracted  to  chhyd. 

The  verb  sakano  is  used  to  form  a completive  compound,  like  the  Hindi  chukna,  of 
which  it  is  probably  a corruption:  Parno,  to  fall,  is  twice  used  to  mean  • to  begin.* 


1 Gazetteer,  N.-W.  p.  (1886),  Vol.  XII,  p.  385. 


[No.  9.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


Central  Groupu 


CENTRAL  PAHARl  (KUMAUNl). 


KumaiyI  Dialect.  District  Almora. 

^ TOOT  ft  W OT  I TOf  3*  % *TRT  OTTOT 

to  S TOt  fa  ^t  tot  tot  twr  W % to  S'  trow  S’  fa 
% i ^fk  ^4  % to¥  m ffa  toN  wr  faro  ff%  faSt  i Sk 
?smt  fa*r  ot4  ot  TOrt  t€t  to  fk  frotfc  TOtfa  TO  tot 
fafa  TOt  i to  «tt  TOTfrot^r  S t*  TO  toN  to  tot  fror 
ijfa  faSt  I Sir  <3?  TO  fk  f^TTOf%  TOTO  *4  TO3f  ^ft 
TOTOT  qfaft  I TO  ^ TOt  IN  TOTOt  I fk  ^ TORT  # 
TOEj^jT  fro  to:  TO  qfaft  I TO  #N  3T  TOTOTT  TOT  S TO 

TON  To  TOt  I fk  TO  TOftf  fk  ^T«TT  # TOf  TO  OT5TT 

TOT  % TO  TOlfa  OTf  TOg  TOTOt  *lk  # ft  % OTt  fa®Tt  II 


2 6 


▼Ol.  IX,  PART  IV. 


226 


TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 

Kai-mansa  dwi  chela  chhya.  Aur  unB-ml-bai  n£n&-cbela-le 

( Of-)a-certain-man  two  sons  toere.  And  them-in-from  the- small- son-by 

apna-bab-tbl  kayo  ki,  ‘6  bab,  asta-bista-ml-hai  jo  bSy 

his-own- father-io  it-was-said  that , ‘0  father , the-property-in-from  what  share 

mai  mil-chh  inaT  di-de.’  Aur  ui-le  un8-ka  bleb  apni  asta-bista 

to-me  being-got-is  to-me  give-up'  And  him-by  them-of  among  his-own  property 


b5ri-dini. 

Aur  atti 

din  nai 

bliau-chhya 

kanso 

cbelo 

was-divided-out.  And  many 

days  not 

become-were  the 

-younger 

son 

sab-tir 

sigori-batoli-ber 

tara-mulk 

nisi-gayo. 

Tab 

wa 

everything 

put- tog  ether-having 

( to-)  a-far-country  went- away. 

Then 

there 

lugariyol-me  rai-ber  apni  sab  asta-bista  pbuki-dini.  Aur  jaswe 

debauchery-in  remained-having  his-own  all  property  was-squandered.  And  when 

u sab-tir  nimari-sakyo  ul-mulk-me  baro  akal  pariyo.  Tab  u 

he  everything  spent-completely  that-country-in  a-great  famine  fell.  Then  lie 

nahgo  bun  pariyo.  Aur  ii  ui-mulka  kai-banySnyS-sit 

poverty-stricken  to-be  began.  And  he  ( of-)that-country  a-certain-banker-with 

jai-ber  rafln  pariyo.  Tab  wi-le  u apna-gara-in©  sungra 

gone-having  to-remain  began.  Then  him-by  he  his-own-Jields-in  swine 

charaun-kban  layo.  Aur  u 4 un-bakor-aur-dana-le  jan©  sungra 

feedingfor  was-deputed.  And  he  those-husks-and-berries-by  which  the-swine 

kka-chhya  magna  hai-ber  apni  dhar  bliarnu  samjha-chhyo,  aur 

eating-were  pleased  become- having  his-own  belly  to-fill  wishing -was,  and 

kwe  wi  kft  nai  di-chhyo. 

anyone  him  anything  not  giving-was. 


227 


chaugarkhiya. 

Immediately  to  the  north-west  of  Pargana  Kali  Kumaun,  and  also  in  the  Almora 
District,  lies  the  Pargana  of  Cliaugarkha.  The  dialect  here  spoken  by  an  estimated 
number  of  37,210  people  is  called  Chaugarkhiya. 

In  some  respects  it  resembles  the  Standard  Kuniauni  even  more  closely  than 
KuinaiyS,  for  it  has  the  usual  supply  of  cerebral  ms  and  la.  It  has,  however,  a 
few  peculiarities,  which  will  be  observable  in  the  extract  from  a version  of  the  Parable  of 
the  Prodigal  Son  given  below,  and  which  are  as  follows  : — 

The  change  of  e to  yd  (Standard  e to  yd)  before  d (Standard  d)  or  of  e to  yd 
(Standard  e to  yo)  before  o (Standard  o)  does  not  occur.  Thus  we  have  chela,  not 
chyald  (Standard  chyctld),  sons. 

In  this  dialect  we  also  meet,  occasional  instances  of  the  dropping  of  a final  long 
vowel,  which  we  have  seen  is  common  in  Kliasparjiya  and  other  connected  dialects. 
Thus,  in  the  specimen  we  have  both  dpctnd  and  dpan  (phu\  masc.),  own;  nand  and  nan 
(sing,  obi.)  younger;  kayo  and  kay,  said.  Before  kd,  d (Standard  h)  is  regularly 
dropped.  Thus,  naukar-kd,  not  naukard-kd,  hardhar,  equal  to  a servant. 

In  the  pronouns,  we  may  note  dp  a no  or  apanii,  own,  and  janU,  the  obi.  plur.  of  jo, 

who. 

In  verbs,  the  chief  changes  are  the  frequent  use  of  hhiyo,  instead  of  chhiyd,  ‘he 
was,’  and  of  giyd,  instead  of  gayb,  he  went. 


VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


2 o 2 


228 


[No.  10.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

CENTRAL  PAHARI  (KUMAUNl). 

CnAT7 GAR KHITA  DlALECT,  DISTRICT  AlMOKA. 

(Babu  Gobind  JProscul  GhUdyal,  1898.) 

# wr  qn  ft  qqT  faRT  i qfa;  <3qq  tT  % qiq  wr  ^ qrq 
qmq  qR  ! fr  qqr  qfeqfz;  sf  % ft  qfs  If  fat  q?  q far  % | 
qfa:  ft  q ^rcr  faq  qrofar  qfeqfe  qTfa  ffft  i qfa  *ffar  faq 

fa  fqqT  •TRfT  WT  qt  qfeqfe  W <TCqq  ^ faft  | qf 

qjqsq  qqrfT  I tr  qrwr  fjfar  f^ft  i qfk  ft  % qq 
*rt  ffar  fafr  ft  qqqr  q qft  qqq^  qfa  faft  i ^ qftq  fq 
<?rrfq  faft  i qh  ^3?  ft  *rrt  qrr  fi  qfanr  qrr  ^ fr  *far 
*rrfa  faft  i qh:  ft  % qr  qrwr  qqR  q qcfar  q qq 

faft  \ qfa  qr  ^ ^rtt  fqsrc  % qf  qrfq  qrfar  fqqT  ^ft  % 
qr  qmi  fs  qrft  fft^fr  I qfa:  ft  qrfq  ft  ft  fa  fqift  I qfa 
5R  ^ qRfa  *3RT  q § faft  ft  % qrfrt  fTT  qR  W[  faqqq  ffarff 

C\ 

q % qfa  ffare  WRIT  % qq»T  fteT  ftft  qk  If  qqr  ^ qfa  Tf  I 

* A ^ 

q qfe  q*  qRqT  qqT  t fqt  fk  ft  f qfft  ft  qqT  q % qqqrq 
far  qqqT  % q%q  ?f  hr  qrrq  i ffk  qq  q ?kt  fqt  $q 

qqt  f Tft  i q qrfar  qiwr  faqqn  fkkf  q % qqr  fknc  qrr 
qrrqr  qq  ^ « 


229 


TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 


Kai-maisa-ka  dwi 
A-certavn-man-of  two 

kay 


it-was-said 
di-chhai, 
thou-givest, 
latipati 


chela  bhiya. 
sons  were. 

apan-bab-thai,  ‘ 0 baba, 
his-own-father-to,  ‘ O father. 


Aur  unan-me-hai  nan-chela -le 
And  them-in-f rom  the-younger-son-by 
latipati-ml-hai  jo  bat  mai 
the-property-in-from  what  share  to-me 


u mai 
that  to-me 
bani-diyo. 

property  ,wa8-d%v%ded-out. 
latipati  batyai-ber 

property  collected-having 
rai-ber  apano 

remained-having  his-own 
pliSki-diyo,  wi-muluk-ml 

was-wasted,  that-country-in 


ni 

not 


di-de.'  Anr 

give-up .’  And 
Aur  bhaut  din 
And  many  days 

pavcles-hU  giyo. 
a-foreign-land-to  went. 
mai  phuki-diyo.  : 
goods  were-wasted. 

bare  akal 
a-great  famine 


wi-le  unara  bicli 

him-by  of -them  among 


apanx 

his-own 


bhiya 

became 

\\a 

There 

Aur 

And 


pari-giyo. 

fell-down. 


lagi-giyo.  Aur  u wi-muluk-ka  kai-saukar-ka 


began. 


And  he  that-country-of  a-certain-banker-of 
raun  lagi-giyo.  Aur  wi-le  u fipana-gaian-nnl 

to-dwell  began.  And  liim-by  he  his-own-Jields-m 

lagai-diyb.  Aur  u n-chhala-bina-le  jan§-kani 

was-depnted.  And  he  those-linsks-berries-with  tolnch  (ace.) 

bhiya  kliuSi  liai-ber  apanu  pet  bharano 

were  happy  become-having  his-own  belly  to-fill 
kwe  ke  ni  di-clihvo.  Aur  jab  u 

anyone  anything  not  giving-was 

wi-le  kayo,  * mera-bab-ka 

him-by  it-wassaid,  * my-father-of 

khana-hai  sakar  rota  pauni,  aur 

eatmg-than  more  loaves  obtain , 
uthi-ber  apana-baba-thai 

arisen-having  my-own-f ather-to 

mai-lS  Bhagawan-ki  man5a-hai 

me-by  Ood-of  toill-f rom 

ab  mai  tero  chelo 

now  1 thy  son 


n ana-chela-1  e sabai 

tlie-younger-aon-by  dll 

luchna-ka  dagara 

debaucheea-of  with 
wi-le  jab  sabai 

him-by  when  all 

TT  garib  bun 

He  poor  to-be 

dagara  jai-ber 
with  gone-having 
sunar  charaun-ml 
swine  feeding-in 
sunar  klianer 

the-swine  eaters 
chS-clihiyb.  Aur 
wishing-was.  And 


Aur  jab  u apani-kliabar-me 
And  when  he  his-own-sense-in 

mihanatu-naukarfi-mi-liai  bliaut 
hired-serva  n ts-iu-f rom  many 
mai  blink-la  i niari-rayfi. 


and 

jnlo 
will-go 

balrnik, 
outside, 
kun 
tosay 


I hunger-by 
aur  wi-thai 


and 

two 

thee 


o 
“ 0 


jaso 

such 


d y ing-remained, 
kaulo,  “ 
him-to  I-will-say, 

dckha], 
in-the-sight, 
nai 
not 


pap 

sin 

rayo. 

I-remained. 


AvI-kani 

him-to 

ai-giyo, 

arrived, 

naukar 

servants 

Mai 

I 

bab;i, 

father, 

kar-chh,  aur 
done-is,  and 
MaT-kani 

Me(acc.) 


apana-mihanatu-naukarS-me-hai  6k-naukar*ka  barabar 

thine-own-hiredservants-in-from  one-servant-of  resembling 


banai-de.”  * 
make.’*  * 


GANGOLA. 


This  dialect  is  spoken  in  the  Gangola  Pargana,  and  in  the  adjoining  patfis  of 
Pargana  Danpur  of  the  District  of  Almora  by  an  estimated  number  of  37,734  people. 
Its  habitat  is  immediately  to  the  east  of  that  of  Cliaugarkliiya,  with  which  it  is  closely 
connected,  Gangola  mainly  differing  in  possessing  Cliaugarkliiya  peculiarities  in  a 
stronger  degree.  Cliaugarkliiya  sometimes  drops  final  long  vowels,  while,  as  the 
specimen  (a  portion  of  a version  of  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son)  shows,  Gangola 
does  the  same,  but  much  more  often.  Thus,  in  the  very  first  three  words  of  the  specimen, 
we  have  kai  mais-k  for  kai  maisd-kd.  In  fact,  in  Gangola,  the  final  vowel  is  dropped 
oftener  than  it  is  retained,  and  the  dialect  thus  approaches  the  Kliasparjiya  and  the 
dialects  connected  with  it.  Other  examples  are  chydl  for  chyala , sons,  and  kliydt  for 
khydta,  fields. 

As  in  Cliaugarkliiya  the  cerebral  u and  l arc  in  regular  use. 

Gangola  is  fond  of  contracting  forms,  so  that  chhiyd,  he  was,  becomes  chhyd; 
chliiyd , they  were,  becomes  chhyd  and  even  chhya ; and  the  Cliaugarkliiya  bhiyd,  he 
became,  becomes  bhyd.  The  dialect  is  also  fond  of  inserting  y,  as  in  bhyaut,  many ; 
j yd -her,  having  gone ; and  jya  (for  je),  which.  The  letter  r is  sometimes  elided 
before  another  consonant.  Thus  we  have  mand-ry for  marnd-rahyS,  I remained  dying, 
i.e.  I die.  We  shall  see  a similar  elision  in  some  of  the  Garhwall  dialects,  e.g.  in 
Ratlii  (p.  311  post). 

In  the  word  Paraniesioar,  God,  an  r between  two  vowels  has  become  r.  This 
change  of  r to  r is  perhaps  due  to  Tibeto-Burman  influence.  See  the  remarks  on 
Johari,  p.  248. 

A curious  deformation  of  a borrowed  word  is  tndpuk  for  the  Arabic  mwodfiq. 

In  the  declension  of  nouns  we  may  note  hi  and  chhyai,  both  meaning  ‘to’  or 
‘for.*  Thus,  pardeS-ht,  to  a foreign  count ry;  charaun-hi,  for  grazing;  wt-chhyai 
kau-chhu,  I will  say  to  him.  Chhyai  is  probably  another  form  of  that.  In  Western 
Pahiri  th  often  becomes  chh. 

The  Standard  nhatfi,  I am  not,  has  become  ncihatyu,  and  au-chhe  is  used  to  mean  ‘ it 
(fern.)  comes.  * 


[NO.  II.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


Central  Group. 


CENTRAL  PAHARl  (KUMAUNI). 


G angolA  Dialect.  District  Almora. 

(Pandit  Gobind  Prasad  GhUdyal , 1808.) 

^ ffaq?  ft  ^ i fqyft  qqqq  qiq  ^rrq^m  qtqf 

qrft  ffr  wr  qiq  qifqffq  qrfcqfcq  qrrc  qTqfqr  ^ Wf  ffti  * 
ft  i fqrfr  ftq  ^q  ^qrqq  qrfeqfe  mqfa  qifnr-q  i fqrf*  «rtq 
ffq  fq  «it  fer  qT^  qrrqfq  ^rfeqfe  qq?-qfe  qrft%  q*qqff 
qfq-qfr  i fqrfr  qf  WT-fT  qjq  «rr  i *nqfqi  qq  qTffffq  ^rfeqfe 
qjfqr-ft  i fqttr  wq  q qf  qrfeqfe  qf  qsft  q>  f am  sq  qqrre 
wt  i fqrf*;  q qftq  iw  jqaqt  i fmfc  q ft  fanq?  qiqr  qrq  qfq- 
wni  ^nf  ^n-fr  Ttq  qsft  i fqjft  ftq  q to  wcto  ai^q 
qffaifT  qnrrfr  i faff  q qq  qrlteq  fk  qiqq  qqq  w*  ^rfsrr 
’STTqfa  *TTW  qfalt  I ffk  ft  ft  fi  fa  »ft  I faff 
wq  q q^q  qqqt  ffa  qrft  fa  qnr  qiqTqr  qqqqTqq%  ^qf 
^ qff%  qifqr  ^T£  ftqq  fk  q gqr  qqfa^  i qq  q qf%  vmm 
qrqq?  qf  qfff  frk  ftf*  qqrr  qrq  q%  q^faqKTqf  ffgq  m* 
qqq  wm  i faff  q ^rcfaqq  artfr  ^tqft  qrjr  qigqr 
qnff  i q qrrqqr  qqqnrqq%  qrqn  qftqff  q$  f u 

°V  Nj 


[No.  II.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY 


232 


Central  Group. 


CENTRAL  PAHARI  (KUMAUNI). 


G Angola  Dialect.  District  Almoea. 

(Pandit  Gobind  Prasad  Ghildyal,  1898.) 

Kai-mais-k  clwi  cliyal  chhya.  Phiri  unan-ml  nan-chyala-le 

A -certain-man-of  two  sons  were.  Then  them- among  the-younger-son-by 

apan-bab-thai  kayo  ki,  *hala  bab,  bliani-kuni  lati-pati-me 

his-own-fa th er-to  it-was-said  that , * O father,  ntensils-etcetera  property-in 

myar  banki,  jya  mai-tkai  au-ehlie,  ma  di.’  Phiri  wi-le 

my  share,  which  me-to  coming-is,  (to-)nie  give*  Then  him-by 

duwe-chyalan  lati-pati  apani  bani-de.  Pliiri  bhyaut  din  ni 

to-the-two-sons  the-property  his-own  was-divided-out.  Then  many  days  not 

bliyo-ckhiy  nftnu  cliyolo  apani  lati-pati  yelc-bali  kari-bev 

hecome-wcre  the-younger  son  his-own  property  together  made-haring 

pardes-lil  nasi-gyo.  Phiri  wa  jya-ber  Inch  bliyo. 

a-far-country-to  went-away.  Then  there  , gone-having  a-dcbauchec  he-became. 

Apani  sab  bhani-kuni  lati-pati  phuki-di.  Phiri  jab  u sabai 

Mis -own  all  ntensils-etcetera  property  was-squantlered.  Then  when  he  all 
lati-pati  urai-utliyo  wwleS-mi  thul  akal  bhyo.  Pliiri 

property  squandered-completely  that-country-in  a-great  famine  became.  Then 

u £»arib  hun  paithvO.  Phiri  u wl-do&i-k  yak-bhal-inanikha-k  dairar 
he  poor  to-be  began.  Then  he  t hat-count  ry-of  a-gentle-man-of  with 

jya-ber  raun  paithyo.  Phiri  wi-lfi  u apana-khyat-mB  Auiar 

gone-having  to-remain  began.  Then  him-by  he  his-own-Jield-in  swine 

ckaraun-hl  lagayo.  Phiri  u un-pliaketan-aur-danan,  janan  6unar 
feeding-for  was-appointed.  Then  he  those-hushs-and-berries(-by),  which  the-swine 
kka-chkya,  khu§i-le  apani  dhar  blmran  cha-cbbyo.  Aur  wi  kwe 

eating -were , joy-toith  his-own  belly  to-fill  wishing -was.  And  (to-) him  anyone 

ke  diner  ni  bhyo.  Phiri  jab  u apan-sud-m!  ayo,  wi-le 

anything  a-giver  not  became.  Then  when  he  his-own-senses-in  came,  him-by 

kayo  ki,  ‘ myar-baba-k  butkaran-ml-hai  katuk  dhSr  bkari-kai 

it-was-said  that,  * my-father-of  servant  s-in- from  how-many  belly  Jilling-than 

baki  rwat  paunan,  aur  mai  bhuk  mana-ryD.  Ab  mai  ya-hai 

more  bread  obtain,  and  I (by-)  hunger  dying-remain.  Now  I herefrom 

apana-babu-k  wa  jS-cLliu,  aur  wi»clihyai  kau-clilni,  “ hala  bab, 

my-own-f at her-qf  there  going-am,  and  him-to  1-saying-am,  “ 0 father. 


O ANGOLA.  DIALECT. 


233 


mai-16  Parauieswara-k  vimukh  tyav 
me-by  God-of  against  thy 


dekhnO-dck  li  no 
i n- seeing -i  n-seei  ng 


mai  aji-la^ 

I to-day- from 
yak  a barobari 
one  eqnal-to 


tyovo  chyolo  kun  mapuk  nahatyu. 
thy  son  to-say  jit  f-am-not. 

banai-de.”  ’ 
make."  ’ 


3dsu 

Me 


pa]>  kav-cbli.  Phiri 
sin  done-is.  Again 

a pan-bul  k fi  ran  -m?- I tai 
t It  in  e-own  -so  • tut  n Is-  in- 1 rom 


VOL.  ix,  part  IV. 


234 


DANPURIYA. 

This  dialect  is  spoken  in  the  northern  part  of  Danpur  Pargana  and  in  the  southern 
part  of  Johar  Pargana  of  the  Almora  District.  The  estimated  number  of  speakers  is 
23,851.  Immediately  to  its  south  lies  the  Gahgola  dialect,  to  which  it  is  closely  allied. 

Like  Gahgola,  this  dialect  drops  final  vowels  almost  ad  libitum.  Por  instance,  the 
first  three  words  of  the  specimen,  which  is  an  extract  from  the  version  of  the  Parable  of 
the  Prodigal  Son,  are  kai  mais-kd,  of  a certain  man,  and  lower  down  we  have  kai  (bard) 
mai6d-k , with  exactly  the  same  meaning. 

The  principal  peculiarity  of  this  dialect  is  the  universal  nasalization  of  the  last 
syllable  of  verbal  forms.  Numerous  examples  will  be  seen  in  the  specimen.  We  may 
also  note  the  interchange  of  b and  p in  paitha  or  baitha.  he  began.  Verbs  whose  roots 
end  in  vowels,  insert  an  n in  the  past  tense,  as  in  huna,  they  were;  dina,  was  given 
(both  masculine  and  feminine),  and  c/ulna,  he  wished.  So  also  kana,  I have  done  (sin). 
This  should  not  be  confounded  with  the  n (for  it)  of  the  future  passive  participle  in 
words  like  milna,  it  is  got,  or  with  the  n of  the  present  participle,  as  in  marital , I am 
dying.  The  word  for  * l am  not’  is  natchhU. 

An  excellent  further  example  of  this  dialect  will  be  found  on  pp.  34  and  fl’.  of 
Pandit  Ganga  Datt.  Upreti’s  Hill  Dialects  of  the  Kumaun  Division. 

That  example  is  in  an  extremely  colloquial  style,  and  is  full  of  meaningless  inter- 
jections which  will  not  be  found  in  the  version  of  the  Parable  here  given.  In  other 
respects  its  language  is  the  same. 


235 


[No.  12.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

CENTRAL  PAHARl  (KU.MAUNi). 

Danptjbita  Dialect.  District  Almora. 

( Pandit  Gobind  Prasad  Ghildyal,  1898.) 

fNi  HiT  ft  *JWl  ^TT  I ^TRT  % mm  HTH  If  HTOT  f HTH 

% Wt  «TTft  f^RT  ^ If  f^T^T  I ?R  ft  *?T  ffa 

^rnrfw  Hffe-ff5TT  i ^rh:  ff  ffcfi  fa 

wt  zrsi  *mf  i fr  xfif^^r-xRTfw  W ^fa- 

fffr  i ft  5 nrfa-^MT  an  ft  If  §<ft  wise  x^t  fir 
^ ?PT  ^ fsT  I <TH  ^ ft  *J^|Hi  If  f WTfT  #9JT^r  ^*TT3T  # ffa 
h<st  \ ft  % ^ wr  Swr  i cr  s sr  wY  fa 

• nJ 

wra  fk  ^nff  % faff  *am  *r*m  % ^rrofa  ^ wi  i 
fk  it  ft  % fa  faff  i fk  ft  ^rofa  Him  ^nfr  ^ sffa  Ssf 

«fTTT  HiT  ^THrY  % HifcT  *§TW  % Ifa  TTST  ffaf  fk  W 

*rrSf  i If  f t mm  hth  h ^Nrf  fk  ft  If  ^T€f  t hth 

VI  c\ 

Sr  i HTO  fa  *TTfa  % HTH  ^ ^*ff  HRT  fk  If  'HTH  akt 

wfat  mqrai  i ft  in  mw i S^g^rT  ^ nf 

to  % n 


▼Oi,.  IX,  PART  IV. 


2 h 2 


236 


[No.  12.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

CENTRAL  PAHART  (KT7MAUNI). 

Danpuiuya  Dialect.  District  Almoua. 

( Patulit  Cobind  Prasad  Ghildyal,  1898. J 

Kai-maiS-ka  dwi  chkyaura  kun3.  Auv  nana-13  apan-bab-thai 

A-certain-man-of  two  sons  were • And  the-younger-by  his-own-f ather-to 

kaya,  ‘I  bab,  latipati-liai  jo  bano  mai  milna,  u 

il-was-said,  * O father,  the-property-from  what  share  to-me  is-to-be-got,  that 
mai  di-gbal.’  Tab  wi-le  unara  Inch  apani  latipati 

(to-)  me  give-away.’  Then  him-by  them- of  between  his-own  property 

bSti-dinS.  Aur  jail  din  ni  bits  ki  nan-chbyauru-le  sab 
icas-dicided-out.  And  many  days  not  passed  that  the-yonnger-son-by  all 
sameri-ber  tara  muluk  gay  3.  AYa  phahik-pbahik-inaT  sab  mid 

collected-having  afar  country  went.  There  debauchery-in  all  goods 

phuki-dinS.  Jab  wi-le  sab  plniki-balS,  tab  wi-muluk-mni 

were-wasted.  When  him-by  all  icere-wasted-completely,  then  that-country-in 

thido  akal  para,  aur  u tang  bun  paitbaL  Tab  u 

a-great  famine  fell,  and  he  in-toant  to-become  began.  Then  he 

wi-muluk-mai  kai-bara-maisa-k  dagara  jai  raun  paithS. 

that-country-in  a-certain-great-man-of  with  having-gone  to-remain  began. 
Wi-le  apan-gara-mai  suiiar  charaun  bhejS.  Tab  u un  rukhau-ki 
Him-by  his-own- fields-i/n  swine  to-feed  he-was-sent.  Then  he  those  trees-of 
chbal-aur-diinau-Jo,  jinau  suiiar  khanai,  nmgan-hai  apani  dbar 

bark-and-herries-with , which  ~ the-swine  were-eating,  joy-with  his-own  belly 

bharan  cbanS,  aur  kwe  wi  k6  ni  dina.  Aur  jab  wi 

to-fill  wished,  and  anyone  (to-)him  anything  not  gave.  And  when  (to-) him 

apani-pham  ayS,  u kaun  bait-hs,  * myara-babu-ka  xnehantuS-cliakaraudiai 

his- own-senses  came,  he  to-say  begem,  ‘ myfatlier-of  hired-servants-out-of 

kati  khan-bai  jail  nvata.  paunt,  aur  mai  bhuk  mamai. 

how-many  eating-than  ‘more  loaves  get,  and  I (of-)liunger  am-dying . 

Mai  utki-ber  Span-bab-tbaT  jul8,  aur  wi-tbaT  kafilS,  “i 

I arisen-having  my-own-father-to  will-go,  and  him-to  I- will-say,  “ 0 
bab,  mai-le  Bkagwan-ki  marjl-hai  ulta  p5p  twe  d6kb5 

father , me-ly  God-of  will-from  opposite  sin  thee  in-sight-of 


danpuriyA  dialect. 


237 


kanE,  aur  mai  ab  tyaro  chkyauro  kun  maphak  naichhn, 

um-done,  and  I now  thy  son  to-say  worthy  am-not,  me-alao 

apan-mehantua-chakarafi-hai  ck  jhan  banai-de.”  ’ 

thine-own-hired-servants-out-of  one  like  make."  ' 


238 


SORIYALT. 

North  of  Pargana  Knli-Kumaun,  in  the  Almora  District,  lies  the  Pargana  of  Sor 
or  Slior,  and  north  of  this  lie  the  two  Parganas  of  Askot  and  Sira.  These  three 
Parganas  lie  on  the  extreme  east  of  the  Almora  District,  close  to  the  Nepal  frontier. 
In  former  times  they  were  a part  of  the  Nepal  State  of  Doti. 

As  may  he  expected,  the  dialect  of  these  three  Parganas  is  more  or  less  affected  by 
the  Khas-Kura  language  spoken  in  Nepal.  Moreover  a number  of  Gorki officers  and 
soldiers  have  settled  in  these  parts,  and  in  Sira  Pargana  there  arc  several  villages  owned 
by  the  Nepal  Government,  which  are  inhabited  by  natives  of  that  country.  These 
Gorkhas  and  other  Xaipalls  speak  their  own  Khas-Kura.  in  a more  or  less  corrupt  form. 
No  specimens  of  their  language  need  be  given  here,  as  it  is  not  the  real  language  of  the 
country,  but  that  of  foreigners  who  have  settled  in  it.  Those  who  wish  to  see  what  it  is 
like  are  referred  to  Papdit  Ganga  Datt  Upreti’s  Hill  Dialects  of  the  Kmnaun  Division, 
on  pp.  41  and  47  of  which  specimens  of  the  corrupt  Khas-Kura  are  given  under  the 
names  of  Cork  ball  and  Dotyall. 

What  is  here  given  is  a specimen,  not  of  Khas-Kura  influenced  by  Kumauiu,  but 
of  Kumauiu  influenced  by  Khas-Kura,  as  spoken  in  Sor  Pargana  by  an  estimated 
number  of  19,806  people.  The  influence  of  the  latter  is  most  clearly  shown  in  the 
frequent  use  of  thiyd  or  thyd,  instead  of,  or  rather  alongside  of,  chhiyd,  for  ‘lie  was.’ 
Besides  this  there  are  other  divergencies  from  Standard  Kumauiu,  the  principal  of  which 
are  as  follows  : — 

As  in  Kunmiya,  the  use  of  cerebral  //  and  / is  rare.  We  have  apnd , instead  of 
dp  no,  him  instead  of  hint  and  akul  instead  of  akdl.  The  only  instances  of  cerebral  n 
which  occur  in  the  specimen  are  bun,  a share,  and  snni,  \a  noise)  was  heard.  There  is  a 
curious  interchange  of  aspiration  in  t he  word  dhekand,  for  dekhano,  to  see.  Wo  noted 
a somewhat  similar  interchange  in  Phaldakotiva. 

In  the  declension  of  nouns,  there  are  several  alternative  forms  of  the  oblique  plural. 
Usually  we  have  the  Standard  form  in  an,  as  khefon-ind,  in  the  fields;  nn  aka  ran -mu -ha  i, 
from  among  the  servants  ; yatuk  ha rsan-bati , from  so  many  years  ; pdtaran-kd  yd,  with 
harlots.  Sometimes,  however,  we  have  dn,  as  in  dandn-le,  with  berries;  khutdn,  on  the 
feet ; dagariydn-kd  sath,  with  (my)  companions.  Once,  we  have  nd,  as  in  nankarnd- 
that,  (the  father  said)  to  the  servants. 

There  are  some  unusual  post  posit  ions  of  the  dative.  Besides  that,  we  have  the 
thfii  just  quoted.  Instead  of  kani,  we  have  everywhere  khi.  Another  dative-accusative 
is  commonly  made  by  adding  s,  as  in  ek-s,  (having  called)  one  (of  his  servants);  bdbus 
jubdb  diber,  having  given  a reply' to  the  father  ; tnai-s,  to  me;  tcl-8,  to  him.  This  is  the 
suffix  employed  in  Kashmiri.  Sometimes  it  takes  the  form  sn,  as  in  hatnasu,  to  us. 

In  the  pronouns  the  only'  anomalous  forms  are  jinaun,  which  (the  swine  were 
eating),  the  oblique  plural  of  jd,  which,  and  kasai,  a*  well  as  kai,  the  oblique  singular 
of  ktoe,  anyone,  asm  kasai  jimddr-kd,  dayard,  with  a certain  land-owner,  beside  kai- 
ddmi-kd , of  a certain  man. 

Tn  verbs,  we  have,  as  already  seated,  thyo  or  thiyd,  also  written  (yd,  for  ‘he  was.’ 
2s aha ti,  is  ‘ I am  not.  * A contraction  similar  to  thyd,  is  kyd  for  kayo,  said.  The  infini- 


soriyAl!  dialect. 


239 

tire  ends  in  «,  as  in  hun  pasyo,  he  began  to  be  (in  want)  ; raun  pasyo,  he  began  to  dwell. 
Its  oblique  form  ends  in  a,  as  in  oharaund-khi , (sent  him)  to  graze  (swine).  * 

Amongst  irregular  past  participles,  we  may  note  dind,  given ; Ihind,  taken  • rvd 
remained ; and  gyd,  went.  ' ’ 

The  following  forms  may  also  be  noted  -.-paundn,  they  get  (loaves);  khd-tyd  (not 
-thyd),  they  were  eating ; samaj-tliyd,  he  was  wishing;  di-lhyo,  (no  one)  was  living  • 
bachi  gyd-chh,  he  has  been  saved  ; pd-chh,  lie  has  been  found  ; kar-chhy  (apparently  for 
kar-chliiyo)  (I)  have  done  (sin)  ; gyd-thyd  (not  gyd-thyd),  (not  many  days)  had  gone  I 
am  unable  to  explain  jdnwe-ryd,  he  went  away,  unless  jd-nwe  or  jdn-ice  is  a compound 
As  in  Kumaiya,  sakanb  is  used  to  form  a completive  compound  in  urai-sakyd,  he 
squandered  completely.  Instead  of  pail  ha  yd,  pasand  is  the  word  used  to  mean  ‘ to 
begin.* 

The  specimen  of  Soriyali  is  a complete  version  of  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son. 


[No.  13.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 


CENTRAL  PAH  A R 1 (KU  MAUN  I). 


Sorlyal!  Dialect.  District  Aluora. 

^ TO  ft  %TO  HZJT  I 

If  wt  ft  tot  if  % to  to  if  tt  ft  | i fk 

% :?TO-fN  TO^ft  WT  fwi  | fk  *t|cT  f^T  kft 

WT  f%  TOTTt  %TO  TOT  cftT  Ucff  TOT  TOT  ?ff  TOt 

kf  $TOT  TO  TTO  TTW  TO^T  fffr  1 fk  TOT  Si  TOT 

fk  TTWt  cm  sft  %ST  *TT  ^TOW  ft  ’fk  <5  %TDT  ^ 

i *fk  <3i  ft  to  toi  froT^TT  to  to  *kr  tot 

^rk  ft  ir  ft  tt  tot  to  test  ^Tkn  kf  TOft  i fk  ^ ^ 
fk  ^tto*t  ^ froki  tost  to  to  i TOift  *nkr 

• ^ "sj  nJ 

TTTOT  CETt  fk  ft  ft  TT  % k SJTT  I fk  Sff  <3?  TO1TO  TOT 

Tff  TOft  ft  % TOt  tot  tot  to  TOrkro  ftro  to  t to:  tot*t  farmt 

TkT  fk  W VTTO  Trfr  Tf  I S'  ^fz  ^TOTT  TO  TO 

__  «v 

TO  TO  ft  t*  ^Tkr  ^T  TOT  & i RTOTO  TO  TO  ^ZT 

to  Trmkr  to  to  i "*fk  W fak  wr  tot^t 
^Trft  ff  totot  TOkTO  ’Stto  ttt  % ^ to  wtot  wto  % i 


210 


KTTMAUNl. 


4k  Sx  tortt  tot  S (Sf)  kt  i nx  to  4kr  $1  sat  St 
to  to  S <ar  $xSt  4kStxr^roTO$;4kft%  4*f?  Sx  *t 
wr  «ni  ksSt  4k  *$fS  ffSt  i 4k  4to  ^ It  f Sit  tot 
it  % toSxtx  to  xrt  to  toet  ^x  to  tox  Sf  vm  to:  ?w  ^x 
S fSfx  ?fft  SSt  4kft  TOt  ^rr€:  xS  i to:  tox  % tortt  Stroro 

©\  ©V 

*ni  Sit  fS  xrt  % fSfS  9xRt  fSrofS  tot  4k  ft  xr  S xr  kx 
4k  i*  to  vrt  to  4k  x^m  tor  to  4k  to  4T  4k 
tort  toT  i to  to  fS  ft  Sxt  SSt  x?fx  St  sat  4k  ftifx:  xfS 

*St  5 S?  TOS  St  Eft  ffrfx  TO  ^ | 7RT  S TORT  TOT  TOT  II 

TTfS  fS^  St  St  S£t  ^St  TO  TO  Wt  I 4k  TOT  <3T  TOSt 
Sftx  TO  TO  •TfSXf  tJ«St  XT  St  S XTRt  a4Wt  ^X  •TR  St  XRTXT 
xrSt  i 4k  St  S 4N»x?t  to  t tog  xr  StxrnrSx  Skit  far  xtot 

sJ 

to  tottot  w i 4k  St  ^ St  S'  wr  ^xr  ^t4  to  ^ Sxt  tot  S 
xtrtt  Sf  S w to  to  fS  St  S sr  fSSt  4k  xjrorxt  f i ^r 
^ ftxrnr  Srt  4k  St  S 4txrx  TOSt  *rif  3RSt  i tot  St  St  to  Sx 

C\ 

TOSt  4k  St  XT  TOTkr  TOt  I 4k  St  S ^TOTO  XT  ^TO  * fS 
to  TOt  fS  to*  It  tort  wtot  x^t  Sxt  ,rokt  ^rfx  x^  4k  4 S 
to  xtxt  TOSt  Sft  TOSt  i S i S i to  to  totxt  St  TOt  mSt 

TOT  Sfi  fSSt  I i I TORTT  3*lffTO  TO  XTRT  TO  ^X*T  I TO 
TOt  St  TOt  St  TOTOXT  TO  TO  XiXt  TOT  TOT  fSfS  Sit  * wxS  ^ ^ 

to  ^ S St  ?ff  rt^tt  ^rx  gar  i 4k  to  S St  S TOt  tot  S 

^ O' 

xrx  fro  Sxt  tost  xf^4kirS3xt$xR3xtS:*i  St 
fs%  ESt  fS  TO  TORT  wif  ^X  ^4t  TOf  I *&  TO  fS  St  TTXt 
xnS  St  xrfx  St  «St  fSfx  xfS  iSt  w ^x  txtt  St  cSt  fSfx  to  ^ i 


241 


[No.  13.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 


CENTRAL  PAHARI  (KUMAUNI). 


SdRiTAiit  Dialect. 


District  Almora. 


TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 


Kai-adml-ka  dwi 
A-certain-man-of  two 


apna-baba-thai 
hia-own-father-to 
mai-s  , mil 

mc-to  ia-got 

ban-din!. 
tcas-divided-o  ut . 

sabai-tir 
everything 
kukarin-mli 
evil-deeds-in 
jab  u 
when  he 


kyo, 

it-was-said, 

dl-de.’ 
give-away .' 
Aur  bliaut 
And  many 


chela  tliya. 
aona  were. 
*6  baba, 

‘ O father , 

Aur  wi-le 
And  him-by 
din  nal 
days  not 


Aur  unan-ma  kSsa-le 

And  them-among  the-younger-by 
asta-ml-liai  jo  ban 

the-property-in-from  what  share 

unara-bicli  apni  asta-bista 

them- of- among  his- own  property 
gyo-tkya  ki  kaso  chelo 

gone-were  that  the-younger  son 

janwe-ryo, 
went-away, 

phuki-dino. 

was-squandered-away 


aur 

and 


wl-deS-ma 

that-country-iy 


bard 


wa 

there 

Aur 

And 

akal 


a-great  famine 


ek-batd  kari-ber  pardes-khi 

together  made-having  afar-conntry-to 

rai-ber  apno  sab  mal 

remained-having  his-own  all  wealth 

sab-tlr  urai-sakyo,  tab 

everything  had-wasted-completely,  then 

aur  u hairan  liun 

he  distressed  to-be 

dagara  jai-biir 

loith  gone-having 

charauna-kbi  lay  6.  Aur  u S-bokra-aur- 

feeding-for  it-was-  deputed.  And  he  thosc-hmks-and- 

sunar  khS-tya,  klmsl-le  apno  pet  bliarno 

the- swine  eating  -we  r e , happiness-wit  h his-own  belly  to-fill 
kwe  wl-s  kc  n5i  di-thyo.  Aur  jab  u 

him-to  anything  not  giving -was.  And  when  he 


paryo, 

fell,  and 
jimdar-ka 
landowner-of 
apna-khetan-ina  sunar 
hi8-own-fields-i»  swine 
dauan-le,  jinaun 
berries-with,  which 
samaj-thyo,  aur 
wishing-was,  and  anyone 


pasyo. 

Aur  u 

wi-des-ka 

kasai- 

began. 

And  he 

that-country-of 

a-certain - 

raun 

pasyo, 

aur  wi-le 

Wl-S 

to- dwell 

began. 

and  him-by 

him-as-for 

mera-balm-ka 
1 my-father-of 
aur  mai 
and  I 


apna-cli&t-ina  ayo  wi-le,  kyo, 

his-own-sense-in  came,  him-by  it-was-said, 
liaiber  katgu  jhikwau  rota  paunan 
from  how-many  more  loaves  get , 

Mai  uthi-ber  apna-babu-pal  jaulo, 

I arisen-having  my-own  father-near  will-go, 

baba,  mai-le  Parmesar-ka  man-ka  ulta  am’  , 

father,  me-by  Ood-of  will-of  opposed  and  thee-of  bejore 

VOt.  IX,  PAM  IV. 


maj  uridav-nauka  r-ina- 

hired-servants-in- 

bhuk-le  mari-rayQ. 
liunger-by  dying-am. 


aur  wl-tliai 
and  him-to 
tera  samni 


kaulo,  “ o 
I- will-say,  “O 
pap  kar-chhy, 
sin  done-teas , 


242 


KUMAUNl. 


aur  mai  phiri  t5r6  chelo  kaun  laik  naliati.  Mai-s 

and  I any -more  thy  son  to-be-called  worthy  1-am-not.  Me{acc.) 

apna-ixiajuridar-naukaran-ma-hai  ek-ka  barabar  banai-de.”  ' Aur  u uthi-ber 
thine-own-hired-servants-in-from  one-of  equal  make."  * And  he  arisen-having 

apna-baba-thaT  {or  -kb?)  gyo.  Par  jab  u bhaut  durai  thyd,  wl-ka 
h is -own-fa  thei'-to  went.  lint  when  he  great  distance-even  was , him-of 
babft-lg  u dlxekyo,  aur  wi-s  daya  al,  aur  wl-lg 

the-father-by  he  was-seen,  and  him-to  compassion  came,  and  him-by 

dauri-ber  u gala  lai-lliino,  aur  bbuki  dini.  Aur  chela-1 6 

run-having  he  on-the-neck  icas-taken,  and  kiss  was-given.  And  the-son-by 

wi-thaT  kyo,  ‘ baba,  mni-lc  Parmesar-ka  man-ka  ulta  aur 

him-to  it-was-said,  * father  me-by  God-of  will-of  opposed  and 

tera-najar-ina  pap  kar-cbhy,  aur  mai  phiri  tero  chelo  kaunO  jaso 

thy-sight-in  sin  done-was,  and  I any-more  thy  child  to-be-called  like 

nai  rayn.’  Par  habu-le  apna-naukarna-thai  kyo  ki, 

not  I-remained.’  But  the-father-by  his-own-servants-to  it-was-said  that, 

‘sab-hai  niki  pairon  nikali  lya,  aur  wi-s  ve-s  paira ; aur 

* all-than  good  garment  having-produced  bring,  and  it  this-onc-to  put-on ; and 

e-ka  hat-ma  uiunari  aur  khutan  jwatii  paira.  Aur  ham  khau 
this-one-of  liand-on  a-ring  and  {on-)feet  shoes  put-on.  And  we  may-eat 
aur  chaman  karafi.  Kya-la  ki  yo  mero  chelo  mari-go-thyo, 

and  merriment  ice-may-make.  Because  that  this  my  son  dead-gone-was, 

aur  phiri  bachi-gyo-chh  ; it  liarai-gb-thyo,  phiri  jxa-ehh.’  Tab  . n 

and  again  escaped-gone-is ; he  lost-gone-ioas,  again  got-is'  Then  they 

chaman  karan  pasva. 

merHment  to-do  began. 

Tati-lin  wi-ko  jetho  chelo  garlm-mS  thyo.  Aur  jab  u tiyo, 

Then-up-to  him-of  the-elder  son  tlie-ficld-in  was.  And  when  he  came, 

am*  ghar-ka  najik  pujvo,  ta  wi-lc  gano  bajauno  aur  nachh-ki 

and  the-house-of  near  arrived,  then  him-by  singing  music  and  dancc-of 

bhanak  suni.  Aur  wi-le  naukarau-mai-hai  ek-s  bolai-ber  sodyo 

sound  was-heard.  And  him-by  the-servants-in-f rom  one-to  called-having  it-was-asked 

ki,  ‘ inaro  kya  xnatlab  chh  ? * Aur  wi-le  wi-thaT  kyo,  ‘ tero 

■that,  ‘of- these  what  meaning  is  ? ’ And  him-by  him-to  it-was-said,  ‘ thy 

bhai  a-clih.  Tera-baba-le  kliana-khi  de-chh,  kya-la  ki  wi-le  u 

brother  come-is.  Thy-father-hy  the-feast-as-for  it-given-is,  because  that  him-by  he 

niko  aur  sukyaro  pa-chh.’  Aur  u risai-gyo,  aur  wi-le  bhitar  jano  Dai 

well  and  sound  got-is*  And  he  angry -went,  and  him-by  within  to-go  not 

thanyd.  Tab  wi-ko  habu  bhair  ayo,  aur  wi-s  manaun 

was-intended.  Then  him-of  the-father  outside  came , and  him-to  to-remonstrate 


SOEIYALt  dialect. 


243 


pasyd.  Aur  wi-16  apna-babu-s,  jubab  di-ber,  kyo  ki, 

began.  -And  him-by  his- own-father -to,  answer  given-haring,  it-icas-said  that, 

*dhSk,  mai  yatuk-barsan-batl  terl  chakari  kari-rayn,  aur  mai-le 

(see,  I this -many -y ear s-from  thy  service  having-done- remained,  and  me-by 

kabbai  tero  a-kayo  nai  karyo.  Tai-le  mai-s  kabhai  ek-bakra-ko 

ever  thy  unsaid  (thing)  not  was-done.  Thee-by  me-to  ever  a-goat-of 
nano  patho  lyagai  n5i  dino,  jai-le  mat  apna-dagariyfm-ka  sSth 

young  hid  even  not  was-given,  which-with  I my-own-companions-of  with 

chain  karnu.  Par  tero  yo  cliCdo,  36  pataran-ka  yS  tero 

rejoicing  might-have-done.  But  thy  this  son,  who  harlots-of  near  thy 

mal-tal  nili-gyo-chli,  jaswe  a-chh,  taswe  tai-lo  wl-khl  khana  kar-chhy.* 

property  devoured , even-as  he-come-is,  so-even  thee-by  him-to  a-feast  made-was. 

Aur  babu-le  wi-tha?  kyo,  ‘chela,  tai  sah-dinai  mera  dagara 

And  the-father-by  him-to  it-wassaid,  ‘son,  thou  all-days-even  of-me  with 

rau-chhai,  aur  je-ke  mere  ebb,  sab  tero-1  chb.  Yo  thike  thyo 
remaining- art,  and  whatever  mine  is,  that  thine-even  is.  This 
ki  ham  chaman  karau  aur  khus!  manafi. 
that  we  merriment  should-make  and  rejoicing  may -celebrate. 
tero  bhai  30  mari-go-tbyo,  pliiri  bachi-gyo-chh ; am 

thy  brother  who  dead-gone-icas , again  escaped-gone-is ; and 


right  was 

Kya-la  ki  yo 
Because  that  this 
liarai-go-thyo,  phiri 
lost-gone- was,  again 


pa-chh.’ 

got-is.' 


VOt.  IX,  PAKT  IV. 


2 r 2 


244 


ASKOTT. 

Immediately  to  the  north  of  Pargana  Sor,  on  the  Nepal  frontier,  lies  the  Pargana 
of  Askot  (eighty  fortresses).  The  dialect  of  Kumaunl  here  spoken,  by  an  estimated 
number  of  10,964  people,  is  called  Askoti  or  Askotiya.  It  is  practically  the  same  as 
Soriyali.  A short  extract  from  a version  of  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son  will 
suffice  as  an  example.  We  may  note  the  following  divergencies  from  Soriyfili.  The 
word  bhitya  (Hindi  bite)  has  the  initial  b aspirated.  On  the  other  hand,  for  ‘ to,’  we  find 
both  that  and  tat.  Compare  tyd  for  thy  a in  Soriyali.  The  word  for  * own’  is  sometimes 
apanu  and  sometimes  apanu.  The  conjunctive  participle  is  formed  by  adding  beri 
instead  of  her.  Completive  compounds  are  formed  with  the  verb  chukano  instead  of 
sakano,  and  inceptive  compounds  with  basanb  instead  of  pamrib. 

[No.  14.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

CENTRAL  PAUARI  (KI'MAUNl). 


Askoti  Dialect.  District  Almora. 

iff  3tT  ft  f *TT  SHT  | fk  f f m 

* w sTPrsrm  f*  t wt  ffc  $r  u ftrftr  ft  Sr  ft  % i fk 
ft  i fkr  ^rrqft  srrkr  ft  i fk  fkr  ft*  ft  ffsn 

ft?  ^rifrr  ffr  w fk  nrr  fk  f n ft?  w *rft  fk  fr 

^rqsf  % * f k ^rrq*  *rsr  ^TT^rerr^r  ff  ft  i fk 

**fk  ^*ft  ft  f sr.  f fk  <3?  y5*  TOt  1 

fk  ^ ft  f sr  *rt  # *trh  *rt  ura  f f k fkr  *rsit  i fk  ft 

f ft  ^*kn  ft r if  *rwft  i fk  sr 

• ^ 

fftifT  fk  ^T*TT*T  % ftR*  WT  CTT  ifft  % fs  HT«T 

sft  I fk  ft  ft  *T  % ft  ft*  m\  II 


245 


l No.  14.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 


AskotI  Dialect. 


CENTRAL  PAHARl  (KTJMATJNl). 


District  Almora. 


TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 

Kai-mAnas-ka  dwi  chela  thy  a.  Aur  unan-m6-hai  nana-le 

A-certain-vnan-of  two  son s were.  And  them-in- from,  the-younger-by 

apana-baba-thaT  kayo,  ‘ baba,  jayajat-ml-bai  jo  b3t  maT-s 

his- own-father -to  it- was- said,  * father , the-property-in-from  what  share  me- to 


inili,  so  maT  di-de.’  Aur  wi-le  unara-bich  apani  jayajat 
is-being-got , that  to-me  give-away And  him-by  of- them- among  his-own  property 
bani-di.  Am*  bbaut  din  ni  bhitya  ki  kanso  chelo  sab-tlr 

was- divided-out.  And  many  days  not  elapsed  that  the-younger  son  everything 

jama  kari-beri  dur-deS-ki-taT  gayo,  aur  wa  luchpan-ml  rai- 

collected  made-having  a-far-country-of-to  went,  and  there  debauchery-in  remained- 

beri  apanu  sab  mal-tal  urai-diyo.  Aur  jab  u sab-tir  kharch 

having  his-own  all  goods  were-wasted.  And  when  he  everything  expenditure 


kari-chukyo,  wi-deS-me  baj*6  akal  paryo,  aur  u tang  bun 

■nade-completely , tliat-country-in  a-great  famine  fell,  and  he  distressed  to-be 

basyo.  Aur  u wi-des-ka  kai-bhalti-manas-ka  pas  jai-beri  raun 

began.  And  he  tliat-country-of  a-certain-wealthy-man-of  near  gone-having  to-dwell 
basyo.  Aur  wi-le  wi-s  apna-garan-me  sunar  cliarauna-ki-tai 

began.  And  him-by  him-as-for  his-own-fields-in  swine  feeding-of-for 


lagayo.  Am* 

it-was-deputed.  And 
kh5-thya,  khu4i-le 
eating -were,  happiness-with 
ke  ni  din-thyo. 
anything  not  giving -was. 


u uni-bokara-aur-danan-le 

he  those-husks-and-berries-with 

.■v 

apanu  pet  bharan  eba-thyo. 
his-own  belly  to-fill  wishing- was. 


jinan  sunar 

which  the-swine 
Aur  kwe  wi-s 
And  anyone  him-to 


246 


STRALT. 

Immediately  to  the  west  of  Pargana  Askot,  and  still  to  the  north  of  Sor,  lies  the 
Pargana  of  Sira.  The  dialect  of  this  Pargana  is  known  as  Sirali,  and  lias  an  estimated 
number  of  12,481  speakers.  Sirali  is  practically  the  same  as  Soriyali.  Its  only 
divergence  is  when  it  tends  to  approximate  the  Standard  form  of  Kumauni.  Thus  it 
has  chhyd  sis  well  as  thyo  for  ‘ he  was.’  Instead  of  the  Soriyali  khi  it  has  khin,  as  the 
postposition  of  the  Dative- Accusative.  There  is  a tendency  to  interchange  e and  ai, 
so  that  we  have  both  le  and  lai  as  the  postposition  of  the  Agent.  The  verb  forming 
completive  compounds  is  chukand,  not  sakatid , while,  on  the  other  hand,  inceptive 
compounds  are  formed  with  pat  and,  as  in  Soriyali. 

A short  extract  from  a version  of  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son  will  he  a 
sufficient  specimen. 

[No.  15.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

CENTRAL  i'AlIAKl  (KUMAUNI). 


SiBAiii  Dialect.  District  Almora. 

qrt  mr*  ft  w sit  i ^nr  if  qrNrc  w # vrt 

«trt  sf  qrft  wmrn  if  m to  irr  * ft  ffq  i 

m ft  It  if  ^roft  winner  mfz  ft  i far  *ft?r  ff* 

W $ «rr  fw  ^rreT  swt  3rfr  f^r  «rf%  i 

ft  I WT  *TP?mT*r  why  ffft  i snr  ^ m 

^4  wft  ft  ijro  if  qfrt  i qfarrar  qfrt  i 

<ar  ft  qrr  # ^ fr  toV  i f*nT 

ft  % ft  ^ wn  ttst  st  wsr  f^r  «rrft  i ^ 

ffaFST  ^T5JT5T  # # *|ft  # *rqft  ZTS  »TTft  ff 

ofti  ^hcftnitff^rffsOTti 


:247 


TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 


Kasai-mais-ka  dwi  chela 
A-certain-man-of  two  sons 
apana-baba-thl  kayo,  c 6 

his-own-father-to  it- was -said,  ‘ 0 

chai-chh,  so  ml  di-diy.’ 
proper-is,  that  to-me  give-away.' 

apani  jajat  b3,ti-dl. 

his-ovon  •property  was-divided-out. 
ki  kSsa-cbela-le  sab 

that  the-younger-son-by  all 

nasi-gyo.  W5  kukarm-ml 
t cent-away.  There  cvil-deeds-in 
phuki-diyo.  Aur  jab 

i cere-squandered.  And  when 

wi-mulak-ml  baro  akul 


that-country-in  a-great 

Aur  u wi-de£-ka 
And  he  that-country-of 

pasyo.  Phir  wi-lai 

began.  Again  him-by 

layo.  Aur 

it-was-deputed.  And 

khs-chhya,  khuSi-lai 
ealing-were,  joy-with 


famine 


chhya.  Aur  unan-me  kas&-ckela-le 

were.  And  them-among  the-younger-son-by 

baba,  jajat-ml  jo  bS.t  mero 

father,  the-property-in  what  share  mine 

Tab  wi-lai  unara-apas-ml 

Then  him-by  of -them-one-another -among 

Phir  bhaut  din  nai  bhe-chhy& 

Then  manv  days  not  become-were 

pardeS-khin 

a-foreign-country-to 

sab  mal-tal 

all  goods 

kari-chukvo 
* 

made- completely 

bun  pasyo. 
to-be  began . 


jama 

collected 


bhaut  din 
many  days 
kari-ber 

made-having 

rai-ber 

rema  ined-having 
a sab 

he  all 

paryo.  TT 

fell.  He 

ka  i-bliala -adami-ka 
a-certain-rich-man-of 

wi-s  apana-gara-ml 

him-as-for  his-own-field-in 
un-bokara-danan-lai 


apano 

Ms-own 


kharch 
expenditure 
kankal 

poverty-stricken 


dagara 


with 


u 


he  those-h  itsfcs-berries-with 
apano  dhar  bharano 

his-own  belly  to-fill 


jai-ber  raun 

gone-having  to-dwell 

sunar  charauna-khin 

swine  feedingfor 

jai-s  sunar 

which  (ace.)  the-swine 

cha-thvo.  Aur  wi-s 

% 

wishing-was.  And  him- to 


kwe  ke  nai  di-thya. 

anyones  anything  not  giving-were. 


248 


JOHART. 

North  of  Parganas  Sira  and  Askot  lies  the  Pargana  Johar.  This  Pargana  runs  up 
to  the  Tibetan  frontier,  and  most  of  the  inhabitants  speak  the  Pronomenalized  Tibeto- 
Burman  language  entitled  Rangkas  and  described  in  Vol.  Ill,  Pt.  I,  pp.  479  ff.  Nearly 
the  whole  of  the  rest  of  the  population  is  bilingual,  speaking  both  Rangkas  and  a 
corrupt  Kumauni  called  Johari.  The  number  of  speakers  of  Johari  is  estimated  to  be 
about  7,419. 

As  may  be  expected,  Johari  is  a mongrel  form  of  speech.  It  is,  in  fact,  simply  bad 
Kumauni,  spoken  by  people  who  have  another  native  language.  It  would  be  waste  of 
time  to  attempt  to  give  a grammar  of  such  a jargon,  and  it  is  sufficient  to  give  the 
following  extract  from  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son  as  an  example  of  its  character. 
The  second  half  of  the  Parable  has  been  selected,  as  showing  these  characteristics  better 
than  the  earlier  portion.  A very  prominent  peculiarity  is  the  interchange  of  r and  r, 
as  in  tyaf,  thy.  The  same  occurs  in  Rangkas.  Whether  this  change  is  due  to  Tibeto- 
Burman  influence  or  is  a relic  of  the  old  Khaga  language  is  doubtful.  Perhaps  the 
former  explanation  is  the  more  likely.  We  meet  the  same  or  similar  changes  in  the 
Ohurahi  and  Pahgwali  dialects  of  the  Chameall  form  of  Western  Pahari,  and  these 
dialects,  like  Rangkas  and  Johari,  are  spoken  close  to  the  inner  range  of  the  Himalaya, 
in  immediate  proximity  to  tribes  speaking  Tibeto-Burman  languages.  Of.  p.  817  and 
p.  846  below. 

We  may  also  notice  the  regular  tendency  towards  dropping  a final  vowel,  which 
we  have  noticed  in  Khasparjiya  and  other  colloquial  dialects  of  Kumauni.  The  past 
tense  always  ends  in  i. 


249 


[No.  16.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

CENTRAL  PAHARI  (KUMAUNl). 


Johari  Dialect.  District  Almora. 

ft  ft  W3t  xEpST  *TTfT  R It  I fk  ^ ft  4*  fk 

«4faia  ft  ^ *Tff  •rr^rr  ft  ^rff  \ 

• si 

fk  ft  *T  ^rgf^TPT  *T  f TCT^f  W W5T  *ft  fa?  ft 

IN  i ft*rft%**lfa?sif^  ^ t ^ fk  sre  «ns  *r 

Tm  W I ^JT  %*TT  *T  fat  ft  *T  ft  %°  Wt  tN:  ^^sft 

^ ^ i fkft.W'fkr;lffkft«r  ftcrr  wig  ft  srft  i f 
t*3T  ^ft^t^^^^^rftf  *rfkr  arfar  i fk  ft  «r 
f°  anmr  ft  fr  f far  w ^sfarar  tot  =rfe  sr  zr?«r  ^nR  «nfa 

sj  • 

t ^ ^k  ^ sr  ft  zrfar  i f *r  if  f*  **^r  TOt 
*iN  ft  ft  tff  ^THR  ^nff^TR  *|ft  *?R  ft  I ^ 
?I  =5E^T  ft  qTcT^T  ^tT  oSRT  TTRcTR  fafal  % ^ ft  ^T?f  ^ 

wt  If  *r  ft  ft  %*rr  *r  faff  3»f  i fk  ft  ¥ f 

xEpsTT  If  «lft  ft  # Tk  affair  *rft  W sift  ^ I 

ft  ^fan*  ft  far  ^far  trr  ^r  *ffar  *i^t  ft  f ^§t  ^ far  ft  sre 
It  ft  *rfa  ft  ft  fan:  *rr  % f t H f i fk  fr  ft  ft  fan:  f 

Cv 

t ^ u 


2 K 


VOL.  IX,  SAKT  IV. 


[No.  16.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


250 


Central  Group. 


CENTRAL  PAHARl  (KUMAUNl). 

JGhAri  Dialect.  District  Almora. 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION, 

Tab-lhct  wi-ko  jyatho  chyal  gura-mS  thi.  Haur  jab  wl  ai 

Then-till  liim-of  th  e-elder  son  the-Jield-in  was.  And  when  he  came 

haur  ghar-k  najik  pujit,  wi-1  gains  bajaunS  haur  nachana-kd 

and  the-house-of  near  arrived,  him-by  singing  music  and  \daneing-of 

bachan  suni.  Haur  wi-1  apan-khurturiyan-m-hai  ek-thai  bhatyai-ber 

noise  was-heard.  And  liim-by  his-own-servants-in-from  one-to  shouted-having 

sudyai  ki,  ‘ inar  ki  hai-rai-chh  ? ’ Wi-1  wi-liai  kai 

it-ivas-asked  that,  * these- of  what  becoming-is  ? ’ Him-by  him-to  it-was-said 

ki,  ‘tyar  bhai  ai-rai-clih,  haur  tyar-babu-1  khawai-lliiwai  kai-rakh- 

that,  * thy  brother  come-is , and  thy-father-by  a-feast  been-arranged- 

chh,  kya-lekha-1  ki  wi-1  Avi-hai  bhalo  haur  barkano 

is,  what-reason-by  that  him-by  hitn-as-for  well  and  lively 

pai-chh.’  Haur  wi-thaT  ris  ai-ge,  haur  wi-1  bhitar  jiiuu  ni 

it-received-is.’  And  him-to  anger  came,  and  him-by  inside  to-go  not 

thari.  Ye-lekha-1  wl-ko  babu  bhair  ai,  liaur  wi-haT 

it-was-decided.  This-reason-by  him-of  the-f other  outside  came,  and  him-to 

manaun  ba£i.  Haur  wi-1  babu-thai  jubab  di-ber 

to-remonstrate-with  began.  And  him-by  the-father-to  answer  given-having 

kai  ki,  ‘dyakh,  maT  itik-bara6-bati  tyar  talial  karan-lagi- 

it-was-said  that,  ‘see,  I so-niany-y  ears- from  thy  service  doing-conti- 

rai-clihu,  haur  mai-l  tyar  kukam  ni  tali.  TaT-1  kabhai 

nually-am , and  me-by  thy  order  not  was-disobeyed.  Thee-by  ever 

mai-hai  ek-pathd-lhek  ni  di,  ki  mai  apan-dagariyan-dagar 

me-to  a-kul-even  not  was-given,  that  I my-own-  companions-with 

khu£i  kan-thi.  Par  tvar  yu  chyal,  jo  p&taran-ka  dagar 

rejoicing  might-have-made.  But  thy  this  son,  who  harlots-of  with 

tyar  mal-tal  nili-hai-ohh,  wi  ja4.4ai  ai,  wa44ai  tai-1  wi-ko 

thy  goods  devoured-has,  he  just-as  came,  just-so  thee-by  him-of 

lekha-1  khawai-lhiwai  kaye.’  Haur  babu-1  wi-haT  kai, 

reason-by  a-feast  was-made.'  And  the-father-by  him-to  it-was-said, 

* chyala,  tai  barabar  myaro  dagar  rau-chhai,  haur  jatik  myaro  chh, 

‘ son,  thou  always  of -me  with  remainest,  and  whatever  mine  is 


jOharI  diaxkct. 


251 


sab  tyaro 

chh. 

Yd 

bujin  till 

ki 

hami 

rnagan 

kuu 

all  thine 

W. 

This 

proper  was 

that 

we 

delighted  should-be 

khuii 

manaun, 

ke*l6kha-l 

ki 

yo 

tyar  bhai 

oicitiff 

what- reason- bg 

that 

this 

thg  brother 

who 

maii-gai'thi, 

phir 

jyun 

hai-ber 

ai-gai ; 

ham* 

liarai-gai-thi. 

phir 

dead-gone-was. 

again 

alive 

become-haoing 

came ; 

and 

lost-gone-was. 

again 

pai-hai  1.* 

foimd-beccme  lo  ! * 


TOL.  IX,  PART  IT 


2 K 2 


253 


kumaunT-english  vocabulary. 


Kamftunl. 

English. 

KnmaunL 

English. 

A 

i 

AbSr, 

late. 

Amild , 

sour. 

JchhS, 

nice,  good. 

Amis, 

sour. 

AehS^ohak, 

adv.  accidentally,  suddenly. 

An-biwai, 

virgin. 

Achambhd  karnS, 

to  surprise.  • 

Andhs , 

blind. 

Achammi 1 harnO, 

to  surprise. 

AnyarS , 

dusk,  darkness. 

AdlS  badlO, 

barter. 

Aphi, 

myself. 

Adimf, 

man. 

Aphlm , 

opium. 

AdSf 

green  ginger. 

ApnS, 

own. 

AgalS, 

matchlock. 

Arshl , 

looking  glass. 

Aghin  sal. 

adv.  next  year. 

Asa, 

hope. 

A gala. 

finger. 

Aid  rakhnl,  did  dharnl , 

to  expect. 

Agutha , 

thumb. 

AsfigupS, 

narrow. 

Axis, 

adv . so. 

AsSguri  bdf, 

a narrow  track. 

Am, 

famine. 

AiHy 

tear  ( noun ). 

Am, 

sky,  heaven. 

Au-lu/§, 

dysentery. 

Akhd, 

eye. 

Aukhad , aukhat , 

medicine. 

AkhSjr, 

walnut. 

B 

Bdbd , bdbd, 

father,  papa. 

Bahadur , 

brave. 

Bdohhd , 

king. 

Bdhik , 

ado.  prep . besides. 

Bdchhi, 

(/.)  oalf. 

Baid,  ba%dit 

doctor. 

Bachhs, 

(m.)  calf. 

Baini, 

younger  sister. 

JBddal , 

cloud. 

Bair , 

enmity. 

Badall , 

cloud. 

B airly 

enemy. 

Bddaw, 

cloud. 

Bait  hah. 

committee. 

Badh, 

dam  (the  earthwork). 

BSj, 

oak,  barren  (a  woman) 

BddhnS,  bddpd, 

to  tie,  to  bind,  to  wrap. 

Bajdr, 

market. 

tog. 

leopard. 

BSjS, 

fallow. 

Bakaf, 

bull. 

Balehat, 

time. 

254 


KUMAUNi- ENGLISH  VOCABULARY. 


JCamaonL 

English. 

Kumaqnf. 

English. 

Bakkal , 

bark  o£  a tree. 

BhStfey 

vessels  of  metal. 

Bdkrd, 

goat. 

Bhadra  karnd , 

to  shave. 

Bskrt, 

goat. 

Bhfig, 

hemp. 

BdkrO, 

goat. 

Bhdgwdn , 

fortunate. 

Bal, 

hair. 

Bhatr  upO, 

to  come  out. 

Bals, 

ear-ring  (for  women) 

Bhdjnd. 

to  retire  from  a case. 

worn  inside  the  ear. 

BharnOy 

to  fill. 

Bald , 

ball. 

Bhaterd , 

sufficient. 

Ban, 

forest. 

Bhati  bhdti  fed, 

various. 

Band, 

to  plough. 

Bhau , 

brow 

Bar, 

day. 

BhauSy 

brow  (plural). 

Bafd9 

big. 

Bhaujt, 

sister-in-law. 

Barai , 

year. 

Bhau  kuaiy 

any. 

Barat  r&khqQ, 

to  fast. 

Bhaurd , 

bee  (plural). 

Bdrh, 

hedge. 

Bhaiirfi, 

bee 

Baraw&pikO, 

yearling. 

Bhdya, 

younger  brother. 

Bit, 

bamboo  (m.). 

Bhedy 

mystery. 

BasnO , 

to  abide. 

. 

Bhejry 

sheep. 

Bdt, 

wind. 

Bhiriy 

sheep,  ewe. 

Bat , 

way,  path,  track,  share. 

Bhet , 

offering. 

Bdt  dSkhni, 

to  await. 

BhStnOy 

to  meet. 

Bita, 

share. 

Bhijiyal \ 

wet,  damp. 

Bdti, 

wick. 

, 

Bhtjiyd, 

wet,  damp. 

Bats, 

wick. 

Bhik3nOf 

toad. 

Battli t 

path. 

Bhlnd, 

uncle,  husband  of  father’ll 

Bafudy 

purse. 

sister. 

Bdu , 

sand. 

Bhindy 

brother-in-law,  eldei 

Bister’s  husband. 

Bau  lagunH y 

to  swim. 

BhirnQ% 

to  wear,  to  put  on  clothes, 

Baunyd , 

dwarf. 

shoes,  etc. 

Bauntty 

to  turn,  to  return. 

Bhlt , 

wall. 

BdWy 

hair. 

Bhittr  paifhnd , 

to  enter. 

Beiydy 

adv . yesterday. 

Bhiter  pauaipB, 

to  enter. 

BSliyl, 

adv . yesterday. 

Bhffd, 

husk  of  Usbiyd. 

B§4aky 

adv . certainly. 

Bhuchdl , 

earthquake. 

Be-aaram, 

obscene. 

Bhuichal , 

earthquake. 

KTJMAUNt-ENQIilSH  VOCABULABT, 


255 


Knmranl.  Engliih. 


SkaknS, 

to  bark. 

Shul, 

mistake. 

BhBl-bitar, 

mistake. 

Shull, 

sister. 

Bhaml, 

earth. 

BhunnO, 

to  fry. 

Shea, 

husk  of  barley,  of  chanldi 
and  matfu  wd* 

Bhiitt!, 

busk  of  dhauldi  and 
matfuujd. 

Bfch, 

mix \ prep . amid. 

Btj, 

grain  for  seed. 

Bijulf, 

lightning. 

Bijiinfii 

to  wake. 

Bikit, 

poison,  venom. 

Bind , 

pod  of  musk. 

Birdlu , 

cat  (f.). 

Ghabunfi , 

to  munch. 

ChalkB9 

earthquake. 

Chdlno , 

to  strain  (liquids). 

Chard , 

bird. 

Ohdro  tarf. 

adv.  around. 

Oharnd , 

to  browse. 

Chat  phdt  kamO , 

to  decide. 

Chaugrrd, 

a dr.  around. 

Chaukaf, 

beware. 

Chaumds , 

monsoon. 

Chaurai , 

flat,  level. 

ChanfVy 

broad. 

Ohdwal , 

rice. 

Chdwo, 

rice. 

Chdwnti, 

to  strain  (liquids), 

Chela , 

disoiple. 

Ghhail , 

shade,  shadow. 

i KumaunJ.  ' English. 

! 

I 

i ’ 


Bisar, 

mistake. 

Bishy 

poison,  venom. 

Bdjl, 

sister-in-law. 

B&li  dend9 

to  announce. 

Bfilnd, 

to  announce. 

Bit, 

tree. 

Bubv , 

aunt,  father’s  sister. 

Buguchdy 

bundle. 

Bunntiy 

to  weave. 

Burt, 

bad  (/.). 

Buro , 

bad  (m.). 

Burufhiyd , 

thumb. 

Byd, 

wedding  marriage. 

BJV, 

interest,  on  loans  or  cash 

By  nl, 

evening. 

Bydl  bakhat. 

evening. 

Chharft, 

ashes. 

Chhatt , 

roof. 

Chhebdfo , 

lizard,  chameleon. 

Chhilkfi, 

bark  of  a tree. 

Chhimd , 

pardon. 

Chhitnd  karnfi, 

to  pardon,  to  forgivo. 

Chhiprfiy 

lizard,  chameleon. 

ChhGdnQ, 

to  abandon,  to  forsake 

Chhord , 

lad. 

Chilam , 

pipe  (/or  smoking’). 

Chilam  kfi  kdthf, 

bamboo  portable  pipe. 

Chinkd , 

spark. 

ChimiOy 

to  build. 

Chiplildy 

smooth. 

Chisnd , 

to  burn. 

Chit  t a, 

white. 

ChubdnSy 

to  prick. 

856 


KVH AlTNl-BK ©LH H YO0AS0L4LBY. 


f 

' / 

Eogl^ 

Knmwwl.  . 

'*'4* 

EogUbh. 

Checks, 

teat. 

duels. 

^hearth. 

Chao M, 

teat. 

Chain , 

hearth. 

Ohnglf  UhOfO, 

to  backbite. 

OhunnS 9 

to  pick,  to  select,  to  glean. 

Ohmhmlf 

Chide, 

banter. 

lemon. 

ChupfO, 

Ohuthraul , 

butter.  Used  in  some 
parts. 

pine  marten. 

Dabdf, 

Ddbnd, 

X>S4 , 

Dddd, 

pSjo, 

D&gar , 
Ddl-bhdl , 
Dajty, 

Pakar, 
pdnS, 
Dan-pdn, 
par  halnt, 
Ddrim , 

Darvty 

DSt, 

DSnO, 

Dewar, 

Dhadh  lag&fi, 

Dhagd, 

PhSkan, 

Phak$lp8t 

Dhdn , 

Dhanmif 

Dharrid, 

Dhartif 

Mini, 

Ella  rSt , 


D 


craok  (in  stone9  eto.). 

Phafuwd, 

to  press. 

Dhattiri, 

fine  (the  punishment). 

DhSld , 

elder  brother. 

Phil  kami. 

mountain. 

PhinB, 

charcoal. 

Dhopari , 

brethren. 

to  burn.  Used  in  some 
parts. 

DhudhalO , 

hiccough. 

Dhal 

mountain. 

DhUp , 

charity. 

DhutoSt 

to  cry. 

Didi, 

pomegranate. 

Didtoi, 

powder,  gunpowder. 

DdllnS, 

tooth,  teeth. 

to  give. 

Dubld  patld, 

brother-in-law,  husband's 
younger  brother. 

Dudh  dtind, 

to  call. 

Dadhi  dSnl , 

thread. 

DukhiyS , 

lid. 

Dar, 

to  push. 

Darkhdit  kami. 

paddy. 

Dutkdrnd » 

bow. 

Du>3r, 

to  have. 

Dwiyai, 

earth.  ' 

Dydbatd, 

4 

1 

I * 

m 

alone. 

Eti, 

adv.  to-night. 

t t 

adv*  to-night* 

Etv&r, 

* 


cat  (m.). 


clod. 

to  delay. 

boll,  anything  round. 

lunch.  But  the  use  of 
this  word  is  ambiguous, 
sometimes  a meal  at  8 
or  9 a.m.  is  called 
dhdpart  in  the  hills. 

dusk. 

dust. 

/ 

incense. 

smoke  (noun). 

elder  sister. 

Diwall  song. 

to  walk.  Used  collo- 
quially and  sometimes 
contemptuously. 

lean. 

to  suokle. 

to  suokle. 

ai. 


far. 


to  request, 
to  hate, 
door. 

ode.  both# 

deity. 

adv.  bm. 

Qundoy.' 

» 


257 


kttmattnI-hnglish  vogabulaby. 


Kumaunl. 

tigiuh. 

Kumau& 

English. 

G 

Qabhai  dttif, 

to  bear  witness. 

Ghdrar , 

chamois  (Himalayan). 

Qatar*, 

cheek. 

Ghughutd , 

dove. 

QalQn*, 

to  melt. 

Q human. 

conceit. 

Q&nf 

mumps. 

GhunS , 

knee. 

Oana , 

a man  who  has  mumps. 

QhurgtiuranS , 

to  snore. 

Qan&Q, 

mumps. 

GhtoSr , 

chamois  (Himalayan). 

QattjS. 

bald. 

Giddri , 

singer  (/.). 

QannB$ 

to  count. 

Gifjuwd, 

ball,  anything  round. 

Garh, 

fort. 

Qiriy 

ball,  anything  round. 

Qarur , 

brown  vulture. 

Git, 

ballad. 

GaruwQ, 

heavy. 

Gdbar , 

dung  of  cattle,  manure*. 

Gat, 

body. 

Gdijnl, 

small  pickaxe. 

GaunO , 

to  melt,  to  lose. 

GOrnB, 

to  weed. 

Gout , 

body. 

Gntti/i, 

to  surround. 

aid, 

ball,  anything  round. 

Grahan, 

eclipse. 

Qhaghro, 

petticoat. 

Qu , 

human  excrement. 

QhSm  tapylf, 

to  bask. 

Gudara , 

rag. 

Qhat~kUrX, 

goods  and  chattels  and 

Quliyti, 

sweet. 

house. 

Guthelt, 

stone  of  fruit. 

Qhitphirnl, 

to  complain  to  the  gods. 

Gu  thy  did , 

stone  of  fruit. 

Qhat&nB, 

to  shorten. 

Qurrdnd9 

to  growl. 

QhOl, 

nest. 

1 

H 

• 

'HU  tab a. 

outcry. 

HattSrl , 

alas. 

Hajar, 

adv . present. 

Han, 

air,  plough. 

Hal, 

plough. 

Hau, 

i * 

adv . yes. 

Hart, 

verdant. 

i Hawdy 

air,  wind. 

Hama  rO, 

our. 

HSmant9 

winter. 

Hir, 

bone. 

, HirnO  bhdlndt 

to  search. 

Hafhiya, 

mad  dog,  hydrophobia. 

Hit, 

mud. 

e 

, to  laugh. 

i. 

i Hilo, 

mud. 

* 

H*.*' 

shop*  - 

| Hiray, 

deer. 

BoimM 

f N 

1 v palm  of  the  ha&d* 

j Suite, 

1 

raspberry. 

“ 'ft 


258 


KUUAjmX-ENGLISH  VOCABULARY, 


KuraaunT.  English. 


Hisau, 

raspberry. 

HOriS, 

to  be. 

Ho  par  dr, 

adv.  two  years  ago. 

Iji, 

mother. 

Ijn, 

mother. 

Jab , 

air.  when. 

Jddro, 

handmill. 

Jddtly 

enhancement. 

Jdgd , 

place. 

Jatgini  klfd. 

firefly. 

Jaitca, 

brother-in-law,  younger 
sister’s  husband. 

JaS , 

barley. 

Jaindnd, 

to  yawn. 

Jdmini, 

bail. 

Jdmnt, 

bail. 

Jdmn 9, 

to  grow. 

Janam , 

birth. 

JdnG9 

to  go. 

Jdnrd , 

handmill. 

Jar , 

fever. 

Jdr9 

paramour. 

Jari  buti , 

drug. 

Jar-jarG, 

tough  meat. 

JdrG9 

cold. 

Jarur9 

necessary. 

JaiG , 

ait>.  con/,  as. 

Kabhat , 

ait>.  when. 

Kabhat  kabhat \ 

air.  now  and  then. 

Karhll f 

mud. 

Kumatial.  English. 


ice,  snow, 

HySnO, 

winter. 

mother. 

In4U 

castor  oil  plant, 

Jeth, 

brother-in-law,  husband’s 
elder  brother. 

Jefhd , 

firstling. 

Jffhu, 

brother-in-law,  wife's  elder 
brother. 

JhagarnG , 

to  dispute. 

JhayGra , 

husk  of  ehSni. 

Jhantly 

flag. 

Jhat9 

air.  soon. 

Jhat-pat 9 

air.  soon. 

JhGl9 

dirt,  in  roof  and  walls  of 
house. 

Jhumkd , 

ear-ring  (for  women)  worn 
in  the  lobe  of  the  ear. 

JhumOkdy 

ear-ring  (for  women)  worn 
in  the  lobe  of  the  ear. 

JhGtthO, 

untrue. 

JhufG, 

liar. 

Jungga , 

mustachios. 

Jdr9 

strength. 

Jorns, 

to  add. 

Judd  karnB, 9 

to  separate. 

JUn, 

moon. 

Jwakd , 

leech. 

JiVSy 

wife. 

Kachld  mdnndy 

to  take  offenoe. 

Kaohydr, 

mud. 

Kdgat 9 

Paper. 

KUMAUNl- ENGLISH  VOCABULARY. 


259 


KuiumdL 

English. 

Kumaual. 

English. 

Kggito, 

comb. 

KaySk, 

several. 

KajiyS  kamS, 

to  dispute* 

ES, 

prep.  what. 

Kakd, 

uncle,  father’s  brother. 

K§  tat. 

conj.  because. 

Kakal-tawtl, 

centipede* 

Khadernd , 

to  drive. 

Kakau, 

bamboo  (/.). 

Khdl, 

dike. 

Kdkh%, 

aunt,  father’s  brother’s 
wife. 

KhaichnB , 

to  drag. 

KalB, 

black. 

Ehaj, 

itch. 

Kamfn , 

base. 

Khdjl , 

itch. 

KdmlB, 

blanket. 

Khdl , 

skin. 

Kamiinfi, 

to  earn. 

Khalard , 

goat  8 kin. 

KdmwB, 

blanket. 

Khalarl , 

goat  skin. 

Kdnd, 

a one-eyed  person. 

Khan, 

quarry. 

Kapds, 

tinder. 

KhdnB, 

to  eat. 

Kaphan , 

shroud. 

Khdnd  jBg, 

eatable. 

Kaphuwd  chajrO , 

cuckoo. 

Khanydr , 

ruin  of  house  or  village. 

KaramphutiyO , 

unfortunate. 

Khip , 

mouth. 

Kardr  karnB, 

to  promise. 

Khdr  a , 

ram. 

KararB, 

hard. 

KharyunO, 

to  bury. 

Karjd  gddnB, 

to  borrow. 

Khasam , 

husband. 

Karud , 

bitter. 

Khdt, 

pit. 

Karnwd, 

bitter. 

Khdt, 

bed. 

Katin, 

adv,  how. 

Khdtar, 

(for  the)  sake  (of). 

Kafr, 

hook. 

Khdtrd, 

rag. 

Kathd-kahdni, 

story. 

Khaiinfi, 

to  feed. 

Kathdwli , 

ear-ring  (for  women)  worn 

Khissd, 

pocket. 

on  the  rim  of  the  ear. 

KhBnB, 

to  waste. 

KdtnB, 

to  cut,  to  bite. 

1 Khulfi, 

airy. 

RdtnB, 

to  kill.  Used  in  some 

i 

parts. 

I 

Kll, 

peg,  wedge,  pimple  (sing.) . 

Kafr, 

buffalo  calf. 

! 

i 

■ZTffc*, 

pimple  (plural). 

Katthfi, 

! 

together. 

i Kiphait , 

economy. 

Katthti  kamd , 

1 

to  gather. 

Kirmavod , 

flying  ant. 

Kau , 

crow. 

KirB, 

worm. 

Kaunt, 

husk  of  chinf. 

Ksrf, 

leper. 

Rat oft. 

crow. 

Ktirnfi, 

to  bore  (holes  made  by  rats 

and  birds  by  gnawing). 

RSwB% 

black. 

Kdthald, 

bag. 

^ol.  m,  va&I  iv. 

. -L— 

2 L l 

200 


kumatjnI-english  vocabulary 


Kumsunl. 

English. 

Kumsunl. 

English. 

Kuchd, 

broom. 

Kulyard , 

axe. 

Kuchil , 

filthy. 

KtJrf, 

house. 

Knchild , 

filthy. 

Kurd, 

house. 

Knchh-na? \ 

nothing. 

Kut, 

interest^  in  kind. 

Kukuri , 

bitch. 

Kutanib-Jcabila, 

family. 

Kukuri , 

hen. 

Kuwa , 

dam  (the  earthwork). 

Kulu  rd, 

cock. 

! 2Tape, 

somebody,  any. 

Ku1t 

dam  ithe  earthwork). 

Kwird, 

L 

fog,  mist. 

Zagund, 

to  apply. 

Lauki ’, 

gourd,  calabash. 

Luhar , 

wave. 

Zaukti, 

largo  gourd,  calabash. 

Lai, 

shame. 

Laiiniyd , 

reaper. 

Zdkrd, 

wood. 

Lekhdy 

account. 

Laly  anti. 

to  exclaim,  to  cry. 

LhdSy 

corpse. 

Zampuehhi  tardy 

Langur , 

Laral , 

Zdt, 

Lathi , 

Ldtd, 

comet. 

ape. 

battle. 

flame. 

walking  stiok. 

dumb. 

Lipndf 

Lu, 

Lukai  dind, 

Lukunfi , 

Lun, 

to  * leep  * (to  smear  with 
cowdung  and  earth). 

iron. 

to  conceal. 

to  conceal. 

salt. 

Zatyvnd , 

to  kick. 

Zuwd , 

iron. 

Lau^d> 

child  (m.),  boy. 

Zwe9 

blood. 

Laudl , 

child  (/.). 

IV 

Zytind, 

1 

to  bring. 

ALdchhd , 

fish  Oingr.), 

M dlnk% 

owner. 

JIdchh€3 

fish  ( plural ).  i 

Mdmdy 

uncle,  mother’s  brother. 

Mdclihd  Jed  hand, 

Machhwva , 

l 

fish  hook, 

i 

! 

fisherman.  j 

MdnU , 

aunt,  mother’s  brother’s 
wife. 

tfadat  deni , 

to  help.  | 

proud. 

Mannd9 

Mc.riydf 

to  accept. 

dead. 

Main, 

beeswax. 

Mdrndy 

to  beat*  to  hit. 

Mats' , 

man. 

Mas, 

husk  of  moffir. 

Majbut, 

firm,  strong. 

M&tho, 

forehead. 

Mgjhd , 

bed. 

Md(d9 

clay. 

Mahha, 

fly. 

Mau9 

honey. 

KUM ATTNl*BNGXiIS u vocabulary 


261 


Km^Aunl. 

English. 

Kumaunl. 

English. 

Jdaus&f 

undo,  husband  of  mother’s 

Mu  to  bdnnO, 

to  fatten. 

sister. 

Mow  a. 

manure,  gobar  mixed  with 

Mausf, 

aunt,  mother’s  sister. 

grass. 

• 

Mugari, 

mullet. 

Mel, 

peace. 

Mujt , 

linger. 

Menat, 

labour. 

Mukarno , 

lo  deny. 

MM, 

mine,  my. 

MuJchtO , 

sufficient. 

Mhaind, 

month. 

Muktd, 

sufficient. 

MilnO, 

to  find. 

Mulkiydy 

compatriot. 

mi, 

mannre,  gdbar  mixed  with 

grass. 

MunnOy 

to  shave. 

Msl, 

cost. 

MurJcdy 

ear-ring  (for  men). 

Mol  liftf. 

to  buy* 

Mashd, 

rat. 

Molyund, 

to  buy. 

Math , 

fist. 

MoriyS  kS  b8pS, 

cousin  (mother’s  side). 

Mutthi , 

fist. 

Msts, 

fat. 

Mu  ruled , 

ear-ring  (for  men). 

N 

NS, 

adv.  no. 

Nauti , 

navel. 

Nadan, 

fool. 

Ndwd, 

ravine,  brook. 

Nat, 

adv.  nay. 

Nay§, 

new. 

NelnO , 

to  swallow. 

Naj, 

grain. 

Nich , 

base. 

NdkdrnO, 

to  deny. 

Nils, 

blue. 

Ndld, 

brook. 

Nigdli, 

ringal-bamboo  (Arundi* 

Nalas , 

complaint. 

naria  faleatek). 

Nang, 

nail  (of  body). 

NigalnO, 

to  swallow. 

NiydwO, 

ringal-bamboo  (iirutidt- 

Nang $ 

bare. 

naria  falcatd ) • 

NanO, 

little. 

Niriis, 

hopeless. 

Nanfi, 

to  bathe. 

Nisi  phi, 

just. 

NasnO, 

to  depart. 

NithurO, 

cruel. 

Nm, 

relation. 

NiyurnO , 

to  bend. 

N&ti, 

grandohild.  (m.). 

Nun, 

salt. 

N&tinx, 

grandchild.  (/.). 

NyelnS, 

to  woed. 

Nats, 

relation. 

NyS, 

justice. 

NaZ, 

name. 

Nyurrid, 

to  bend. 

NaJ&tf, 

butter. 

Nyutd 

to  invite. 

262 


KUMAUNl-ENGUilSH  VOCABULARY, 


Kumaunl. 


English. 


Kuinaanf. 


English. 


Oh, 

alas. 

OlnO, 

to  knead. 

Fachhin , 

ado . prep . behind,  back- 
ward. 

Pachhin  hafnO, 

to  go  l>aok. 

Pachhild, 

last. 

PachkunO, 

to  crush. 

PachnO, 

to  digest. 

PaharnO, 

to  put  cn  clothes,  shoes, 

etc. 

Pahuchnd, 

to  approach. 

Paidal, 

adv.  afoot. 

Pain  lcarniS, 

to  sharpen. 

PairnO , 

to  wear,  to  put  on  clothes, 
shoes,  etc. 

PakS , 

mature. 

PakarnO , 

to  catch. 

Pdkh , 

wing. 

Pdkh , 

fin,  feather. 

PakupO, 

to  ooolc,  to  bake. 

Paid , 

ice,  frost,  hoar  frost. 

PalnO , 

to  nourish. 

Padkh, 

wing. 

Parar, 

adv . year  before  last. 

ParikhnO, 

to  examine. 

ParkhanO , 

to  prove,  to  examine. 

Parpanoh, 

deceit. 

Pa&u, 

animal,  brute,  beast. 

Pat  ax. 

fatigue. 

Pdtar, 

harlot. 

Pat  hi, 

kid. 

Paths, 

kid 

PatianO, 

to  believe. 

PattnO, 

certain. 

PatlO , 

lean. 

0$h, 

dew. 

PatOr , 

floor  (of  planks). 

Pafta, 

lease. 

P&tthar , 

stone. 

PatydnO, 

certain ; to  believe. 

Paun , 

air. 

PaunO, 

guest. 

FdwO , 

ice,  frost,  hoar  frost. 

PayvnO , 

to  sharpen. 

Payya, 

cherry  tree. 

Pet, 

belly. 

PS  tali, 

pregnant. 

PSt-muyd, 

still-born  child. 

Phaidd , 

profit. 

Phdphrd , 

husk  of  wheat. 

PharShy 

decoit. 

Phasal, 

crop. 

Phafkal  marni, 

to  jump. 

Phdwd, 

ploughshare  (Don). 

Phdtod  mdrni. 

to  spring,  to  jump. 

Pheri  dSnO, 

to  give  back. 

Phir, 

adv . prep,  again. 

Phiri, 

adv . prep,  again. 

PhirnOy 

to  turn. 

PhiiknO, 

to  ignite. 

Phul, 

flower,  blossom. 

Phul  phatak  jun, 

moonlight,  dear,  without 
clouds. 

Phuphiyd  kd  be  fa, 

cousin  (father’s  side). 

Pichhdfi , 

rear. 

PihaicO, 

yellow. 

PtjarO, 

cage. 

Pi*4, 

body. 

K'UM.A.'UNl -ENGLISH  VOOABULABY, 


263 


Knmianl. 

English. 

KnmannL 

4+ 

BnglUh. 

Fir, 

pain. 

Purputai, 

butterfly. 

pith. 

back. 

PurtO, 

manure,  gObar  mixed  with 

grass. 

PBdfnS, 

mint. 

Pil8> 

cat.  A term  of  endear* 

Pur, 

adv.  last  year. 

rnent. 

PBthlt 

book. 

Pasig 

cat  (/*.).  A term  of  en- 

dearment. 

Pdtin, 

mint. 

PuthOg 

back. 

PuchharS, 

tail. 

Put  ho  pichhdfi, 

adv.  prep,  behind  one’s 

PujnB, 

to  adore,  to  worship. 

back. 

Pnwa , 

bridge.  Used  by  the  illi- 

PurhSt, 

priest. 

terate. 

Faro, 

full. 

Pyad&g 

adv.  afoot. 

R 

RSfuwS, 

widower. 

j Ris-rag , 

1 

jealousy. 

Rat  t ait 

dawn,  morning,  adv.  early. 

! 

Rito, 

vacant,  empty. 

Rdji-hhGsi, 

welfare. 

Ritu , 

weather. 

Rska, 

torch. 

Rokar , 

cash. 

RdkhnB, 

to  have,  to  keep. 

RujnO, 

to  soak. 

RarnO, 

to  slip. 

?*>, 

debt. 

Ratio , 

to  weep  ; to  abide. 

EM, 

jealousy. 

Ruled , 

tinder. 

s 

Sad3, 

adv , always,  continually. 

Said, 

brother-in-law,  wife's 

younger  brother. 

Sadukrt, 

small  box. 

Salu, 

locust. 

SSgal, 

chain. 

Santa, 

season. 

Sagan, 

omen. 

SamdlnO, 

to  bear. 

SainO, 

flat,  level. 

Sdn9 

sign. 

Sattrti, 

to  cherish. 

Sanisu, 

bug. 

Sajail, 

peace. 

San  rmrni. 

to  wink.  v 

Sajt, 

fresh. 

Sarah, 

road. 

Sajhi, 

partner. 

Saram , 

shame. 

Sskhi, 

evidence. 

Sardl , 

autumn. 

Sakh  pumt, 

to  give  evidence,  to  bear 
witness. 

Sarid9 

bargain,  contract. 

Sakun, 

omen.  • 

Sartt9 

contract. 

Sails, 

advice. 

j S&rikai , 

tight. 

Sails  difft, 

. to  adviao. 

| 

1 Safiyd, 

putrid. 

264 


KUMAUNt-BNGLISH  VOCABULARY, 


KuAJftunl. 

English. 

Kumaunl. 

English. 

Sarna , 

to  ondure. 

Sabuta , 

leisure. 

Sard, 

tight. 

Sochnd , 

to  consider. 

SafunS, 

tO  COITUpt. 

Sopno , 

to  deliver. 

Satid, 

hare. 

Snts, 

club. 

Sastd^d, 

to  rest. 

Sudl, 

question. 

Sastd , 

cheap.  i 

Sugar , 

pig,  hog. 

Sdtiii, 

i 

mother-in-law.  j 

Sugnd, 

to  smell. 

S a surd. 

father-in-law. 

i 

Sukh , 

ease. 

Sdthi, 

friend.  ! 

Sftkha  ghds , 

hay. 

Satyd  ndti  hamO, 

to  destroy,  root  and 
branch. 

Sukila, 

white. 

Sukhiya, 

arid,  dry. 

Saugan , 

oath. 

Sukra  tdrd , 

evening  star. 

Sauk, 

desire. 

Svnnd, 

to  listen. 

Sera , 

a squint-eyed  person. 

Sund, 

gold. 

Serd, 

cool. 

Sup, 

winnowing-sieve. 

SidhS, 

right. 

Sat. 

interest,  on  loans  or 

Stg, 

horn. 

cash. 

S?g, 

horn. 

Suth, 

dry  ginger. 

Sikund, 

to  teach. 

Suwd, 

parrot. 

Simt, 

seed-pod. 

Suwar , 

hog. 

Sirdnl, 

pillow. 

SicSpta , 

leisure. 

Sira , 

syrup. 

Swas, 

breath. 

Sirkdr , 

the  Government. 

Swind  dtikhnd, 

to  dream. 

Sirkdri  atdmi , 

tenant  paying  revenue  to 
Government. 

SyUl, 

jackal. 

SySua, 

jackal. 

Sima, 

to  sew. 

Syttd, 

white. 

Sitna, 

to  sleep. 

Syu, 

tiger. 

SW, 

lead  (noun). 

Syu, 

tiger. 

T 

Tabai , 

adv.  however. 

Tamdkhu  khdnd, 

to  smoke  tobacco. 

TdgS, 

thread. 

Tdma, 

copper. 

Tdl, 

pond. 

| 

fever. 

TalwSr, 

sword. 

j T«r, 

far. 

Tdmd  khOrt, 

bald. 

Tar-tarG, 

leather. 

Tamskhu , 

tobacco. 

1 Taiai, 

adv,  at  that  very  time. 

KTJMATTNl -ENGLISH  VOOABTJLA.KY, 


265 


Kamaunl. 

English. 

Kumaanf. 

English!® 

_ - . 

— — -- 

Tata, 

warm,  hot. 

Thdrd  thdrd. 

economy. 

Taynr, 

persevering. 

Thdwa , 

Hp. 

Tekdr, 

holiday,  fetid. 

Thick  no. 

to  spit. 

Thai  mV, 

to  wait. 

Thun , 

bill  of  a bird. 

Thitnind, 

to  hold,  to  catch. 

Tind, 

damp,  wet. 

T hand ft, 

cool.  • 

1 

TU, 

thirst. 

Thappar  wirni, 

to  slap. 

I 

Tim, 

thirsty. 

Thdrd  hondy 

to  stand. 

Tiffin, 

thirsty. 

That  t a. 

jest,  banter. 

Titiri, 

partridge  (/.). 

Thelndy 

to  push. 

Third, 

partridge  (rn.). 

The s lagnf , 

to  trip. 

Thfs  khdnf , 

to  stumble. 

To  pi. 

cotton  cap. 

Thok  Ihik  karnt , 

to  ropair. 

T np  /•?, 

basket. 

ThdL 

lip. 

Tnrnd, 

to  break. 

Thdrd, 

short. 

Tupuknd, 

to  drop. 

Third  kartid, 

to  abate. 

Ty-ir. 

holiday,  fetid. 

u 

Uhha , 

adv . above,  up. 

Urudl  ad. 

to  boil. 

TJbllnd, 

to  boil. 

IT  rat  d. 

nice. 

Pehn, 

high. 

Unit  siun , 

largo  needle,  for  ./nollcn 

cloth,  home-made. 

Ugluirnti, 

to  open. 

Vnd , 

to  come. 

U gharo , 

airy. 

Urnd, 

to  fly. 

TJjyald, 

light. 

Urfind , 

to  abduct  (a  woman),  to 

VjydtoO, 

light. 

t^ope  with. 

TTkdwi), 

ascent. 

U sand. 

to  swell. 

Zfkhdlnd, 

to  vomit. 

Utarndy 

to  descend. 

Ukhtr, 

walnut. 

TJtaul  karni, 

to  hasten* 

T?  Vidro, 

descent. 

Uthnd , 

to  arise. 

/ 

Tati, 

adv . here. 

YSd  dhamf. 

to  bear  in  mind. 

lad, 

memory. 

: Yar. 

paramour. 

fad  rakhnt. 

to  remember. 

VQI-  IX,  PAET  IV. 


267 


ENGLI8H-KUMAUNI  VOCABULARY. 


English. 

Kumaunf. 

English. 

Kmnaunt. 

\ 

Abandon  (vb.)f 

chhdfnB, 

Animal, 

pa  hi. 

Abate  (vb.), 

thdrd  karnd. 

Announce  (vb.), 

bclno,  bdll  denfi. 

Abduct  (vb.), 

(a  woman)  uf&nG. 

Ant  (flying-), 

kirmald , kirmawd. 

Abide  (vb.), 

r£nQ>  basnG. 

Any, 

kwey  bhdu  kuai. 

Above, 

ubh%. 

Ape, 

langur . 

Accept  (vb.). 

mcLnno, 

Apply  (vb.), 

lag  und. 

Accidentally, 

achdnchak . 

Approach  (vb.), 

pahiichnd. 

Account, 

lekhi 5. 

Arid,  i.e.  dry, 

sukhiyd. 

Add  (vb.), 

jfirnt. 

Arise  (vb.), 

uthnl 5. 

Adore  (vb.), 

pnjnd. 

Around, 

chaugird , chdro  tarf . 

Advice, 

sal  Id. 

As, 

jasd. 

Advise  (vb.), 

8 all’ i dSnf.  j 

| Ascent, 

ukfltcd. 

Afoot, 

•paidaly  pyadd. 

Ashes, 

chharo . 

Agaiu, 

phir , pilin' . 

At  that  very  time, 

tasai. 

Air, 

hawd , hau  ; in  some  parts  j 
paun.  j 

Aunt, 

father’s  sister,  bubu ; 

mother’s  sister,  mausi ; 

Airy, 

i 

nghari 3,  khuld.  j 

! 

father’s  brother’s  wife, 
kdkht ; mother’s 

brother’s  wife,  rndmu 

Alas, 

hatter?,  dhattert.  j 

Alone, 

Sklai. 

Autumn, 

hi  rdf. 

Always, 

sadd. 

Await  (vb,). 

b>lt  dekhnt. 

Ainid, 

bich. 

Axe, 

kulyarG. 

Back, 

B 

pl(h,  puthB  ; behind  ono’B  Bald, 

ganjo,  tdmd  khdrl. 

•backward, 

Bad, 

Bag, 

hack,  puthd  pichhdri ; 
to  go  back,  pachhin 
hafnd ; to  give  back, 
pheri  d$nO ; to  back- 
bite, chugli  khand. 

pachhin . 

burst,  (f.)  hurt. 

kdthald. 

i 

: Ball, 

Ballad, 

Bamboo, 

Banter, 

gSdy  g?duic<2,  giriy  tfhivd 
(anything  round). 

glty  didn't , i.e.  Diwiili, 
song. 

h&*,  (f)  kdkuu. 

fhaftdy  chuhui. 

Bail, 

jdmnf,  j&mini. 

Bare, 

nangd . 

Bake  (vb.), 

paki InS. 

i 

Bargain, 

sared . 

2 m 2 

VOL.  ix,  Xx&T  IT. 


268 


ENGLISH-KTJMAUNl  VOCABULARY, 


English, 

KumiunY. 

English. 

Knm&unL 

Bark  (vb.), 

bhtiknd . 

Blind, 

andhli. 

Bark  of  a tree,  etc., 

bakkat , chhilkd . 

Blood, 

hoe . 

Barley, 

jau. 

; Blossom, 

phal. 

Barren, 

bdj  (a  woman). 

| Blue, 

nild. 

Barter, 

adlu  ha  did. 

Body, 

gat , pint/,  flraaf. 

Base, 

learnt  Hi  nich. 

Boil  (vb.), 

ubdlno,  umdlno. 

Bask  (vb.)f 

tjh'iin  tapno. 

Bone, 

liar. 

Basket, 

toprf. 

Book, 

pot  hi. 

Bathe  (vb,)t 

Battle, 

nano. 

la  rdf. 

Bore  (vb.), 

holes  made  by  rats  and 
birdB  by  gnawing,  k&rnd. 

Be  (vb.), 

hi~no. 

Borrow  (vb.), 

karjd  gadnD. 

Both, 

diary  ai. 

Bear  (vb.), 

samdlno : in  mind,  yld 

Bow, 

Box  (small), 

Boy, 

Brave, 

Break  (vb.), 

Breath, 

Brethren, 

Beast, 

Beat  (vb.), 

Because, 

Bed, 

Bee, 

Beeswax, 

dharni  ; bear  witness, 
yubhai  dint,  sJkh  purni. 

passu, 

vndrnd. 

ke  taT. 

mdjh  7,  khdt. 

bhaurdy  (pi.)  bhaurd. 

main,  1 

dli  anus. 

sddukri. 

laudd. 

bahddur . 

tor  no. 

8100.8, 

ddi-bJuii. 

Behind, 

Believe  (vb.), 

pachhin.  , 

i 

pat  i t no,  patydno . 

Bridge, 

Bring  (vb.), 

Broad, 

pinca. 

i 

lytind. 

chauro. 

Belly, 

Bend  (vb.)f 

pp(. 

niyorndy  nyurnd.  j 

Brook, 

ndld%  ndivd. 

Besides, 

] 

bdhik. 

Broom, 

kurho. 

Beware, 

: 

Brother, 

(elder)  dddd  ; (younger) 

chaukaL 

i 

bhdyd . 

Big, 

burd.  1 

Brothor-in-law, 

wife’s  younger  brother, 
sold : wife’s  older 

Bill  of  bird, 

t hun.  | 

i 

brother,  ' jethu  ; hus- 
band’s younger  brother, 
dewar ; husband’s  elder 

Bind  (vb.), 

badhnd. 

brother,  jeth ; elder 

sister’s  husband,  bhind ; 

Bird. 

chard. 

yonnger  sister’s  husband, 
jaiiva. 

Birth, 

Bitch, 

janam . | 

i 

kukuri . 

Brow, 

bhau,  (pi.)  bhauS. 

Browse  (vb.), 

charnfi. 

Bite  (vb.), 

kdtno. 

Brute, 

* pasu . 

Bitter, 

karuwd , karud . 

Bug, 

mineau. 

Black, 

kdldy  kdwu . 

Build  (vb.), 

cStnnd. 

Blanket, 

kdmldy  kdmtofi. 

Bull, 

bahap 9 bald . 

ENGMSH-KUMAUNl  VOCABULARY. 


269 


English. 

Kumanni. 

English. 

Eumaunl. 

Bundle, 

bu>,  ucho. 

Butter, 

naunf,  chuppo. 

Bmn  (vb.), 

chisnfi,  (jajino. 

Butterfly, 

purputai. 

Bu t v (vb.), 

kharyiinr\ 

c 

Bny  (vb.). 

nudyuno,  rnSil  linS. 

Cage, 

pi  jam. 

Comb, 

k a g ild. 

Calabash, 

lauko , laukf . 

Come  (vb.), 

unO. 

Calf, 

Call  (vb.), 

Cap  (cotton), 

(m.)  bdchho  ; (f.)  hachhi ; 
buffalo  calf,  kdto. 

dhddh  laguni. 

topi. 

Come  out  (vb.), 

Comet, 

Committee, 

hhair  urio. 

lampuchhi  t&rfi. 

bait  hah. 

Cash, 

Castor  oil  plant, 

mkap. 

in  ill. 

Compatriot, 

Complaint, 

mulkiyd . 

nThis ; to  complain  to 
gods,  ghat  phernt . 

Cat, 

(tiiJ  dharuwd.  As  a torm 
of  endearment,  pus , past. 
(f.)  birdlu,  pusl. 

Conceal  (vb.), 

Conceit, 

Ink  lino,  lulcai  dind. 

ghitman. 

Catch  (vb.), 

fhdmno , pakarno. 

Consider  (vb.), 

sdchno. 

Centipede, 

lcakalsaunl . 

Continually, 

sada. 

Certain, 

patydno , patlno . 

Contract, 

saret,  sared. 

Certainly, 

besak. 

Cook  (vb.), 

pa  Icu  no . 

Chain, 

sdgal . 

Cool, 

thando , iero. 

Chamois  (Himalayan), 

gh&rar.  ghiver . 

Copper, 

tdmfi. 

Charcoal, 

dagdr. 

Corn, 

ndj . 

Charity, 

dan-pun. 

Corpse. 

thus 

Cheap, 

sasto . 

Corrupt  (vb.), 

iiiruno . 

Cheelc, 

galdrd. 

Cost, 

mol. 

Cherish  (vb.), 

saitnO . j 

Count  (vb.), 

gannd . 

Cherry-tree, 

Child, 

Clay, 

Clod, 

Clond, 

payya . , 

(m.)  laui/a.  (f.)  lau<ji. 
still-born,  pet-muyd. 

mdto. 

dheld . 

bddal , bddaw • 

Cousin, 

i 

Crack  (in  stone,  etc.), 

j Crop, 

| 

j Crow  (noun), 

j 

' Cruel, 

! 

mother’s  sido,  mosiyd  kd 
betd;  father's  sidc,p&'>- 
phiyd  kd  beta. 

dabdr. 

phasal. 

kauy  hated. 

nit  hu  ro. 

Cloudy, 

badaU . 

j Crush  (vb.), 

paehkunfi. 

Club, 

Cry  (vb.), 

ddr  hdlnl,  lalydnS • 

Cook, 

J leukurd . 

Cuckoo, 

kaphuwd  chapd. 

Cold, 

3arQ* 

Cut  (vb.), 

kdtnd. 

270 


ENGLISH-KUMAUnI  VOCABULARY. 


fingliah.  Kumaunl.  I Eogltob.  Kumaunl. 


o 


Dam  (the  earthwork), 

kul9  kuwa , badh. 

Digest  (vb.), 

pachriB . 

Damp, 

tlno , bhijiyO . 

Dike, 

khdl. 

Darkness, 

unydrB. 

Dirt  (in  roof  and 

walls  jhdi. 

of  house). 

Dawn, 

•rat  tat. 

Disciple, 

child. 

Day, 

bar . 

Dispute  (vb.), 

kajiyd  karnB , jhagapnB. 

Dead, 

mariyd. 

Doctor, 

baid , baidi . 

Debt, 

ri(i. 

Door, 

dwdr. . 

Deceit, 

phareb , parpafich. 

Dove, 

ghugutd. 

Decide  (vb.), 

ehhdt  phdt  karnQ. 

Drag  (vb.), 

khn  Tchnd. 

Deer, 

liiran . 

Dream  (vb.), 

s wind  dikhnB. 

Deity, 

dydbatd . 

Drive  (vb.), 

khadernd . 

Delay  (vb.). 

tfhll  karnl. 

Drop  (vb.), 

tupuknd . 

Deliver  (vb.), 

80pnfi. 

Drag, 

t7</ri  butt. 

Deny  (vb.), 

tnukarnd,  nakdrnti. 

I)ry, 

sukiyo. 

Depart  (vb.), 

nasnd. 

Dumb, 

Idtfi. 

Descend  (vb.), 

utarno. 

Dung  (of  cattle), 

gobar. 

Descent, 

ulhdro. 

Dusk, 

anydrBy  dhudhal&m 

Desire, 

Sank. 

Dust, 

dhul . 

Destroy  (root  and  branch)  8 at  yd  ndi  karnd. 

(vb.). 

| 

Dwarf, 

baunyd . 

Dew, 

dsh.  1 

Dysentery, 

au-ltoi. 

E 

: 

Early, 

rattai. 

Eatable, 

khdnO  jSg. 

Earn  (vb.), 

kamund , 

Eclipse, 

grahan . 

Ear-ring, 

for  men,  murkd , murukd ; 

Economy, 

MSpd  Jciphait . 

for  women,  on  rim  of  oar, 

kathdwli ; 

Elope  with  (vb.), 

urunfi. 

„ „ on  inside  of 

ear,  bdld ; 

Erupt} , 

rltG. 

„ „ in  the  lobe, 

fihumld9 

Endure  (vb.), 

sarriTt. 

jhumvka • 

Enemy, 

bairi. 

Earth, 

dharti , bhuml. 

Enhancement, 

jddtl. 

Earthquake, 

chalko , bhUchdl , bhuichdh 

Enmity, 

hair. 

Ease, 

8uhh. 

i 

Enter  (vb.), 

bhitir  paifhitB,  bhitir 

Eat  (vb.), 

khdrtfi. 

paiisinB. 

ENGLISH- KTJMAUNI  VOCABULARY, 


271 


English. 

Evening, 

Evidence  (noun), 

To  give  evidence, 
Ewe, 

Examine  (vb.), 

Fallow, 

Family, 

Famine, 

Far, 

Fast  (vb.). 

Fat, 

Father, 

Father-in-law, 

Fatigne, 

Fatten  (vb.). 

Feather, 

Feed  (vb.). 

Fetid, 

Fever, 

Fill  (vb.), 

Filthy, 

Fin, 

Find  (vb.), 

Fine  (punishment), 
Finger, 

Firefly, 

Firm, 

Firstling, 


Knmannl. 

bydl,  bydl  bakhat. 
sdkhl. 

8&kh  purnl. 
bh&rl. 

parkhanB,  parikhnO . 

bfijd. 

kutamb-kabtld . 
akdl. 
dvry  \df. 
barat  rdkhnB. 
mdld. 

bdb( I,  babe I. 
faiurd. 
pa{ai. 
mdpo  bdnnO • 
p%kh. 
khaunB. 
iehilr ■,  tydr. 
tdp,  jar . 
bharnB. 

kuchfl , kuohilB . 
pSkh . 
milnB. 

4Sd. 

Sguld. 
jatginl  ktfB. 
majbut • 


English. 

Exclaim  (vb.), 
Excrement  (human), 
Expect  (vb.), 

Eye, 

F 

Fish, 

1 Fish  hook, 

| Fisherman, 

i 

| Fist, 

i 

Flag, 

Flame, 

Flat, 

Floor  (of  planks), 
Flower, 

Fly  (noun). 

Fog, 

Fool, 

Forehead, 

Forest, 

Forgive  (vb.), 
Forsake  (vb.), 

Fort, 

Fortunate, 

Fresh, 

Friend, 

Frost, 

Pry  (vb.). 

Full, 

G 


Knmssnl. 

lalySnB . 

yii. 

dsd  rdkhnl , JiJ  dharnf . 

a ; one-eyed  person, 
kdnd : squint-eyed  per- 
son, serd. 

mdchhd,  (pi.)  mdchhi. 
mdchhB  kfi  kdnd. 
machhuwd. 
mutthi , mtfffc. 
yfcanti. 

Idt. 

chaurai , satpd. 
patBr. 
phul . 

mdkha,  (vb.)  urn 3. 

kwtrd. 

ndddn. 

mdthB. 

ban. 

chhimd  kariid. 
chhBtfnB. 
gafh . 
bhdgwdn. 
sdjt . 

pdtcB,  pdlB. 
bhunnd . 

piirB. 


denB. 


Gather  (vb.)f 
Qina|r  (green), 


kafthB  kamB . 
ddC  ; dry, 


Give  (vb.), 
Glass  (looking-) 


drshi. 


272 

KNGLISH-KUMATJNi  VOCABULARY. 

English. 

Kumaunl. 

English* 

.ja 

Kumaanl. 

Glean  (vb.), 

chunno.  This  word  has 

Gourd, 

laukl , laukd  (large). 

two  meanings  : (1)  to 
pick,  (2)  to  select. 

Government, 

sirktfr. 

Go  (vb.). 

jdnO. 

Grain, 

ndj,  for  seed  bij. 

Goat, 

bdkrd9  bdkrt,  bdkard. 

Grandchild, 

nd.fi , (f.)  ndtini. 

Goat-skin, 

khalara,  khalari. 

1 

Grow  (vb.), 

jam  no. 

Gold, 

sunO. 

Growl  (vb,), 

yurr&nd. 

Good, 

dchho . 

Guest, 

yautifi. 

Goods  and  chattels 

ghar-kuri. 

and  house. 

H 

Hair, 

bate,  bdl.  ! 

Hit  (vb.). 

mdmd. 

Hand  mill, 

jdnrd . | 

Ilonr  frost, 

pd  ted,  pabl. 

Hard, 

kararo. 

Hog, 

sfigar9  sniuar. 

Hare, 

i 

Hold  (vb.). 

ill  T ratio. 

Harlot* 

pdtar . 

Holiday, 

tehdr , tydr . 

Hasten  (vb.), 

utaul  karnt. 

1 

Honey, 

man. 

Hate  (vb.). 

(lutkdrno.  ! 

Hook, 

kdtd. 

Have  (vb.), 

rakhnn f dharno . 

Hope, 

d.sd. 

Hay, 

8ukho  ghds. 

Hopeless, 

nirds. 

Hearth, 

chuld , chuld. 

Horn, 

si<J,  sly. 

H ea ven. 

aka  s. . 

Hot, 

tdtdm 

Heavy,  v 

garvwd. 

House, 

kvrdy  hurl. 

Hedge, 

bdrli . 

How, 

kaso . 

Help  (vb.), 

madat  deni . 

However, 

tabai. 

Hemp, 

bhdy. 

Husband, 

khtisam. 

Hen, 

kukuri. 

Hnsk, 

6f  barley,  bhSe  ; of  chfhit, 

' jhagdrd  or  kauni ; of 

Here, 

eti , yati. 

wheat,  phdphrd;  of  wa- 
stir,  mai ; of  ldbiyd9  bhdd  ; 

Hiccough, 

(fakdr. 

of  chauldt  and  maiuwd » 
Mfl*,  also  bhifrff  in  hills. 

High, 

uchd. 

Hydrophobia, 

hapkiyd. 

111. 


Interest, 


273 


* 

BNOLiaH-KyMAXTNI  YOCABTJIiARY. 


English* 

— — — » 

KatnfttiuT. 

EnglUh. 

Kumaunl. 

Invito  (vb.), 

nyutd  dino. 

Itch, 

khdj9  lihdjl. 

Iron, 

lu9  luwd. 

• 

j 

Jackal, 

iydwat  iydl. 

Jump  (vb.), 

1 phSwa  mSrnl,  phafldl 

marnl. 

Jealousy, 

rts,  rld-rdg. 

Just, 

nieaphi . 

Jest, 

that  Id • 

Justice, 

nyd. 

K 

Keep  (vb.), 

rakhnd. 

King, 

bdchhd . 

Kick  (vb.). 

laty&nd. 

Kid, 

pdthfi,  pdthf. 

Knead  (vb.), 

slnd. 

Kill  (vb.). 

kdtnfi. 

Knee, 

ghund. 

L 

Labour, 

menat. 

Level  (adj.), 

saino , chauras. 

Lad, 

chhdrn. 

Liar, 

jhutD. 

Last, 

pachhild. 

Lid, 

dhdkan. 

Late, 

aber. 

Light, 

ujydlo , ujydictZ. 

Laugh  (vb.), 

hasno. 

Lightning, 

bijuli. 

Lead  (noun), 

tlS'l. 

Lip, 

thfil,  thDwa. 

Lean, 

patlv,  dublO  patlB. 

Listen  (vb.), 

s u nnd. 

Lease, 

pat  (8. 

Littlo, 

n<fn<5 . 

Leech, 

jwdhS. 

Lizard, 

(chamoloon)  chhebJrQ 

chhiprd. 

Leep  (vb.). 

to  smear  with  cowdung 

salu. 

and  earth,  llpnd. 

Locust, 

Leisure, 

swdptd,  sdbntd. 

Lunch, 

dh&pari.  But  the  uso  of 

this  word  is  ambiguous, 

Lemon, 

eh  fife. 

sometimes  a meal  .it  S or 

9 a.m.  is  called  dh<*p<tri 

Leopard, 

bag. 

in  the  hills 

Leper, 

hurt. 

i 

M 

Mad  dog, 

harkiyd . 

Manure, 

gnbar.  When  mixed  with 
grass  it  is  called  r hGI, 

Mallet, 

mfigart . 

mSiea , purs'd. 

Man, 

tit  aft,  ffcttmf. 

Market, 

bajdr . 

2 N 


▼OL.  IX,  PART  IV.** 


274 


ENGLISH-KTJMAUNl  VOCABULARY. 


English. 

Knmaani. 

it jfc*  t — 

* English. 

RuinUpotf. 

'if 

Marriage, 

byd. 

Moon, 

jun. 

Matchlock, 

Mature, 

Medicine, 

Meet  (vb.), 

Melt  (vb.). 

dgald • 

pdkd, 

aHkhat , aulehad . 

bhelnfi. 

gain  no , gating.  Tho  latter 
word  gaunB  has  two 
meanings:  (1)  to  melt, 

(*J)  to  lose. 

Moonlight, 

Morning, 

Mother, 

M other-in-law, 

Mountain, 

Mouth, 

ph&l  phafak  jun  (dear 
without  clouds). 

rattai, 

ijf,  ijd , f id. 

dd&u. 

ddnfiy  da$Q, 

khdp. 

Memory, 

ySd. 

Mud, 

hlly  hilGy  kadhily  kachydr . 

Mill, 

Mine, 

jdnroy  jSdro  (a  hand-mill). 

meru. 

Mumps, 

* 

gandH,  gdn . A man 
having  mumps  is  called 
gand . 

Mint, 

potin,  pddlno. 

Munch  (vb.), 

chabunG, 

Miser, 

viuji. 

Musk  (a  pod  of), 

' bind . 

M ist, 

k 1017  0. 

M ustackios, 

junggS. 

Mistake, 

bhuly  bisar9  bhul-bisar. 

My, 

merd. 

Monsoon, 

chan  mds. 

Myself, 

dp  hi. 

Month, 

mhaitiu. 

Mystery, 

hhed. 

N 

Nail  (of  body). 

nahg 

Nest, 

glint. 

Name, 

nau. 

New, 

nayo . 

Narrow, 

asngurn . 

Nice, 

umtOy  dchhG. 

Navel, 

vautl . 

No, 

7id. 

Nav, 

na  r. 

Nothing, 

kfichh-nat. 

Necessary, 

jar  nr. 

Nourish  (vb.). 

pdlnfi. 

Needle, 

large,  for  woollen  cloth 
home-made,  undl  aiun. 

Now  and  then,  ’ 

kablxai  knbhaT- 

3 

Oak, 

hPij. 

Open  (vb.), 

ughdpnG. 

Oath, 

gan. 

Opium, 

aphlm . 

Obscene, 

bt-aaram. 

Our, 

hamarG . 

Offence, 

to  take  offence,  IcachlO 
mdnnfi. 

Ontcry, 

hdi  tdbd . 

Offering, 

Omen, 

bhet9  in  hills. 

tagun,  adkun. 

Own, 

Owner, 

ftpnG, 

tndlak . 

BNGLISH-KTTMATJNt  VOCABULARY, 


275 




HttglU'u  ^ 

* KomaunL  '* 

* 

English. 

Knmaunl. 

P 

Paddy, 

dhSn. 

Place, 

jaga. 

• Pain, 

pir- 

Plough, 

hau , hal. 

Palm  of  hand, 

hathnaU. 

Plough  (vb.), 

bdnB, 

Papa, 

bait. 

Ploughshare  (iron), 

phdwd 

Paper, 

k&gat. 

Pocket, 

khissd . 

Paramour, 

yar,  jdr. 

Pod  (seed-), 

4im\. 

Pardon, 

chhimS. 

Poison, 

bishg  bikh . 

Parrot, 

SuwS. 

Pomegranate, 

dfiritn. 

Pai-tner, 

»ajh i. 

Pond, 

tai. 

Partridge, 

(m.)  titirBj  (f.)  titirl. 

Powder, 

(gunpowder)  dam. 

Path, 

bat,  batolf. 

Pregnn  nt, 

pet  dll. 

Peace, 

sajail , mel. 

Present, 

hdjar. 

Peg, 

m. 

Press  (vb.), 

dabnB. 

Persevering, 

iay&r. 

Prick  (vb.), 

chubanD . 

Petticoat, 

ghdghrfi. 

Priest, 

! 

purhit. 

Pick  (vb.). 

chunnd. 

Profit, 

phaidd . 

Pickaxe  (small), 

g$4nl. 

| Promise  (vb.), 

| 

kardr  karnB. 

Pig. 

sugar . 

| Proud, 

i 

magri 9. 

Pillow, 

sirdni. 

; Prove  (vb.), 

parkhanB. 

Pine  marten, 

chuthraul. 

Purse, 

battid • 

Pimple, 

kil9  (pi.)  ms. 

. Push  (vb.), 

dliakelnB,  thilnff. 

Pipe, 

chilam.  Bamboo  portable 
pipe,  chilam  kB  kdtht. 

Put  (vb.), 

to  put  on  clothes,  shoesi 
etc.,  paharnd9  pairnl l 
bhirnB. 

Pit, 

kliSt . 

Putrid, 

doriyB, 

Q 

Quarry, 

khan 

Question, 

sudi. 

1 

R 

khStfSf  gudajrS. 

Ravine, 

nif  icd. 

Ram, 

kh&pu. 

Reaper, 

launiyd. 

Raspberry, 

hifi&u  hisSla . 

Rear, 

pichlidfi. 

Rat, 

mUshS. 

Relation, 

i 

f 

ndtl 1,  ndtB. 

d 

— ’2n2 

VOL.  IX,  PAST  IV. 


276 


BK&LI8H-KUilA.UNl  TOOABtJlrAET. 


English. 

Kumaunl. 

English. 

KumtgnL 

« 

Remember  (vb.)» 

y&d  rdkkp I. 

Rice, 

chfitod,  chaxoal . 

Repair  (vb.),  thok  ikak  learnt. 

Request  (tb,)j  darkhBst  learnt. 

Rest  (vb.),  taitSnS. 

Retire  (from  a oase)(vb.),  blitljnS. 

Return  (vb.),  baufnO. 

{ 

Bight, 

Bingal-bamboo  (druw- 
dinaria  falcata ), 

Hoad, 

Roof, 

Bnin  (of  house  or 
village), 

3 

nigdwd,  ntgdli. 

aafak. 

chhatt. 

khanydr . 

Sake  (for  the— of), 

khdtar . 

Slip  (vb.), 

rajrnG. 

Salt, 

lun,  nun . 

Smell  (vb.), 

sugnd. 

Sand, 

bdu. 

Smoke  (tobacco)  (vb.), 

tamdkhu  khdnd. . 

Search  (yb.), 

Tier  rid  bhdlpB. 

Smoke  (noun), 

dhuwd • 

Season, 

edmd. 

Smooth  (adj.), 

chiphld . 

Separate  ( vb.). 

judd  karnd . 

Snore  (vb.), 

ghurghurdnd. 

Several, 

kayek. 

Snow, 

hyu. 

Sew  (vb.). 

sirnd. 

So, 

a tid. 

Shade,  shadow. 

chhail. 

Soak  (vb.), 

rujnd. 

Shame, 

Idj , saram. 

Somebody, 

kwd » 

Share, 

hats;  b3t. 

Soon, 

jhat , jhaf-paf. 

Sharpen  (vb.), 

pain  karnd , pay and. 

Sour, 

dmld9  amild. 

Shave  (vb.), 

munnd , bhadra  karnd. 

Spark, 

chinkd. 

Sheep, 

bher , bh&fi. 

Spit  (vb.), 

thuknd. 

Shop, 

bat. 

Spring  (vb.), 

phdwa  mdrni. 

Shori* 

thdrO. 

. Stand  (vb.), 

fhdfd  hdnd. 

Shorten  (vb.), 

ghaiund. 

Star  (evening), 

Mura  tdrd. 

* 

Shrond, 

kaphan. 

Stick  (walking), 

lathi. 

Sign, 

Singer  (female). 

Sister, 

sdn. 

giddrl . 

elder,  duZt ; younger  baini, 
bhuU. 

Stone, 

Story, 

Strain  (liquids)  (vb.). 

pdtthar.  Stone  of  fruit, 
guihSU-  guthydla. 

katha-kahant. 

chain 8,  ohawvB. 

Sister-in-law, 

hhaujlt  65/f. 

Strength, 

j6r. 

Skin, 

khdli 

Strong, 

majbut. 

Sky, 

akdi. 

Stumble  (vb.), 

fhSi  khan 1. 

Slap  (vb.), 

thappap  mdrni. 

Suckle  (vb.), 

dfpl,  dirm. 

Sleop  (vb.), 

-s* £- 

sitnd. 

Suddenly, 

acha^chok. 

ENGLISH- KUMAUNt  VOCABULARY, 


277 


English. 

Kumauul. 

English. 

Knmanni. 

Sufficient, 

bhatSrG,  muktO , m ukhtB, 

Sweet, 

guliyO . 

Sunday, 

itwSr . 

Swell  (vb.), 

uiSnZ. 

Surprise  (vb.), 

achammS  on  aehambhl 1 

Swim  (vb.), 

bau  lagunD . 

karnti. 

Sword, 

talwSr. 

Surround  (vb.), 

gOfnC. 

Syrup, 

sir*. 

Swallow  (vb.). 

nigalnd,  nSlnd. 

r 

Tail, 

puchhafti. 

Time, 

bakhat. 

Teach  (vb.). 

jikunBm 

Tinder, 

tutoa,  kapds. 

Tear  (noun), 

fifu. 

Toad, 

bhikdnO. 

Teat, 

chuchl , chUch& , 

Tobacco, 

tamdhhu. 

Teetb, 

dSt. 

Together, 

katthB. 

Tenant, 

paying  revenue  to  Govern- 

To-night, 

ella  rdt , el  rdt* 

ment,  sirkSri  asftmf. 

Tooth, 

dtit . 

Thirst, 

til 

Torch, 

rgka. 

Thirsty, 

tUS,  tilSn. 

Tough, 

meat,  jar-jard ; leather, 

Thread, 

ahSga , tagS. 

tar-tard. 

Thumb, 

dguihS,  buruthiyS . 

Track, 

bat ; a narrow  track. 

asagufl  bSt , 

Tie  (vb.), 

bfidhnd. 

Tree, 

bdt. 

Tiger, 

ty%,  iyv- 

Trip  (vb.), 

th$&  lagnl. 

Tight, 

aird,  idrikai. 

Turn  (vb.), 

phirnc >,  ba  urnO. 

Uncle, 


U 


father’s  brother,  leaks  ; 
motlier's  brother,  mSmi I ; 
husband  of  father’s 
sister,  bhina ; husband 
of  mother’s  sister, 
mausS. 


Unfortunate, 

Untrue, 


Up, 


IcaramphutiyO. 

jhfttthd. 


t ibhS* 


Vacant, 

rttd. 

Vessels  (of  metal), 

bfiddi 

Various, 

bhSti  bhSti  to. 

Virgin, 

an-biwai . 

Venom, 

bith,  bihh. 

Vomit  (vb.), 

ukhSlno . 

Verdant, 

hard. 

Vnltnre, 

brown,  garur. 

w 


Wait  (vb.). 
Wake  (vb.), 


fhairnS, 

IdjUnO. 


Walk  (vb.)# 


(fdltnd.  Used  colloquially 
and  sometimes  con- 
temptuously. 

2L, 


278  BN GLISH-KUM AUNl  TOOABTJIiABT. 


English. 

Kuinaunl. 

1 English. 

j 

Kumsuni. 

Wall, 

bhlt. 

What, 

kS. 

Walnut, 

akhdr . Country  people 

sometimes  call  it  ukhdr. 

When, 

i 

(rel.)  jab , (interrog.y 

kabhai. 

Warm, 

tdtd. 

White, 

iukilOy  fyetd,  chitta . 

WaBte  (vb.), 

khOnB. 

Wick, 

bat*,  bats. 

Wave, 

lahar . 

Widower, 

ra(fuw3 . 

Way, 

bat. 

Wife, 

jv>S. 

Wear  (vb.), 

pairnd,  bhirnd . 

Wind, 

hJioS,  b&t • 

Weather, 

ritu. 

Wing, 

pankhy  p§kh . 

Weave  (vb.), 

bunnti. 

Wink  (Yb.), 

$3 n m&rni. 

Wedding, 

by  3. 

Wiunowing-sieve, 

Sop. 

Wedge, 

m. 

Winter, 

hemant , hyund* 

Weed  (vb.), 

nyilnfi,  gdrnd. 

Wood, 

ISkrn, 

Weep  (vb.), 

runH. 

Worn, 

k IrG. 

Welfaie, 

rSji-khtisi . 

Worship  (vb.), 

pujnO. 

Wet, 

bhijiyai,  tinfi. 

Wrap  (vb.), 

bddnft. 

\ 

/ 

Yawn  (vb.). 

jfiuiSnfi. 

Yellow, 

pihawV. 

Year, 

baras.  Last  year,  pdr ; 
year  before  last,  pardr  ; 
year  before  that,  hi 5 

parSr;  next  year,  ajhin 

8*1. 

Yes, 

Yesterday, 

hau. 

bSliyd,  b&iyd. 

Yearling, 


barsiV'inik' . 


279 


Gai?hwalt. 


Garhwal,  as  a tract,  consists  of  two  portions,  viz.,  the  State  of  Teliri  Garhwal,  and, 

to  its  east,  the  British  District  of  Garhwal.  This  tract  is 
Where  spoken  bounded  on  the  west  by  the  Jaunsiir-Bawar  tract  of  Dehra 

Dun,  the  language  of  which  is  the  "Western  Paharl  Jaunsari,  and  on  the  east  by  the 
Almora  District  of  Kumaun,  the  main  language  of  which  is  Kutnauni.  To  its  north 
are  the  higher  ranges  of  the  Himalaya,  inhabited  by  people  speaking  Tibeto-Burman 
forms  of  speech  which  are  dealt  with. in  Vol.  TTI,  Part  I,  of  this  Survey,  and  to  its  south 
are  the  British  Districts  of  Dehra  Dun  and  (again)  Almora.  Still  further  south  lie  the 
Districts  of  Saharanpur,  Bijnorand  Moradabad,  of  which,  and  also  of  most  of  Dehra  Dun, 
the  language  is  some  form  of  Western  Hindi.  Garhwal!  is  the  Aryan  language  spoken 
in  Garhwal,  and  also  to  some  extent,  by  an  overflow  population  in  all  the  above  adjoining 
districts. 

As  previously  explained  (mile,  pp.  1:>  ff.)  Garhwal  at  an  early  period  received  Aryan 
Colonies  from  Rajputana,  using  that  name  in  its  widest  sense.  The  founder  of  the 
present  line  of  rulers  of  Teliri  is  said  to  have  been  a Pa  la  immigrant  from  Gujarat,  who 
is  differently  named  in  the  various  lists.  According  to  some  he  was  no  other  than  the 
famous  Kanishka.1  Thirty-sixth  or  thirty-seventh  in  descent  from  the  founder  came 
Ajaya  Pala,  who  lived  in  the  latter  half  of  the  fourteenth  century  A.D.  He  consolidated 
the  power  of  his  family  over  the  other  tribes  in  Garhwal,  and  transferred  his  capital  to 
Srinagar,  the  present  chief  town  of  the  British  District,  Up  to  his  time  Garhwal  had 
been  divided  amongst  a number  of  petty  Rajas.  “ Livery  glen  or  hill,  as  formerly  was 
the  case  in  the  highlands  of  Scotland,  was  subject  to  its  own  chiefs  who  have  left  no 
record  behind  except,  the  moss-covered  walls  of  their  strongholds.  And,  although  Ajaya 
Pal.a  is  credited  with  having  reduced  fifty-two  of  these  petty  chiefs  under  his  own  rules, 
we  may  well  suppose  that  he  was  only  the  first  of  his  line  to  aim  at  more  than  a local 
supremacy,  and  that  to  his  successors  is  due  the  extension  of  the  Garhwal  power  over 
the  Dun,  Bisahir  (Bashahr)  and  the  tract  now  known  as  Teliri  or  foreign  Garhwal.”2 

Besides  Tibeto-Burman s the  lower  ranges  of  the  Himalaya  from  the  .Jehlani  to  Nepal 
wero  inhabited  by  various  Aryan  tribes,  the  principal  of  which  was  that  of  the  Kha4as.3 

Those  of  Garhwal  were  subdued  by  these  Rajput  conquerors,  and  adopted  their  lan- 
guage, infecting  it,  at  the  same  time,  with  idioms  belonging  to  their  own  form  of  speech. 
It  thus  follows  that  Garhwal!  is  a somewhat  corrupted  form  of  Rajasthani.  This  corruption 
is  not  so  manifest  as  it  is  in  the  Western  Paharl  languages  of  the  Simla  Hills,  further 
west,  but  here  and  there  we  come  across  forms  of  words  which  distinctly  betray  Khasa 
influence.  This  subject  will  be  dealt  with  more  fully,  when  considering  the  Simla  and 
allied  dialects. 

Garhwal!  is  closely  allied  to  Kumaun!.  Its  Rajasthani  relationship  is  cleai  to 
the  most  casual  observer,  and  need  not  detain  us  further. 

Garhwal!  is  not  a literary  language,  and  in  the  mountainous  tract  that,  forms  its 
• home,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  it  should  change  from  place 

D,alects-  to  place.  No  less  than  eight  varieties  havejwf11  ^PQ1'totl 

1 See  Atkinson,  Himalayan  Gazetteer,  Vol.  II,  pp.  416  ff.  * Atkinson,  op.  cit,  pp.  526  ff.  See  an^e’  P‘~ 


280 


GABHWALI. 


from  British  Garhwal.  As  regards  the  Teliri  State  it  is  reported  that  the  local  dialect 
varies  considerably  from  place  to  place,  but  the  only  specimen  forwarded  comes  from  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  town  of  Teliri  itself.  The  dialect  of  Srinagar,  the  ancient  capital 
of  the  country,  is  admittedly  the  standard,  and,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  specimens  that 
follow,  the  variations  from  this  standard  are  nowhere  of  importance.  The  Teliri  dialect 
alone  presents  prominent  divergencies,  but  even  these  are  not  serious. 

Although  Srinagariya  is  the  standard  form,  it  lias  comparatively  few  speakers.  The 
largest  number  of  sjieakers  in  British  Garhwal  is  claimed  by  the  Salani  sub-dialect  spoken 
immediately  to  the  south  of  ^rinagariya,  and,  as  a matter  of  fact,  hardly  differing  from 
it.  Under  the  head  of  Salani,  are  also  grouped  the  speakers  of  Garhwali,  in  the  British 
Districts  immediately  to  the  south  of  Garhwal,  viz.,  Debra  Dun,  Saharanpur,  Bijnor,  and 
Moradabad ; numbering  6,750  souls  in  all.  The  remaining  speakers  of  Salani  dwell  in 
the  British  Garhwal  (207,832)  and  Almora  (15,176)  districts. 

The  various  sub-dialects  are  as  follows : — 


Srlaagariya  or  Standard — 
Garhwal  . • 

Rat  hi  or  Rath  wall — 
Girhwal 
Almora 

Lobbya — 

Garhwal  • 

Almora  • • 

Badbani— 

Garhwal 
Dasanlya — 

Garhwal  . • 

M5jb-Kumaiya — 

Garhwal 
Almora  • • 

Nagpuriya — 

Garhwal 
Salani — 

Garhwal  . 

Almora  , • 

Dobra  Dun 
Saharanpur 
Bijnor  - . • 

Moradabad  • . 


• • 


• • 


• • 


60,594 

2,463 


8,100 

1,648 


* • 


• « 


m • 


• • 


28,631 

4,380 


207,832 

15,176 

5,0u0 

250 

1,000 

500 


12,008 

63,057 

9,748 

14,108 

17,022 

33,011 

51,831 


Teliri  or  Gangapariya — 229,758 

Teliri  Garliwal  ..........  240,281 


Total  . 670,824 


Garhwali  has  practically  no  literature.  The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew  in  this  dialect 

was  printed  at  Lucknow  in  the  year  1876.  Pandit  Gobind 

I ifpr^fnrp  

Prasad  Ghildyal,  B. A.,  has  translated  the  first  part  of  the 
Hindi  Rajnlti  into  Garhwali,  and  this  was  printed  at  Almora  in  1901.  Several  specimens 
of  Garhwali  will  also  be  found  m Pandit  Ganga  Datt  Upreti’s  Hill  Dialects  of  the 
Kttmaun  Division. 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


281 


The  principal  forms  of  Garhwali  Grammar  are  given  in  Dr.  Kellogg’s  Hindi 
Authorities.  Grammar  (2nd  edition,  London,  1893).  Xo  other  book 

with  which  the  writer  is  acquainted  deals  with  the  gram- 
matical forms  of  this  dialect.  Pandit  Ganga  Datt  Upreti’s  specimens  have  been  referred 
to  above. 

A sketch  of  Garhwali  Grammar. 

The  following  sketch  of  Garhwali  Grammar  is  based  on  the  two  specimens  given 
below,  on  the  list  of  words  and  sentences  on  pp.  353  and  ff.,  and,  when  material  was  not 
there  available,  on  a Garhwali  version  of  the  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew  printed  at  Lucknow 
in  187C.  The  quotations  from  the  first  specimen  (the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son) 
and  from  the  List  of  Words  and  Sentences  will  readily  be  recognized,  and  no  references 
are  added  to  them.  The  paragraphs  of  the  second  specimen,  which  is  taken  from  Pandit 
Ganga  Datt  Upreti’s  1 Till  Dialects  oj  the  Kumaun  Dioision,  have  been  numbered. 
All  quotations  taken  from  it,  and  from  the  version  of  St.  Matthew’s  Gospel,  arc  supplied 
with  references. 

Pronunciation. — The  pronunciation  is  on  the  whole  the  same  as  in  Hindi.  I 
have  not  noticed  any  instance  of  the  interchange  between  yd  and  e which  is  a promi- 
nent feature  in  Kumauui.  Words  which  in  Hindi  end  in  e,  in  Garhwali  often  end  in 
a short  unpronounced  a.  Thus  the  postposition  of  the  Agent  case  is  n (Hindi  we),  the 
suffix  of  the  conjunctive  participle  is  k (Hindi  Ice),  and  the  oblique  form  of  the  infinitive 
in  phrases  is  as  in  karan  lagyb  (Hindi  karne  lay  a).  Although  Garhwali  is  distinctively 
a form  of  Eastern  Rajasthani,  we  may  say  that  in  its  general  characteristics  it  more 
nearly  approaches  Hindi  than  does  Kumauui  or  Khas-Kura. 

Gender. — There  arc  two  genders,  masculine  and  feminine.  These  generally  follow 
Hindi  and  Rajasthani  rules.  A few  words  which  are  feminine  in  Hindi  are,  as  in 
Kumauni,  masculine  in  Garhwali.  Thus,  akhd,  an  eye,  is  masculine  in  merit  akhd  te 
khar  nikalt-de , extract  the  grass  from  my  eye  (TT,  1). 

Number. — There  are  two  numbers,  singular  and  plural.  Tadbhava 1 masculine 
nouns  which  in  Hindi  end  in  d,  in  Garhwali,  as  in  Rajasthani,  end  in  o.  Thus,  Hindi 
glided,  Garhwali  glided,  a horse.  These  nouns  form  the  nominative  plural  by  changing 
6 to  d as  in  glided,  horses. 

In  the  case  of  other  masculine  nouns,  the  nominative  plural  is  the  same  as  the 
nominative  singular.  Thus,  ghar,  a house,  or  houses. 

Feminine  nouns  ending  in  consonants  form  the  nominative  plural  by  adding  a. 
Thus,  bat,  a word,  bdta  (Hindi  bdt%),  words.  In  the  case  of  other  feminine  nouns  the 

nominative  plural  is  the  same  as  the  nominative  singular,  finis,  no  uni,  a daughter  or 
daughters.  Feminine  nouns  in  7,  however,  often  change  the  I to  e in  the  nominative 
plural.  Thus,  jandm,  a woman,  plural  jandin  or  janane. 

Case. — As  in  other  Indo- Aryan  languages,  cases  are  generally  indicated  hr  means 
of  postpositions.  Certain  nouns  are  put  into  an  oblique  form  before  these  are  added. 

In  the  case  of  most  nouns  the  oblique  form  singular  is  the  same  as  the  nominative. 
Thus,  bir,  a hero : bir-an , by  the  hero  : ghar,  a house : ghar -l  e,  from  a house  : navni ? 

1 A tadbhava  noun  is  one  which  lias  descended  to  Uarhwfili  from  Sanskrit  through  Prakrit,  aii'l  whiili  is  not  (liki 
b&lak,  a boy)  borrowed  directly  from  Sanskrit. 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV.  " ° 


282 


garhwAlI. 


the  daughter : nauni-kb,  of  the  daughter : bain,  the  sister : baiy-te,  from  the  sister.  But 
masculine  tadbhava1  nouns  in  o make  the  oblique  form  singular,  as  well  as  the  nomina- 
tive plural,  by  changing  the  6 to  a.  Thus,  ghbfo,  a horse  : oblique  form  singular,  and 
nominative  plural,  ghbfa. 

The  oblique  form  plural  ends  in  au  or  u.  The  two  terminations  seem  to  bo  inter- 
changeable. If  the  nominative  plural  ends  in  a or  a,  this  (with  certain  exceptions  to  be 
noted  below)  is  dropped  before  adding  the  termination.  Thus,  ghbfa,  horses : oblique 
plural  ghbfau  or  ghoru  : bata,  words ; oblique  plural  bataU  or  batu.  If  the  nominative 
plural  ends  in  ?,  this,  together  with  the  termination,  becomes  iyau  or  iyu.  Thus,  naunl, 
daughters ; oblique  plural  nanniyau  or  navniyu.  In  other  cases,  the  au  or  w is  added 
directly  to  the  nominative  plural.  Thus,  ghar,  houses  ; oblique  plural  gharau  or  gharu  ; 
blr,  heroes ; oblique  plural  birau  or  bird.  In  the  case  of  a few  words,  such  as  raja 
(masc.),  a king ; baba  (masc.),  a father ; sewd  (fern.),  service ; and  djtta  (fem.),  a com- 
mand, the  nominative  plural  is  the  same  as  the  nominativo  singular,  but  in  the  oblique 
cases  the  final  d is  not  dropped  before  the  oblique  terminations.  Thus,  baba,  father, 
oblique  plural  babaau  or  babad. 

The  final  d of  the  oblique  termination  is  sometimes  nasalized.  So  that  we  also  find 
ghoru,  batu,  nauniyu,  and  so  on.  Similarly  in  the  Parable,  we  have  khMd-ma,  in  the 
fields,  but  naukarU-madhye,  among  the  servants. 

As  in  Hindi  and  Rajasthani,  the  oblique  form,  singular  or  plural,  can  be  employed 
alone  to  indicate  any  case : but  it  is  usual  to  define  the  case  by  adding  to  it  one  of 
the  following  postpositions  : — 

Agent,  ». 

Accusative, — , or  else  sanl  (sometimes  written  sini)  or  kd. 

Instrumental,  te  or  n. 

Dative,  mni  (si Ini)  or  ku. 

Ablative,  te. 

Genitive,  kb. 

Locative,  md  (in),  par  (on). 

The  Accusative  is  either  the  same  as  the  Nominative,  or,  when  definiteness  haa  to  be 
indicated,  the  postposition  of  the  Dative  is  added  following  the  same  rules  as  Hindi. 

We  may  thus  decline  the  noun  ghdrb,  a horse. 


Sing. 

Plur. 

Nom. 

ghdrb 

ghord 

Agent 

ghofd-n 

ghorau  (or  ghbru)-n 

Acc. 

ghbro,  ghordsani,  -ku 

ghbfa , ghorau  (or  ghbru)-aatti,  - ku 

Instr. 

ghord-te,  ghord-n 

ghbro  U (ghbfii)  - te,  ghbfau(ghbfu)-n 

Dat. 

ghora-aani,  ghbrd-ku 

ghorau(ghbf  u)-8anl,  ghorau (ghoru)-kd 

Abl. 

ghord-te 

ghbfau(ghbfu)-te 

Gen. 

ghbrd-ko 

ghbfau  (phopu) -kb 

Loc. 

ghord-md,  ghora-par 

ghbfou(ghbfu)  -md,  ghorau(ghoru)-por 

1 See  the  footnote  on  the  preceding  page. 


STANDARD  DIAXECT. 


28a 


For  other  nouns  we  may  quote : — 

Simoucab.  Plus  A!.. 


Nom. 

Obi. 

Nom. 

Obi. 

baba. 

a father 

'baba 

baba 

bdbdau  or  bdbdu 

ghar. 

a house 

ghar 

ghar 

gharau  or  gharu 

naunt. 

a daughter 

nauni 

nauni,  naune 

nauniyau  or  nauniyu 

bat. 

a word 

bat 

bata 

bdtau  or  bdtu 

As  examples  of  the  Agent)  wliiph  is  used  before  the  past  tenses  of  transitive 
verbs  as  in  Hindi,  we  may  quote  the  following.  When  a noun  ends  in  a consonant,  an 
a is  inserted  before  the  n to  assist  the  pronunciation.  Thus,  Mr- an. 
betd-n  bblyb , the  son  said. 

purb-kd  bir-an  puchhe,  the  eastern  hero  asked  (II,  2). 
nauni-n  batdl  dine , the  daughter  explained  it  (II,  2). 
dwiyau-n  budali-md  bole , both  said  to  the  old  woman  (II,  3). 

Note  that  the  verb  bblno , to  say,  unlike  the  Hind!  bolnd,  is  transitive. 

For  the  Accusative  we  have  : — 

apnd  pet  bharnb  chando  chhayo , he  was  desirous  to  fill  his  belly. 
tee-n  sdtu-soni  we  talau-md  dal  din  yd,  he  flung  the  8attu  into  the  tank  (II,  1). 
dwi  birau-ku  apnd  kandhd-md  dhar-dinyd,  (she)  put  the  two  heroes  on  her 
shoulder  (II,  3). 

For  the  Instrumental  we  have  : — 

we-ku  apnd  hdth-te  phSk-dine,  (he)  hurled  him  with  his  own  hand  (II,  2). 
mai-n  naunb  bet-an  mare,  I struck  the  son  with  a cane  (sentence  228). 

For  the  Dative  WO  have  : — 

so  mai-sani  de-dewd,  give  that  to  me. 

apnd  ghar-ku  aunu  chhayo,  (lie)  was  coming  to  his  house  (II,  2). 

Verbs  of  saying  generally  govern  the  locative  with  mb,  but  sometimes  they  govern 
the  dative,  as  in  budali-n  U-kii  bole,  the  old  woman  said  to  them  (II,  3). 

For  the  Ablative  we  have : — 

ek-ko  ghar  dmrd-kd  ghar-te  bard  bars-ko  bdto  chhayo,  the  house  of  one  wa  s 
a journey  of  twelve  years  from  the  house  of  the  other  (II,  1). 

As  ablatives  of  comparison,  we  have : — 

* oe-ko  bhai  toe-ki  bhain-te  lambo  chha,  his  brother  is  taller  than  his  sister. 
khdy-te  jadd  rati  pakd,  bread  more  than  (sufficient  for)  eating  is  being  cooked. 
And  for  tho  superlative : 

sab-te  achchhd  kaprd  nikali-k,  having  brought  out  the  best  (lit.  better  than  all) 
clothes. 

The  Genitive  postposition  is  kb.  It  is  an  adjective,  and  is  treated  exactly  like  the 
Hindi  kd.  In  the  masculine  singular  its  oblique  form  is  ka,  and  its  plural  (direct  and 
oblique)  also  kd.  Its  feminine  for  all  cases  of  both  numbers  is  ki.  Thus : 

ik-kb  ndm  euni-k  dusro  jaldb-chhayo , hearing  the  name  of  one.  the  other  was  . 
burning  (H,  1). 
vox,.  IX,  pabt  IV. 


2 o 2 


284 


GARHWALl. 


awarg-kd  biruddh,  against  heaven. 
per-kd  mure , under  a tree  (II,  1). 

dhord-kd  ban-ka  jdntcdr,  the  animals  of  the  forest  of  the  vicinity  (I,  1). 
ndch-ki  dtoajy  the  noise  of  dancing. 

The  Genitive  governed  by  pda  is  sometimes  used  after  a verb  of  speaking,  although 
the  Locative  with  tnd  is  the  most  usual  idiom.  Thus  : — 

wai-n  tcai-kd  pas  bolyo , he  said  to  him  (thy  brother  is  come). 

As  examples  of  the  Locative  we  have:  — 

jetho  naunydl  khet-md  chhayo,  the  elder  son  was  in  the  hold. 
apnd  khetu-md  bhejyb , lie  sent  him  into  his  fields. 
gala-par  lipti-k  chntnyo,  clinging  on  liis  neck,  he  kissed  (him). 

2 Id  sometimes  means  ‘ on  ’ and  par  ‘ in.'  Thus : — 

ice-ki  pith-mu,  kdllii  dhar,  put  the  saddle  on  his  back. 

merb  baba  ice  chhbtd  ghar-par  rahadin , my' father  lives  in  that  small  house. 

After  a verb  of  speaking  the  regular  form  is  the  Locative  with  tnd,  as  in  chhbtd 
naunyal-an  apnd  bdbd-jl-md  bole , the  younger  son  said  to  his  father.  See,  however,  the 
Dative  and  the  Genitive. 

“ From-among  ” is  md-n,  as  in  maisani  apnd  uaukaru-md-n  ek-kd  bardbar  bandied , 
make  me  as  one  from  among  your  servants. 

Adjectives- — Except  tadbhava  adjectives  in  b,  all  adjectives  are  immutable. 
Tadbhava  adjectives  in  b change  the  termination  to  l when  agreeing  with  a feminine 
noun.  When  agreeing  with  a masculine  noun  in  the  plural  or  in  any  case  of  the 
singular  except  the  nominative  (including  the  accusative  when  the  same  in  form  as  the 
nominative)  the  b is  changed  to  d.  Thus  : — 
bhalo  ddml,  a good  man. 
bhald  ddml , good  men. 
bhald  adml-kb,  of  a good  man. 
bhall  jandni,  a good  woman. 
bhall  jandni,  good  women. 

Comparison  is  made,  as  usual,  by  putting  the  thing  with  which  comparison  is 
made  in  the  ablative  case.  Examples  are  given  above  under  tlic  head  of  the  ablative. 

.PRONOUNS. 

(«)  Personal  Pronouns.— 

The  first  two  Personal  Pronouns  are  declined  as  follows: — 

Singular. 


Nominative 

mat,  or  mi,  I 

tu,  thou 

Agent 

mal-n 

ti-n 

Genitive 

merb 

terb 

Obi.  Form 

mat,  mi 

ttoe,  txoai 

Plural. 

Nominative 

ham , hamu 

turn,  tumu 

Agent 

ham-an 

tum-an 

Genitive 

h xmdro 

tumor  o 

Obi.  Form 

ham,  hamu 

turn,  tumu. 

STANDARD  DIALECT. 


285 


In  the  above,  the  plural  is  commonly  employed  honorifically  for  the  singular.  The 
nasal  of  mat  and  mi  is  frequently  dropped,  so  that  we  also  often  have  mat  and  mi. 
Examples  of  the  use  of  these  two  pronouns  are  the  following : — 

ab  tu  mat  dpas-md  lard \ kari-k  dekhuld,  now  you  (and)  I between  ourselves 
having  done  lighting  will  see  (who  is  the  stronger)  (II,  2). 
mat  phir  dp-kd  naunydl  bdlan  Idyak  ni  chhaS,  I am  no  longer  worthy  to  be 
called  Your  Honour’s  son. 

mi  Ihoar-kd  mandir  ujdri  sakdu , I can  destroy  the  temple  of  God  (Matt, 
xxvi,  01). 

tiro  ndm  tnai-n  pahile-te  sun  rakhe-chhayd , I heard  your  name  from  Ion"  a"o 

(n,2). 

maisaui  aptid  tiaukaru-md-n  ek-kd  hardbar  bandied,  make  me  as  one  of  thy 
servants. 

mai-ku  bari  khusi  hoi,  great  pleasure  has  become  to  me,  I am  very  glad  (IT,  2). 
jo  tu  chdi  ta  ml-ku  saphd  kari  sakdi,  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make  me  clean 
(Matt,  viii,  2). 

merd  bdp  Idkhrd  kdtan-ku  jdyE-chha,  my  father  has  gone  to  cut  sticks  (II,  2). 
ham  khawa,  let  us  eat. 

ham-an  tumdrd  wdstd  basuli  bajdi,  we  played  the  flute  for  you  (Matt.  xi,  17). 
hamu-ku  dukh  den-kd  wdstd  di,  art  thou  come  to  torment  us  (Matt,  viii,  29)  ? 
hamdri  chhid-kd  bhair  jdwd,  depart  from  our  border  (Matt,  viii,  34). 
tu  sadd  hamara-hi  sdth  chhai,  thou  art  always  with  me. 
ti-n  wd  kai-te  mol  leyd,  from  whom  didst  thou  buy  that  ? 

tiro  bdp  twai-kd  badld  dclo,  thy  Father  will  give  recompense  to  thee  (Matt, 
vi,  6). 

jo  turn  manttshyau'kd  aparddhau-ku  kshamd  karydi,  ta  tumdrd  bdp  tum-ku 
kslutmd  karld,  if  ye  forgive  men  their  trespasses,  your  Father  will  forgive  you 
(Matt,  vi,  14). 

turn- an  wai-kd  wdstd  achcliho  khdno  kare,  you  made  a feast  for  him. 
turn  pichhdri  kai-kd  ttaund  aunu  chha,  whose  boy  comes  behind  you? 
mi  tumu-md  such  bdldit,  I say  truth  to  you  (Matt,  viii,  11). 

(6)  The  Respectful  Pronoun  of  the  second  jjerson  is  dp.  Your  Honour,  which 
is  declined  regularly.  Thus,  dp-kd  samne  pdp  kare,  (I)  did  sin  before  Your  Honour  ; 
dp-an  matsani  vi  deyd,  Your  Honour  did  not  give  to  me. 

(a)  The  Demonstrative  Pronouns  are  also  employed  as  pronouns  of  the  third 
person.  In  the  singular  they  have  different  forms  for  the  masculine  and  the  feminine. 
They  are  declined  as  follows : — 


This, 

he,  she,  it. 

Singular. 

That,  he,  she, 

it. 

Ma*c. 

Fein. 

Masc. 

>\*m. 

Nom. 

y° 

yd 

ico,  o 

wd 

Obi. 

ye,  yai 

yt 

Plural. 

tee , icai 

id 

Nom. 

ye>  yb 

tco,  b , we 

Obi. 

yu 

wu,  u 

286  garhwalI. 

Examples  of  the  use  of  these  pronouns  are  : — 
yd  kya  chha , wliat  is  this  ? 

yd  merd  larko  mari-chhayo,  this  my  son  had  died. 
yd  sard  Iris tat\  all  this  occurrence  (II,  4). 
yd  mpyd  we-san*  di-de , give  this  rupee  to  him. 
yd  mail  gal  rdrttd,  this  gospel  (fern.)  (Matt,  xxvi,  13). 
ye  Molt,  in  the  meanwhile  (II,  1). 
ye  samsdr-ma,  in  this  world  (II,  5). 

ye  ditye  nait/id  ek  terd  daind  hat  ar  ek  terd  bayd  hat  bailhait,  may  these  two 
sons  sit,  one  on  Thy  right  hand,  and  one  on  Thy  left  hand  (Matt,  xx, 
21). 

tumd  yd  sab  dekhda-chhaydt,  ye  see  all  these  (Matt,  xxiv,  2). 

ye  bat  a kab  holt,  when  will  these  things  he  (Matt,  xxiv,  3)  ? 

yjj  sab  kirau-saui  hamard  birdld-ku  de-de,  give  all  these  insects  to  our  cat  (II,  4). 

rod  hull  sdtu-ku  khdi-gaye,  lie  ate  up  all  the  sattu  (II,  1). 

d icai-des-kd  raha a wd lau-md-n  ek-kd  yakh  jdl-k  toakh  rahan  lagyo,  having 
gone  to  one  of  the  inhabitants  of  that  country,  he  began  to  dwell  there. 
tod  nthi-k  toai-ki  shod  karan  tagl,  she  having  arisen  began  to  do  service  to  him 
(Matt,  viii,  15). 
toai-deS-kd,  as  above. 
tee  khtib  mar,  beat  him  well. 

ice-kn  ek  talau  mile,  to  him  a lake  was  met,  he  came  across  a lake  (II,  1). 

toe-n  fdtu-sanl  dul-dinyd,  be  threw  the  sattu  (II,  1). 

toe  blr-kl  ntd,  the  sleep  of  that  hero  (II,  1). 

ici-ki  md  bhair  di,  her  mother  came  outside  (II.  2). 

blr-an  wi-nauui-te  rastd  pnchlie,  the  hero  asked  the  road  from  that  girl  (II,  2). 
ice-te  ted  rttpyd  (fern.)  li-le,  take  those  rupees  from  him. 
bjhot  ti-kii  bheji-deld,  they  will  at  once  send  them  (Matt,  xxi,  3). 
ii-n  tcai-mu  bolyd,  they  said  unto  him  (Matt,  xxi,  lti). 

d ® chhimiyau-te  pel  bharno  chandd-chhayo,  he  Avas  Avislung  to  fill  his  belly 
Avith  those  husks. 

mat  v.thl-k  aped  buba-ji-pas  jaulo , aur  fi-kd  pas  hollo,  I having  arisen  will  go 
to  my  lather,  and  willjsay  unto  him  (plur.  of  respect). 

(d)  The  Reflexive  Pronoun  is  dp,  self,  which  is  used,  as  in  Hind!,  only  with 
reference  to  the  subject  of  the  sentence.  Its  genitive  is  apno,  its  oblique  plural  is  dphti. 
The  locative  plural  is  apas-md,  amongst  themselves.  Thus  : — 

o apttd  bdbd-jt  pds  chalyd,  he  went  to  his  father. 

* 

apnd-upnd  gharwaiau-'md  bole,  (each)  said  to  his  own  family  (II,  4). 
aplift-dphtf-lcii  chhdld  jdm-k,  each  considering  himself  (to  be)  small  (II,  4). 
dpbtt-ku  kuchh  basin  mi  samjhbk,  not  considering  themselves  anything  (II,  5). 
tu  mat  apas-md  lardi  kari  k dekhtdd,  you  (and  I)  having  fought  amongst  our- 
selves Avill  see  (II,  2). 

{e)  The  Relative  Pronoun  is  jo,  avIio,  and  its  Correlative  is  so,  he,  she,  it, 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


287 


that.  These  do  not  appear  to  have  feminine  forms,  but  seem  to  be  throughout  of  common 
gender.  They  arc  declined  as  follows 

Relative.  Cobkelativh. 

Singular — 

Nom.  jb  so 

Obi.  jc,  jai  te,  tai 

Plural — 

Nom. 

Obi. 

Examples  are  as  follows  : — 

jo  vnerb  hisd  chha,  so  mat-saal  de-dewa,  what  is  my  share,  that  give  to  me. 
jai-n  aptid  khetu-md  bhejyb , who  sent  (him)  into  his  fields. 
elc  jandni-n,  jai-ku  bdra  bars-tc  rbg  chhayb,  a woman,  to  whom  from  twelve 
years  there  was  disease  (touched  the  hem  of  His  garment)  (Matt,  ix,  20). 
dhanya  b jb  mel-tnildp  karauuwdld  chhan,  blessed  are  they  who  are  peace- 
makers (Matt,  v,  9). 

chhlmiyau-te  ja'u-saiii  sun  gar  khdndd  chhayd,  with  the  husks  which  the  swine 
did  eat. 

(f)  The  Interrogative  Pronouns  are  kb,  who  ? which  ? and  kyd,  what  ? kb  is 
declined  liken'd,  as  in  : — 

kb  barb  chha,  who  is  great  ? 

kiti-kb  naunb  auau  chha,  whose  boy  is  coming  r 

tl-n  too  kai-te  mol  leyb,  from  whom  didst  thou  buy  that  ? 

For  kyd,  we  have  :—yb  k yd  chha  ? what  is  this  ? 

Its  oblique  form  is  he,  as  in  : 

ke-te  luijiu  karllb,  wherewith  will  it  be  salted  (Matt,  v,  13)  ? 

tu  ke-ldl  at,  for  what  (i.e.  wherefore)  didst  thou  come  (Matt,  xxvi,  50)  ? 

(g)  The  Indefinite  Pronouns  are  kul  or  ktol,  anyone,  someone,  any,  some,  and 
kichhu  (or  kichhu)  or  kuchh,  anything,  something.  The  oblique  form  of  kwl  is  kai. 
Kuchh , as  a substantive,  does  not  change  in  declension.  When  used  as  an  adjective, 
the  oblique  form  of  kuchh  is  kai,  kui  or  kwl.  Examples  are  : — 

jb  kul  tumu-te  kichhu  puchhlo,  if  any  man  shall  ask  you  (Matt,  xxi,  3). 
kwi  (plur.)  t oaisanl  kuchh  m dendd  chhayd,  any  persons  were  not  giving  any- 
thing to  him. 

tu  kai-ko  khatgo  ni  rakhdl,  thou  carest  not  for  anyone  (Matt,  xxii,  16). 
jb  kul  kiird-md  chha,  so  aptid  bhitra-te  kichhtt  c biz-bast  lea-kit  nd  ntar,  "who- 
ever is  on  the  housetop,  let  him  not  go  down  to  take  anything  out  of  his 
house  (Matt,  xxiv,  17). 

kai  bat -kb  ghamand  ni  karnb  chdindb,  it  is  not  right  to  be  proud  ol  anything 
(11,6). 

kul  bat-kd  toast d,  for  anything  (Matt,  xviii,  19). 


jb  so 

jau  tad 


238 


GARHWALl. 


jo  kuioxjo  him,  as  above,  is  “ whoever  ” and  jo  Jeichhn  or  jo  ktickh  is  “ what- 
ever ” as  in : — * 

jo  kichhii  turn  duniyd-ma  bdndhalyd , whatever  ye  shall  bind  on  earth  (Matt, 
xviii,  18). 

jo  kuchh  mero  chha,  d sab  tero  cliha , whatever  is  mine  is  thine. 

(h)  Other  pronominal  forms  occurring  in  the  specimens  are  : — 
yakh,  here. 
toakh , there. 

katnd , hat  yd,  how  many  ? (plural). 
itnd,  so  many  (plural). 


CONJUGATION. 


A— Auxiliary  Verbs  and  Verbs  Substantive. 


The  Present  is : — 


Singular. 


Plural. 


(1)  chhau , chhau,  I am  chliatcdU,  we  are. 

(2)  chhal,  thou  art  chhaym , you  are. 

(3)  chha , he  or  she  is  chlian , they  are. 

The  Past  is  masc.  sing,  chhayo,  plur.  chhayd  ; fern.  sing,  and  plur.  chhal,  for  all 
three  persons. 

Examples  of  the  use  of  these  tenses  are  : — 

kyd  bolddn  ki  ml,  jo  niannshya-kb  pntra  chhau,  kb  chlian,  what  do  they  say 
that  I,  who  am  the  sou  of  man,  am  (Matt,  xvi,  13)  ? 
dp-lco  naunydl  bolan  Idyak  til  chhau,  I am  not  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son. 
tu  soda  hamara-hl  sdtli  chhal,  thou  art  ever  with  me. 
yd  kyd  chha,  what  is  this  ? 

naurii  marl  til  chha,  the  maid  is  not  dead  (Matt,  ix,  23). 

ham  Terl  srishti-md  sab-te  chhbtd  chhawdu,  in  Thy  creation  we  are  the  small- 
est of  all  things. 

kyd  tumu  U-te  bard  n*  chhaydl,  what,  arc  ye  not  greater  than  they  (Matt. 


vi,  26)  ? 

dhanya  b jo  bhula  clihan , blessed  are  they  who  are  meek  (Matt,  v,  5). 
jetho  naunydl  khet-md  chhayo,  the  elder  son  was  in  the  field. 
kai  ddml-kd  did  naunydl  chhayd,  of  a certain  man  there  were  two  sous. 
terd  milan-ki  baft  chdh  chhal,  there  was  a great  desire  of  thy  meeting,  i.e. 
to  meet  thee  (IT,  2). 

Intide  janane  jo  wai-kd  pichhdrl  al  chhal,  many  women  who  were  come  after 
him  (Matt,  xxvii,  55). 

B — Active  Verb  — The  Infinitive  or  Verbal  Noun  has  two  forms,  a weak  and 
a strong.  The  strong  form  is  made  by  adding  no  to  the  root.  Thus,  khd-no,  to  eat,  the 
act  of  eating.  If  the  root  of  the  verb  ends  in  «,  r,  r or  l,  then  no  is  added  instead  of 
po,  thus,  janno,  not  jdnnb,  to  know  ; mar  nb,  not  mar  no,  to  strike;  lafnb,  not  lafnot 
to  fight ; bolno,  not  bolnb,  to  say. 

The  weak  infinitive  is  made  by  adding  a\i  or,  after  a vowel, n to  the  root.  Asm 
the  case  of  the  strong  infinitive,  this  becomes  n after  n,  r,  r,  or  l.  Thus,  kapap , to 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


289 

tremble  ; khan,  to  eat ; jdnan,  to  know*  mdran,  to  strike ; la  ran,  to  fight ; and  bolan,  to 
say.  So  far  as  I have  noted,  this  weak  form  is  only  used  in  an  oblique  ease. 

Some  infinitives  of  verbs  whose  roots  end  in  a,  end  in  anno  and  ann.  Thus  from 
the  root  chard,  graze,  we  liayo  charauno,  and  from  d,  come,  we  have  auub.  Buty«,  go, 
has  jano,  and  khd,  eat,  khano. 

The  following  are  examples  of  these  infinitives  : — 

(а)  Strong  forms. 

apiib  pet  bharnb  chdndb-chhayo,  he  was  wishing  to  fill  his  belly. 
bhltar  jaiio  ni  chdyb,  he  wished  not  to  go  inside. 

achchhd  khdiib  kare , (you)  made  good  feast.  Here  khano  is  a pure  verbal 
noun. 

dnand  karnb  aur  khuii  rah  no  chdindb  chhayo,  to  do  rejoicing  and  to  remain 
happy  was  proper. 

ghamaml  nl  karno  chdindo,  to  act  proudly  is  not  proper  (II,  5). 

(б)  Weak  forms.  These  are  specially  common  as  infinitives  of  purpose. 
anngar  charauu-kd  bhcjyd,  (lie)  sent  (him)  to  graze  swine. 
khdn-te  jddd  rbti,  bread  more  than  eating  {i.e.  than  can  be  eaten). 
laran-kd  gaye,  he  went  to  fight  (II,  1). 

pant  pen-kd  dyen,  they  came  to  drink  water  (II,  1). 

pani  dhundan-ku  chall  gaye,  they  went  away  to  seek  water  (II,  1). 

pant  ni  milan-te,  owing  to  not  finding  water  (II,  1). 

Idkhrd  kdtan-ku  jdyU-chha,  lie  has  gone  to  cut  sticks  (II,  2). 

terd  milan-ki  bari  chdh  chhai,  there  was  a great  desire  to  see  thee  (IT,  2). 

This  form  is  common  in  inceptive  compounds,  as  in  : — 

ek-kd  yakh  jdi-k  wakh  rahan  lagyb.  going  near  one,  he  began  to  remain  there. 

dnand  karan  lagyb,  he  began  to  do  rejoicing. 

tnanann  lagyb,  he  (plur.  of  respect)  began  to  entreat. 

batliau  hint  lagyb-clihayb,  a storm  had  begun  to  be  (II,  I). 

kapun  lagyb,  they  began  to  tremble  (II,  I). 

The  Present  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  the  syllable  do  to  the  root.  Thus, 
mdrdo,  striking.  Its  feminine  is  mdrdi.  After  a long  vowel,  the  termination  is  mid, 
as  in  khd-ndo,  eating.  Sometimes,  instead  of  this  form  we  meet  a form  borrowed  from 
Kumauni  which  ends  in  nit  ( nil , after  n,  r,  r,  or  l),  with  a feminine  ni  {ni).  Tims, 
marnd,  fcm.  tndrni.  Jlfdrdb  and  nuirnCt  are  declined  like  tadbhava  nouns  in  b,  with 
an  oblique  singular  in  d ( mbrdd , mama),  and  the  feminines  like  nouns  in  i with  the 
plural  in  l or  e {mdrdi  or  mdrde,  mb  mi  or  mdrne). 

The  verb  rahno,  to  remain,  has  its  present  participle  rahadb,  rondo,  rah  if  n or  rand; 
and  amio,  to  come,  has  aundo  or  amiu. 

Examples  of  the  present  participle  will  be  found  under  the  head  of  the  present 
and  imperfect  tenses.  Hero  it  will  ho  sufficient  to  notice  a weak  form  of  the  present 
participle,  made  by  dropping  the  final  o,  and  used  adverbially. 

jab  ghar  annd  ghar-ka  najik pauchhyo,  while  coming  (amid)  home,  when  lie 
arrived  near  the  house. 

The  Past  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  e (after  a rowel,  ye),  yb  or  yfi  to  the  root. 
Thus,  mdr-e,  tndr-yb , or  indr-yu,  struck.  Thcro  are,  as  usual,  some  irrcgulai  ones.  ^ thus, 

VOL.  IX,  PAST  IV.  ? 


290 


gauhwAlI. 


deud,  to  give,  makes  deyo,  diyo , or  dinyo.  So  let. w,  to  take.  Karno,  to  do,  has  both 
karyo  ancl  kittyd.  Jdno,  to  go,  lias  gayo  or  gyd.  The  plural  masculine  of  the  past  parti- 
ciple ends  in  yd  or  ya  (mar yd,  mdrya),  and  the  feminine  of  both  numbers  in  i or  ? 
(marl,  mart). 

Examples  of  the  Past  Participle  will  be  found  under  the  head  of  the  past  tense. 
Here  we  may  give  : — 

khoye  gal-chhayb,  he  had  gone  lost,  i.e.  he  was  lost. 

jo  kichhu  tumu  ditniyd-md  handily d so  stoarg-md  hdndyxL  raid , ar  jo  kiclihu 
tumn  duniya-md  kholilyd  so  stoarg-md  khollyu  raid,  whatever  yo  shall  bind 
on  earth  shall  remain  bound  in  heaven,  and  ivhatever  yo  shall  loose  on  earth 
shall  remain  loosed  in  heaven  (Matt,  xviii,  18).  Here  khollyu  is  the  past 
participle  of  the  passive  verb  khdlino , to  be  loosed. 

o kurchya  nalturau  m to  rib,  bruised  reeds  shall  He  not  break  (Matt,  xii,  20). 

tnarya  apod  maryau-ku  lchadyaun  de,  let  the  dead  bury  their  dead  (Matt, 
viii,  22). 

did  j amine  ekdjadrd  pisan  lagi  rail,  two  women  shall  remain  engaged  to  grind 
at  one  mill  (Matt,  xxiv,  41). 

The  Future  Passive  Participle  is  the  same  in  form  as  the  strong  infinitive. 
Thus,  mar  no,  about  to  be  struck,  fern,  marni.  It  is  used  as  a futuro  passive  tense  in 
phrases  such  as  hamdrl  hdr-jit  (fern.)  kai-njdnni  (fern.),  our  defeat  (and)  victory  by 
whom  is  to  be  known,  i.e.  who  will  know  it  (II,  2). 

The  Conjunctive  Participle  is  formed  bv  adding  i to  the  root,  as  mart,  having 
struck.  To  this  k (the  same  as  (he  Hindi  ke)  is  usually  added.  Thus,  mdri-k,  having 
struck.  The  verb  hbnb,  to  become,  makes  hbi-k  or  hioai-k,  and  karno,  to  do,  makes  kari-k 
or  kai-k.  Numerous  examples  of  this  participle  will  be  found  in  the  specimens.  AVe 
may  quote : — 

urdi  diye,  having  caused  to  fly  he  gave,  i.e.  he  squandered. 

sab  katthd  kari-k  dur  des  chali  gayo,  having  collected  everything,  he  went 
away  to  a far  country. 

The  Noun  of  Agency  is  form  d by  adding  toalo  to  the  weak  infinitive.  Thus, 
maran-wdlo,  a striker.  So  : — 

wai  deS-kd  rahn ntcdla ii-md-n,  from  among  the  inhabitants  of  that  country. 

bou-ka  jdnwar  rbj-kd  aimwdld,  animals  of  the  forest  who  used  to  come  every  day. 

The  Imperative  second  person  singular  is  the  same  in  form  as  the  root.  Thus, 
mar,  strike ; ho,  become ; dhar,  place ; de,  give ; le,  take ; dekh,  behold  ! The  second 
person  plural  adds  d.  Thus,  tndrd,  strike  ye  ; nikdld,  take  ye  out ; de-dewa,  give  (plural 
of  respect) ; bandwd,  make  (plural  of  respect) ; pairatod,  clollie  ye;  dekhd,  see  (plural  of 
respect) . llahnb,  to  remain,  makes  its  second  plural  rated,  as  in  ye-i  toast d chaukas  rated, 
for  this  very  reason  remain  ye  alert  (Matt,  xxv,  13). 

The  Old  Present,  usually  employed  as  a Present  Subjunctive,  or  as  an 
Imperative,  is  thus  conjugated 


Sing. 

Plor. 

1. 

marU 

mar  a 

2. 

mdtl 

maryai,  mard 

3. 

mar 

mar  an 

STANDARD  DIALECT. 


291 


Bahno,  to  remain,  has  1st  singular  rail.  Examples  of  this  tense  are 

jo  ml  sirp  toai-kl  latta-ku  chhuU,  if  I may  but  touch  His  garment  (Matt,  ix,  21). 
ml  tumard  dagrd  saddne  nl  rail,  I do  not  remain  with  you  always  (Matt,  xxvi,  11). 
jab  tu  brat  hart , when  thou  makest  a fast  (Matt,  vi,  17). 

jo  tu  chdi , ta  tnl-ku  sapha  Jcarl  sakdl,  if  Thou  wilt,  Thou  canst  make  me  clean 
(Matt,  yiii,  2). 

so  apnd  bhitra-te  Icichhu  chiz-baat  len-ku  nd  fit  or,  let  him  not  descend  to  take 
any  of  his  proporty  from  within  (Matt,  xxiv,  10). 
ham  khawd,  dnand  kara,  let,  us  eat,  let  us  rejoice.  In  khdica  a euphonic  to  has 
been  introduced  between  the  two  d’s. 

jo  turn  manmhyau-kd  ajtarddhau-kii  kshamd  karydt,  if  ye  forgive  men  their 
trespasses  (Matt,  vi,  14). 
jo  turn  py dr  kara,  if  yc  love  (Matt,  v,  40). 

jab  turn  brat  lewd,  when  ye  take  (up)  a fast  (Matt,  vi,  16).  Here  again  we 
have  euphonic  w. 

u-n  tcai-md  bblyd  he  Prabhu,  ki  hamdrd  akhd  tight-/  jdwan,  he  said  unto  Him, 
‘Lord,  that  my  eyes  may  be  opened’  (Matt,  xx,  30). 

The  Present  tense  lias  two  forms.  The  first  is  made  by  conjugating  the  present 
participle  with  the  present  tense  of  the  verb  substantive  as  in  Hindi.  Thus,  mdrdo  chhau 
or  mdrnii  chim'd,  I am  striking.  The  following  examples  have  been  noted:  — 

wo  i Uidr-md  gdrii  charaunu  chha,  he  is  grazing  cattle  on  the  hill  (sentence  229). 
kiii-ku  nannb  aunu  chha,  whose  boy  is  coming?  (sentence  239'. 
kyd  tumu  yd  sab  dekhdd  chliayd'i,  do  ye  see  all  these  (Matt,  xxiv,  2)  ? 

Much  more  common  is  the  other  form,  made  by  suffixing  terminations  to  the 
present  participle.  Tt  is  thus  conjugated : — 

Sin>;.  Plur. 


1.  mdrdn  mdrddtra,  nidrddU,  mardau 

2.  mb  nil  mdrdbiob,  martial 

3.  mdrd  mdrdin,  mdrdiiit. 

Examples  of  the  use  of  this  form  of  the  tense  are : — 

mai  bhukh-le  itiardu,  I am  dying  of  hunger. 

mat  ilnd  barsau-te  dp-kl  seted  kardu,  from  so  many  years 


am 


doing 


Your 


Honour’s  service. 

tv  ml-ku  sapha  hart  sakdi,  Thou  canst  make  me  clean  (Matt,  viii,  2). 
ham  jdndau  ki  tu  saohchb  chhat,  ar  sachchdl-tc  Parameswar-kd  bald  bataundl, 
ar  tu  kai-ko  kliatgb  m rakhdt,  wo  know  that  Thou  art  true,  and  sliowcst  the 
way  of  God  with  truth,  and  carest  not  for  anyone  (Matt,  xxii,  1G). 
rotl  pakd,  bread  is  being  cooked. 

jo  Daud  wai-kii  prabhu  bold,  if  David  calls  him  Lord  (Matt,  xxii,  45). 
janu  ham  apnd  kasurwdlaii-kii  kshamd  harden,  as  we  forgive  them  that  trespass 
against  us  (Matt,  vi,  12). 
ham  jatidau,  above. 

(No  examples  are  available  for  the  forms  mardbwa  and  ntdrddtcb .) 

ke-lai  jandnl-ku  dukh  dendai,  why  trouble  ye  the  woman  (Matt,  xxvi,  10)  ? 
turn  kyd  chbndal,  what  do  you  want  (Matt,  xx,  32)  .J 

2 p 2 

VOL.  K,  PART  IV. 


292 


garhwAl!. 


merd  baba  (plural  of  respect)  toe  chhofa  ghar-par  r aha  din , my  father  lives  in 
that  small  house. 

garlb  lok  t limit  dagre  saddne  randan , the  poor  always  remain  with  you  (Matt, 
xxvi,  11). 

dhanya  d jo  Sok  karddn , blessed  are  they  that  mourn  (Matt,  v,  4). 
adtni  kyd  bolddn,  what  do  men  say  (Matt,  xvi,  13)  ? 

The  Imperfect  tense  is  formed,  as  in  Hindi,  by  suffixing  the  past  tense  of  the  verb 
substantive  to  the  present  participle.  Both  the  participle  and  the  auxiliary  verb  change 
for  gender  and  number,  but  not  for  person. 

Examples  only  of  the  third  person  are  available  : — 

pet  bhurno  chdndo-chhayb,  a nr  kwi  tcai-sani  kuchh  ni  dendd-chhayd,  he  was 
wishing  to  fill  liis  belly,  and  no  persons  were  giving  him  anything. 
ek-kb  ndnt  steni-k  dusrb  jaldb-chliayb,  hearing  the  name  of  one,  the  other  was 
burning  (II,  1). 

apnd  ghar-ku  aunu-chhayb,  lie  was  coming  to  bis  own  home  (II,  2). 
pa4cliim-kd  btr-ki  vaunt  sdtti  kutni-chhad,  the  daughter  of  the  western  hero  was 
pounding  paddy  (II,  2). 

jau-sanl  suit  gar  khdndu-ch  hay  a,  (the  husks)  which  the  swine  were  eating. 
dwijandni  aatli  kutiu-chhal,  two  women  were  pounding  vice  (II,  4). 

As  in  Hindi,  rayb  (fern,  rat),  the  past  participle  of  ruhnb,  to  remain,  is  sometimes 
substituted  for  chhayd. 

Thus : — 

wakh  bhinde  jandne  dekhde-rai,  there  many  women  were  watching  (Matt, 
xxvii,  55). 

The  present  participle  by  itself  is  employed,  as  in  Hindi,  to  perform  the  office  of  a 

Past  Conditional. 

Thus : — 

lei  mat  apnd  mitru-kd  sdtli  dnand  kardo,  that  I might  have  done  rejoicing  with 

my  friends. 

«• 

The  Future  Tense  is  thus  conjugated. 

Its  feminine  differs  from  masculine  : — 

SlNO.  Tixe. 


Maso. 

Fem . 

Maso. 

Fem. 

1. 

mdrulo,  murid 

maruli,  tnarli 

maru/ci,  marl<i 

mbrnli,  mdrli 

0 

4m  1 

mdrilyo,  mdrild 

mdrili 

mdrihjd,  mdrild 

mdrili 

3. 

murid 

mdrli 

murid 

mdrli 

Verbs  whose  roots  end  in  vowels  present  slight  irregularities,  which  will  appear,  so 
far  as  they  have  been  noted,  in  the  following  examples.  The  nasal  in  the  first  person 
is  quite  commonly  omitted,  and  the  rowel  u is  also  often  lengthened,  so  that  we  get 
forms  like  mdrnld,  mdrulo,  etc.  The  masculine  is  o^ten  carelessly  used  for  the  feminine. 
tab  mat  u-md  khbli-k  bdlnlo,  I will  say  unto  them  openly  (Matt,  vii,  23). 
mat  apnd  bdbd-ji  pus  jaulb.  aur  ft-kd  bblld,  I will  go  near  my  father,  and  will 
say  unto  him. 

ftim  dtoiyau-ki  lardi-kd  dekhuld,  I will  see  the  fighting  of  you  two  (II*  3)« 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


293 


tab  nikdli  dSlo,  then  I will  extract  (it)  (II,  4).  A woman  is  speaking,  and 
here  the  masculine  is  used  instead  of  the  feminine. 
mi  tumu-ku  manushyau-ko  muohhwal  banaulb,  I will  make  you  a fisher  of  men 
(Matt,  iv,  19). 

apnd  bhdl-kd  akha-te  kargat-ku  gddnu  dekhilyo,  thou  wilt  see  to  take  the  mote 
from  thy  brother's  eye  (Matt,  vii,  5). 

appi  bdtu-te  nirdbshi  thardyd  jail  yd,  by  thy  words  thou  shalt  be  justified 

(Matt,  xii,  37). 

jb  toe  khar  mai-kd-hi  de-d<ili,  if  thou  (fern.)  wilt  give  to  me  alone  that  grass  (IT,  4). 
tum-ku  paoitra  dtmd  aur  dg-te  baptismd  delb . Wai-kd  lidth-par  supb  chha  ; 
apnd  klialydn  khub  punlb,  aur  gehii  apnd  bhanddr-md  katthd  karlb , par 
bukhd-kd  tot  dg-md  jo  ni  manjdl  phuklb , lie  shall  baptise  you  with  the  Holy 
Ghost  and  with  fire.  A fan  is  in  His  hand  ; He  will  thoroughly  purge  His 
threshing-floor;  and  the  wheat  He  will  gather  into  his  garner,  but  the  chaff 
He  will  burn  up  with  unquenchable  lire  (Matt,  iii,  11,  12). 
ml  apnb  dtmd  wai-par  d/iarulb,  ar  o pradesynu-kd  nydu  batldlo.  No.  ojhagrd 
karlb , na  dhuni-dhdm  maclidlb,  na  bal-nid  knl  wai-ki  back  aunlb.  O kurchya, 
naltnrau  hi  ni  to rlo  ar  dhnwdlb  bdthlb  hi  ni  majdiclb,  jawdre  tai  nydti-kd 
jit-kd  wdstd  ni  bhejlb.  J r wai-kd  nan-par  prad esl-lbk  dsrb  ralchld,  I will 
put  my  Spirit,  upon  Him,  and  He  shall  declare;  judgment  to  the  Gentiles. 
He  shall  not  strive  nor  cry  aloud  ; neither  shall  any  hear  His  voice  in  the 
streets.  Bruised  reeds  shall  He  not  break,  and  smoking  flax  shall  He  not 
quench,  till  He  send  forth  judgment  unto  victory.  And  in  His  name  shall 
the  Gentiles  hope  (Matt,  xii,  18-21). 
bandytt  raid,  it  will  remain  bound  (Matt,  xviii,  IS). 

ftpas-md  lard*  kari-k  dekhuld,  having  fought  amongst  ourselves  we  shall  see 

(IT,  2). 

basti-md  jauld,  tcakh  larttld,  we  shall  go  into  the  village,  there  shall  we  fight 


(H,  ->)• 

ham  kyd  khauld,  kyd  pyuld,  kyd  pairld,  what  shall  we  eat,  what  shall  we  drink, 
what  shall  we  wear  (Malt,  vi,  25)  ? 

ham  yekhi  tin  derd  ban  a uld,  we  shall  even  here  make  three  tabernacles  (Matt, 
xvii,  4). 


tcai-ku  pdilyd , ye  shall  find  him  (Matt,  ii,  8). 

tumu  ye-}  dadd-te  hi  bold  yd ar  sab  kichhn  jo  tumu  binti-md 

bid  teds  kai-k  rndgilyd  so  pdilyd,  til)  yi>  "iii  say  even  to  this  very  mountain 
. . . and  all  things  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  prayer,  believing,  ye  shall 


receive  (Matt,  xxi,  21,  22). 

toai  din-nid  bhinde  mai-nui  bblld,  in  that  day  many  shall  say  unto  me  (Matt, 
vii,  22). 

o din  did  ki  bandrd  U-te  liyd  jdlb,  those  days  will  come  when  the  bridegroom 
shall  be  taken  away  from  them  (Matt,  ix,  15). 
dui  jandne  ekd  jddrd  pisan  lag  i- rail,  ek  pakryd  jail,  ar  ek  chhuti  ,/dli,  two 
- women  shall  be  grinding  at  one  mill ; and  one  shall  be  taken  and  the  other 

left  (Matt,  xxiv,  41). 


294  ^akhwAlI. 

The  Past  Tense  and  all  other  tonscs  formed  from  the  Past  Participle  are 
construed  almost  exactly  as  in  Hindi ; i.e.  in  the  case  of  Transitive  verbs,  the  subject 
is  put  in  the  agent  case,  and,  when  mutable,  the  verb  agrees  in  gender  and  number  with 
the  object.  The  construction  differs  from  Hindi  and  follows  Rajasthani  and  Gujarati 
in  this,  that  the  verb  agrees  in  gender  and  number  with  the  object,  even  when  the 
latter  is  in  the  dative  case. 

Intransitive  verbs  are,  on  the  other  hand,  construed  actively. 

There  are  two  forms  of  the  Past  tense.  The  first  form  is  made  with  the  past 
participle  in  e (mare).  This  form  does  not  further  change  for  gender  in  the  singular. 
In  the  plural  n is  added.  Thus  we  have: — 

(a)  Singular  Transitive  Verbs  : — 
mai-n  pap  kare , I did  sin. 

apijt  lirsat  bat  diye,  he  divided  his  property. 

bdbd-ji-n  apnd  naukrau-te  bole,  the  father  said  to  his  servants  (note  that  bolno 
is  transitive). 

ndch-ki  avadj  sttne , he  heard  the  noise  of  dancing. 
pitd-ji-n  b kulal-pdrbak  pdye,  the  father  got  him  in  good  health. 
tcai-n  apnd  pitd-ku  jawdb  diye,  he  gave  answer  to  his  father. 
tce-kd  phek-dine,  (he)  flung  him  away  (II,  2). 

hdthi-ku  apnd  khlsd-par  dhar-dine,  (she)  put  the  elephant  in  her  pocket 

(II.  2). 

bir-an  dadd-kb  rasta  piichhe,  the  hero  asked  the  road  of  the  mountain  (II,  2). 
blr-an  bhari  jar  lagdye,  the  hero  applied  great  force  (II,  2). 
we-lcu  rbti  (fern.)  dine,  (she)  gave  the  loaf  to  him  (II,  3). 
sabu-n  Paraniesicar-kb  dhanya  line,  all  made  thanks  of  {i.e.  to)  God  (II,  5). 
lab  id  kare,  (they)  confessed  (II,  o). 

(b)  Singular  Intransitive  Verbs: — 
barb  akal  pare , a severe  famine  fell. 
b kangdi  hoi-gay e,  he  became  poor. 
bachi-ge,  be  was  saved;  mile,  he  was  found. 
dp-kb  bhui  dye,  your  brother  came. 

jb  dp-ki  sampati  khdi-gaye,  who  ate  up  your  property. 
laran-kii  gaye,  he  went  to  fight  (II,  1). 
said  li-ge.  In*  took  away  satin  (II,  1). 
dm  pahar  tak  elude,  be  went  during  two  watches  (II,  1). 
gahro  talan  mile,  a deep  lake  was  met  (II,  1). 
bir-kd  derd  pahuclie,  he  arrived  at  the  hero’s  bouse  (II,  2). 
jab  wb  roti  kluii  chuke,  when  he  had  finished  eating  the  loaf  (II,  4). 

This  form  is  not  so  common  in  the  plural,  cither  in  transitive  or  intransitive  verbs. 
When  n is  added  to  form  the  plural  the  preceding  e is  shortened  to  e or  «,  so  that  the 
terminations  are  en  or  in.  Examples  are  : — 

Transitive : — 

aptia  kltasum-ku,  dekhlain  (from  dekhldnb),  she  shoAvcd  them  to  her*  husband 
(II.  4). 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


295 


Intransitive 

jab  said  bhijl  gayen , when  the  mttu  (plural)  was  soaked  (II,  1). 
bay-ha  jdmoar  pdni  pen-ku  dyen,  the  forest  animals  came  to  drink  water 
(11,1).  • 

lapan-ku  taydr  hoyen,  they  became  ready  for  fighting  (II,  <L). 

There  is  one  instance  of  the  feminine,  the  form  of  which  is  doubtful, — 

bandrd  milan-kd  toast d gaine , (ten  virgins)  went  to  meet  the  bridegroom 
(Matt,  xxv,  1). 

The  second  form  of  the  past  tense  is,  in  the  case  of  transitive  verbs,  simply  the 
past  participle,  agreeing,  as  already  explained,  with  the  object  in  gender  and  number. 

Thus : — 


tl-n  tod  kai-te  mol  leyo,  from  whom  didst  thou  buy  that  ? 
jai-n  b apnd  khetu-nui  bhejyd,  who  sent  him  into  his  fields. 
wai-n  bolyo , ho  said. 
toai-n  puchhyo,  he  asked. 

ulanghan  nl  lcaryo,  (I)  did  not  do  disobedience. 

dp-an  mai-sani  ek  khddu-ko  bachd  bhl  na  deyb,  Your  Honour  did  not  give  to  me 
even  a kid. 

toe-n  apni  sund-sani  (fern.)  talau-md  (lull,  he  put  his  trunk  in  the  tank  (IT,  1), 
(Fem.  object  in  dative  case). 

ek  bari  kilkdr  mart,  (the  elephant)  trumpeted  loudly  (II,  1). 
toe-n  hat  hi- hi  snnd  pakrt,  he  seized  the  trunk  of  the  elephant  (II,  2). 
toe-n  naum-te  pitch  hi,  lie  asked  the  daughter  (II,  2).  Here  the  fem.  object  is 
in  the  ablative  case. 

toe-n  sdtusam  (acc.  plur.  masc.)  tee  talau-md  dal-dinyd,  he  threw  that  sattu 
into  the  lake  (I,  1). 

budhiyd-n  apnd  kandhd-md  dlutr  dinyd , the  old  woman  placed  them  on  her 
shoulder  (II,  3). 

The  second  form  of  the  past  tense  of  an  intransitive  vei'b  has  special  forms  for  the 
first  and  second  persons,  but  the  third  person  is  the  same  as  the  past  participle.  We 
take  as  the  model  verb  chalno , to  go. 


Sing. 

chalyU 

chali 

chalyo  (fern,  chali) 


I’lur. 

cJialya,  chalyd 
clialyai,  clialyd 
chalyd  (fem.  chali) 


Examples  are — 

mat  aj  bahut  chalyft,  I walked  a long  way  to-day. 

ml  dharmyau  nd  par  pdpyau-ku  bulauii  dyif,  I came  to  call  not  the  righteous 
but  sinners  (Matt,  ix,  13). 

hamu-ku  dukh  den-kd  toast d dl,  didst  thou  come  to  torment  us  (Matt,  viii,  29)  ? 

dur  del)  chali  gayo , ho  went  away  to  a far  country. 

toakh  rahan  lagyo,  he  began  to  remain  there. 

khdbarddr  hoyb , he  became  sensible. 

apyd  babd-ji  pas  chalyo,  he  went  near  his  father. 


296 


GARHWAl!. 


gliar-kd  nhjik  pauchhyd,  he  arrived  near  the  house. 
tSro  bhdi  maryo , phir  bachyd , thy  brother  died,  again  he  escaped. 
apni  ma-kd  pas  bhdji-k  gal , she  fled  to  her  mother  (II,  2). 
tci-ki  Did  bhair  at,  her  mother  came  outside  (II,  2). 
dtoiyau-kl  bhet  hoi,  a meeting  of  the  two  took  place  (II,  2). 
ek  bud  all  mill,  an  old  woman  was  met  (II,  3). 

ted  ntlii-k  wai-kl  seicd  karan  lag!,  she  arose  and  ministered  unto  him  (Matt, 
viii,  15). 

haman  kabdri  tu  rogi  yd  kaid-md  deklil  ar  twai-mil  dya,  when  saw  we  Thee  sick 
or  in  prison  and  came  to  Thee  (Matt,  xxv,  39)  ? 
ham  teal-sin  l ke-lai  ni  nikdll  sakyd,  why  could  we  not  cast  him  out  (Matt, 
xvii,  19)  ? 

harnau  tu  kabdri  pardeti  deklil  ghar-md  Ihdyd,  when  saw  we  Thee  a traveller 
and  took  Thee  into  the  house  (Matt,  xxv,  38)  ? 
turn  kyd  dekhaij-kii  nikalyai,  what  went  ye  forth  for  to  see  (Matt,  xi,  8)  ? 
tuviu  ui  ndchya,  ye  did  not  dance  (Matt,  xi,  17). 

pita  toai  Dianaun  lagyd  (plur.  of  respect),  the  father  began  to  entreat  him. 
dwiye  basti-kd  rastd  chalyd,  both  went  on  the  road  to  the  village  (II,. 3). 
kapan  lagyd,  they  began  to  tremble  (II,  1). 

jo  taydr  chhai  tcai-kd  dagrd  bydn-md  gal,  i^the  virgins)  who  were  ready  went 
in  with  him  to  the  wedding  (Matt,  xxv,  10). 

The  Perfect  tense  is  formed,  as  in  Hindi,  by  suffixing  the  present  tense  of  the  verb 
substantive  to  the  past  participle.  Thus  : — 

Diet'd  bap  dado  jdyU-chha  (not  gayu-chha,  as  we  should  expect),  my  father  has 
gone  to  the  mountain  (II,  2). 

ham  lok  sail  kichliu  chhori-k  tern  dagrd  lagya-chhau,  we  have  left  all  and 
followed  Thee  (Matt,  xix,  27). 

The  Pluperfect  is  similarly  formed  with  the  past  tense  of  the  verb  substantive, 
as  in : — 

l era  ndni  uiai-n  pahile-te  suit  rakhe-chhayu,  I had  heard  thy  name  from  before 

(II,  2). 

bnlhau  hon  lagyd-chhayd,  a storm  had  begun  to  be  (II,  4). 

rdt-md  jab  hamu  seya-chhayd,  at  night,  while  we  slept  (Malt,  xxviii,  13). 

In  the  parable,  the  pluperfect  is,  however,  formed  by'  using  not  the  past  participle 
but  the  conjunctive  participle,  with  the  auxiliary.  Thus  : — 
bhuut  din  nt  biti-chhayd,  many  days  had  not  passed. 

yd  merd  larkd  marl-chhayo  .....  khoye  gai-ehhayd , this  my  son 

had  died had  been  lost  . 

terd  bhdi  harchl-chhayd,  thy  brother  had  been  lost. 

The  Passive  voice  is  formed  much  as  in  Hindi,  by  combining  the  past  participle 
with  the  verb  jdno,  to  go,  but  the  oblique  singular  of  the  participle  is  usually  employed. 
Thus : — 

khoye  gai-clihayd,  lie  had  been  lost. 

merd  khadyayd  jdn-kd  wants,  for  my  being  buried  (Matt,  xxvi,  12). 


standard  dialect.  297 

jakh-kakhl  yd  mangal-bdrUd  prachdr  karyd  jdll,  wherever  this  gospel  will  bo 
pre.achcd  (Matt,  xxvi,  13). 

twndrd  ghar  tumdrd  wdatd  bajd  child  ryd  jdnd,  your  house  is  being  left  for  you 
desolate  (Matt,  xxiii,  38). 

o din  did  ki  bandrd  fi-te  liyd  jdld,  the  day  will  come  when  the  bridegroom  will 
he  taken  from  them  (Matt,  ix,  15). 
ek  pakaryd  jdll , one  (woman)  will  be  seized  (Matt,  xxiv,  41). 

In  KumaunI  there  is  an  organic  Passive  formed  by  adding  l to  the  root.  I have 
met  one  or  two  examples  of  a corresponding  form  in  Garhwali,  in 

so  swarg-md  khdllyU  raid,  that  will  remain  loosed  in  heaven  (Matt,  xviii,  18). 
ke-te  luniU  karlld,  wherewith  will  it  be  made  salted  (Matt,  v,  13)  ? 

Causal  verbs  are  formed  as  in  Hindi  by  adding  d to  the  root.  The  infinitive  ends 
in  aund.  Thus,  charauno,  past  participle  ohardyo,  to  cause  to  graze. 

There  arc  numerous  irregular  causal  verbs.  Most  of  these  also  follow  Hindi ; e.g. 
marno,  to  die  ; mdrno , to  kill.  We  have  an  example  of  the  Causal  of  khdnd,  to 
eat,  in  : — 

U-sini  khaannd.  He  feedeth  them  (Matt,  vi,  2G). 

Compound  verbs  are  formed  much  as  in  Hindi.  Examples  are  : — 

Intcnsives : — 

de-deicd,  give  away:  baf-diye,  he  divided  ; chall-gayd , he  went  away. 
Potentials  : — 

mi-kn  sap /id  kari  salcdi,  Tliou  canst  make  me  clean  (Matt,  viii,  2). 
kui  nl  boll  8(tkyd,  no  one  could  speak  (Matt,  xxii,  4G). 

Completives  : — 

jab  d sab  nrdi  chuke,  when  he  bad  finished  squandering  everything. 
Hcsideratives : — 

bhitar  jdnd  nl  chdyd,  he  did  not  wish  to  go  inside. 

Inccptives  : — 

d dnand  karan  lagyd,  ho  began  to  rejoice.  See  also  under  the  head  of  the 
Infinitive. 

Permissive  : — 

mar  yd  apnd  maryau-ku  khadyauif  de,  let  the  dead  bury  their  dead  (Matt, 
viii,  22). 

I have  not  noted  an  instance  of  an  Acquisitive  compound. 

The  ordinary  N6g£ltiv8  is  nl,  of  which  numerous  examples  will  be  found  in  the 
specimens.  We  also  sometimes  find  na,  as  in  examples  on  pp.  293  and  295.  With  the 
imperative  we  have  nd,  as  in  bh  itra-te  kichhu  chis-bast  leii-ku  nd  utar , let  him  not 
descend  to  take  any  property  from  within  (Matt,  xxiv,  17). 


* 


VOL  IX,  PART  IV. 


298 


[No.  I.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

CENTRAL  PAHARt  (GARHWALl). 

Stan  da  it  d Dialect  op  Srinagar.  District  Garhwal. 

Specimen  I. 

It  rttoWt  RkroTO  i wter  RtorR-R  tot  rtrt- 

#-RT  Rt<R  t RTRT-^t  fTOTOT-R  Rt  HTt  t%TTT  W RT  If-TOft  t“TO  I ?TR 

-to  tor?*  kTO  Rfc-fro  i tof  ^ wr  kr  ft?r  RtorTO 

TTR  Ri^T  RT^t-Rf  fT  TO  R<ft  TO  TO  TOTRRT-*Tr  f^pT  RfT^t-Rf  TORft 

k&T  kt  l TO  TO  ^Tt  1%  TO  t RTOT  R-ft  RRTO  R%  Rfk 

rttot  fti  to ! ^k  I to-^tt  ttortrtYtto  urt-ru  to  Rnt-Rf 

TO  TTO  TOt  TO  ^T  TOUT  <RTOT  ^RT  RTN-ft  RRtft  I Rt  ^ 

#-TOft  RRT  RTO  WRT  RRWt  R£  TORt  'RTRt  TOt  I m\ 

t-TOfT  Rt  f ^T  TO  I TO  RT-R  TOT^IT  TOT  TO  RT«RJT  kf  RTT 

RTRTWt-Rn  RkTTO  TOjTTOF-RiT  RTTTO  TOT  Tt€t  ^k  TT  q^T-TT  I 

If  RS“t-RT  RRWT  RTRT-^Tt  RTTT  R^RTt  ^k  ^ft-RTT  RTTT  RtRT^t  kf  *¥  «H«U-Rft  TT- 

R TO-RiT  toil  RTTR-RTT  RTTOT  RTR  RiT  ! If  kiT  TO-^t  RkjTR  RtTO 

RTTRRf  TO  \ H-TPft  WITT  RkfRi-RT-R  tlRf-RTT  TORT  RRTRT  I TO  Rt 

R^t-Rf  TORT  RTRT-^  RTR  TORT  ^k  fT-ft  TO  kf  R-RfT  RTRT-^t-R  t %*#t- 

Rf  TO  RiT  Rlk  Tf#T-RT  R-RTT  WT-RT  kTR^t-Rf  RRlt  I TO-R  ^f-RT  Rt^t 

% RTRT-Rt  If-R  RPT-RTT  toiR  RTR-RTT  R1R%  RTR  RfT  | kiT  RTR-Rft  R^TOT 

RTRR  RtRR?  Rt  TO  I t-RTT  RTRT-^t-R  RWT  Rkiff-R  Rt%  kf  TTR-R  R^?T 

RiTO  fRRTT^t-RT  R RTTRT  | Rfk  R-RTT  RTR-RT  ^T  R^T-^T  §TTRT  I 

^T  TO  *RTRT  ^TTO  RTTT  I RI-RTT?  kf  Rt  TO  Rf^t  *kt  ^RT  kiT  R^- 

♦ 

5f  I toR  RR  ®RT  k»T  f*T%  I RR  Rt  RTTO  RfTR  TOt  II 

R-^t  WSt  ^RTRT  to-RT  WRt  I R?k  RfR  RT  RT-RfT  RRfki 

hT«*TI  7TR  RTRTT  ^T  RTR-Rft  RTRTRT  I ^T  R-R  TORT  ^Rf^-THR  TOT- 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


299 


qr  *tTOt  rtr  wrt-q*  fa*  ^ i %-m  ms  fr^rr  ^nrot 
^nrc  *rh:  vw-mx  *?T5r  q ^qq?t  fa?  gisp??- 

Ijafa?  xrra  I RT  I-5?  U^HT  3RT  ^TRfT  1 qf-?r  l-^tT  fa?TT 

wuni-qr  q ?Rfa?  ^rr  i t-*r  ^wr  fqm-^r  wsm  faq  fa?  fa?  If 
^T^rr  wf-^  ifaT  qrr^  i ^rr^rr-^t 

^ffa  ^nft  *rro-*r  iMrift  to  wT^-^t  tot-^  fa?  If  ^wr  ftnr-^rr 

-mh^  q?rft  I x^g  ^arm-^t  *lWt  €t  mcr^-^rr  *fa  ^nq-^t  wfY 

?§t4  *fa  TOT-^t  ^T ^ crqTT-’ft  ?J?T-R  l-^T  ^T^TT  wfaft  q»T  I fa*TT- 

ifl-qfTqro  ft%  t qZT<J^T  ^RTCT-ft  RTS?  wt  I 

w i tn;  qn^t  *rfa  t#  -qiT^t  %-^ni  fa?  srt  ?trt 
*ni  *Nft  farc  to  i to¥  wift  fanft  to  u 


▼OI»  IX,  *ABT  IV. 


t Q 2 


300 


[No.  I.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


Central  Group, 


CENTRAL  rAHARl  (GARHWALI). 


is,  that  me-to 
Bhaut  din  ni 

Many  days  not 

karl-k  dur 

made-having  far 
kati-k  apni 

cut-having  his -own  property 
tab  wai-des-ma  barb 

then  that-country-in  great 

wai-des-ka 
that-very-country-of 


u-n 

him-by 


Standard  Dialect  of  Srinagar. 

Specimen  I. 

Kai-adini-ka  dwi  naunyfd  chliaya.  tf-ma-n 

A-ccrtain-man-of  two  sons  toere.  Thcm-in-from 

apna-babii-ji-ma  bole,  * lie-baba-ji,  birsat-ma-n 

his-otbn-father-to  it-was-said,  1 0-father,  property -in-from 

chlia,  so  mai-sani  de-dewa.’  Tab 

give-away.1  Then 
bUi-chbaya,  ki 

passed-icere,  that 
des  ckali-gayo, 

country  went-aicay , 
birsat  urai-diye. 

was-wc rsted. 
akal  pare, 

famine  fell, 
ralia  n walau- ma-  n 
dwell  ers-in-from 


District  Garhwal. 


chkota-naunyal-an 

the-yonng-son-by 

jo  mero  hisa 

what  my  share 

apni  birsat  bat-diye. 

his-own  property  t cas-divided. 


cbliota-naunyal-an  sab 

the-young-son-by  all 

aur  wakh  I ngarpana-ma 

and  there  debaucliery-in 


o 

he 


o 

he 


rakan 

to-remain 

Aur  6 
And  lie 


Jab 

When 

aur  6 
and  he 

ek-ka 

one-of 

lagyo,  jai-n  o apna-khetu-mii  suiigar  ekaraun-ku 

began,  whom-by  he  his-own-fields-in  swine  feeding-for 
S-cbhimiyau-te,  jnu-sani  sungar  khanda-ckkaya, 

those-husics-with,  which  (acc.  plur.)  the-swine  eating-were, 


sab 

all 

kangal 

poor 

yakh 

here 


urai 
wasted 
hoi-gaye. 

became. 

jai-k 

gone-having 


kattlia 

together 

din 

days 

chuke, 

had, 

Aur 

And 

wakh 

there 

bhejyo. 

tcas-sent. 

apno 

his-own 


pet  bbarno 
belly  to-fill 
denda-clihaya. 
giving-were. 


chando-ehhayo  ; 
wishing-was  ; ' 

Tab  wS-to 
Then  therefrom 


aur  kwi 
and  anyones 

khabardar  hoy  6, 

sensible  he-became, 


wai-sani 

him-to 


aur 

and 


ki,  ‘ mera-baba-ji-ka  katna-i-majurdarafi-ka 

that,  ‘ my-father-of  how-many -verily -hired-servants-of 


roti  pakd,  aur 

bread  is-being -cooked,  and 

apna-baba-ji-pas  jaulo, 

my -own-father -near  icill-go, 

mai-n  swarg-ka  biruddh 

me-by  heaven-of  against 


mai  bhiikb-te 

7.  hunger-by 

aur  u-ka  pas 
and  him-of  near 


mardu. 

am- dying. 

bollo 

will-say 


aj  -Aa  sampe 

Your-Honour-of  before 


kuchh  ni 
anything  not 

wai-n  bolyo 
him-by  it-was-said 
khan-te  jada 

eating-than  more 
Mai  uthi-k 

I arisen-having 
ki,  **  h8  baba-ji, 

that,  “ O , father, 
pap  karg,  mai  phir 
sin  was- done,  1 again 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


301 


ap-kd  naunyal  bolan  ] 

Your- Honour -of  son  to-be-called 

apna-naukaru-ma-n  &k-ka  barabar  l 

thine-  own-servants-in-from  'onc-of  like 
apna-baba-ji-pas  chalyo,  aur  cli 

Jiis-own-father-near  went , and  dista 

baba-ji-n  wai  dekhi-k  daya 

the-father-by  him  seen-having  compassion 

gala-par  lipti-k  chumyd. 

neck-on  clung-liaving  hc-was-  kissed. 

4 he-baba-ji,  mai-n  swarg-ka  biruddh 


layak  m cnnaa ; mai-sani 
l fit  not  am ; me  (acc.  sing.) 
v banawa.”  * Tab  o utlri-k 

make.”  * Then  he  arisen-having 

dur-lil  chhayo,  ki  wai-ka 

distant-even  he -was,  that  him-of 

a kare,  aur  dauri-k  wai-ka 

was-made,  and  run-having  him-of 


chhaG ; 
t am ; 

Tab  o 
Then  he 
cbhayo, 

he-was, 


Beta-n 

The-son-by 

ap-ka 


u-ma 

him- to 


samne 


O-father,  me-by  lieaven-of  against  Your-Honour-of  before 


bolyo, 

it-was-said, 

kare. 

was-done. 


Pliir  ap-ko  naunyal  bolan 

Again  Your-Honour-of  son  to-be-calle 

baba-ji-n  apna-naukarau-tc  bole 

the-father-by  liis-own-servants-to  it-was-said 

nikali-k,  wai  pairawa ; aur  wai-ka 

produced-having,  him  clothe-ye ; and  him-of 
jiito  pairawa.  Aur  ham  khaw5,  anar 


bolan  layak  ni  chhaG.’  Wai-ka, 
to-be-called  fit  not  I-am .’  Him-of 

bole  ki,  ‘ sab-te  achchha  kapra 
it-was-said  that,  4 all-than  good  clothes 

Lir  wai-ka  hath-par  gunthi,  aur  pairau-ma 
id  him-of  liand-on  a-ring,  and  feet-on 
v5,  anand  kara ; ke-lai  ki  yo 


an  and 


shoe  clothe-ye.  And  ice  may-eat,  rejoicing  may -make ; because  that  this 


mero  larko  mari-chhavo,  pliir  bachi-ge ; 
my  son  died-had,  again  was- sac ed ; 

mile.’  Tab  0 anand  karau  lagyo. 

was- found'  Then  he  rejoicing  to-make  began. 

Wai-ko  jet. ho  naunyal  kliet-mii  chhayo. 

Him-of  the-elder  son  th  e-field-in  was. 

ghar-ka  najik  pauchhyd,  tab  baja  aur 


klioye  gai-chhayo. 


gonc-had,  again 


jab  gliar  aund 
when  home  coming 


ghar-ka  naji 
house-of  nea 

Aur  wai-n 

And  him-by 

puchhyo 

it-was-asked 

4 ap-ko 


nach-ki 


he-arrived,  then  music  and  dancing-of 
apna-naukarG-madhye  ek-kii  apna-pi 


sound 


his-own-servants-among  one-to 


ki, 

that, 


4 yo  kya 
this  what 


chha  ? 


u apna-pas 

o himself -of -near 

Wai-n  wai-ka  pas 

Him-by  him-of  near 


was-heard. 

bulal-k 

called-having 

bolyo, 

it-icas-said, 


bhai 


ap-ka 


pita-ji-n  achchho  bhojan 


4 Yonr-Honour’s  brother  came,  and  Your- Honour’s  father-by  good  feeding 


kare,  ye-sabab-te  ki  6 kuSal-purbak  paye.*  Par  wai-n  gussa 

was-made,  this-reason-by  that  he  prosperity-icith  icas-got.'  JBut  him-by  anger 

kare,  aur  bhitar  jano  ni  cliayo.  Ya-te  wai-ka  pita 

was-made,  and  within  to-go  not  he-wished.  Herefrom  him-of  the- father 

bhair  ai-k  wai  manaun  lagya.  Wai-n  ap^a-pita-ku  jabab 

outside  come-h aving  him  to-entreat  began.  Him-by  his-own-father-to  answer 


302 


GARHWAI.t. 

* * 

dfve  ki,  * deklia,  ki  mai  itna-barsau-tS  ap-ki  sewa 

was- given  that,  * see,  that  I so-many-years-from  Your -Honour -of  service 

kardu.  Kabhl  ap-ki  ajfta-ko  ulanglian  mi  karyo, 

am-doing.  Ever  Your-Honour-of  command-of  transgression  not  was-made, 
aur  kabhi  ap-an  mai-sani  ek-khadu-ko  baclia  bhi  nl  d&yo, 

and  ever  Your -Honour -by  me- to  one-goat-of  young-one  even  not  was- given, 

ki  mai  apaa-mifcru-ka  sath  anand  kardu.  Paranttf, 

that  I my-own- friends- of  with  rejoicing  I-  might-have-made.  But, 

ap-ko  nauno,  jo  patrii-ka  sang  ap-ki  sampati 

Your-Honour-of  son,  who  harlots-of  in-company  Your-Honour-of  property 

kliai-gaye,  jabare-hi  aye,’  tabare-lri  tum-an  wai-ka  wasta  achckho 

ate-np,  when- even  he-came,  then-even  you-by  him-of  for  good 

khqnd  karb.*  Pita-n  lvai-ka  pas  bole,  *he  beta,  tu 

eating  was-made ' The-father-by  him-of  near  it-was-said,  ‘ O son,  thou 

sada  hamara-hi  sath  chhai;  jo-kuchh  mei‘6  chha,  6 sab  tero  chha# 

ever  us-of-even  with  art ; what-ever  mine  is,  that  all  thine  is . 

Par  anand  karno  aur  khuSi  rahno  chaindo  ckhayo,  ke-lai  ki 

But  rejoicing  to-malce  and  happy  to-remain  proper  was,  because  that 

yo  tero  bhai  inaryo,  phir  bachyo ; harehl-chhayo,  mili-gayp.’ 

this  thy  brother  died,  again  escaped ; lost- hod-been,  found- was' 


Central  x^roup. 


£ No.  2.] 

indo-aryan  family. 

CENTRAL  PAHARl  (GARHWAlI). 

Standard  Dialect  of  Srinagar.  District  (tarhwal. 

Specimen  II. 

ijf  ffk  trfw-SRT  q^T^TcT  II 

I l \ trfwr  ^WPTT-HT  ft  «nft  fk  l xj^f  xjf  f^TT-^fT  3?NT 
qfw  f^rr  ^rr  xfftxnT-TTT  Tfft  wvx  i 

i xx^-^r  ^rc-?r  ^ttt  ?\z\  wo\  \ vjm  xj^- 

fk  x^tr-^rr  fk-^rr  tjps  g^rrorra  ? ^T-ff  to  i wut 

*t  ' ft  TOT  cT°ft  I WT-HT%-l[XI^^^r^ft  ^ 
ir^tt  rift  fair  i to  %-?r  to*tt  xtrt^t  ^T^-^tft  % toNtt  ^ra  fa?3T  i 
^ TjT^knft  to*  to  €r  x-ni  to  i froift  *fkT  statist  tf- 

^rt  ^ $ to  i ir  fkr  % tohrt  wt*to  ^«.=imi  xjpft 

^xir-^  tto*  i cf’ft  gkt  %*#t-sfi  ?r  <prft  to*  TOft  ^kt  to  i 

fx^T^  xnxfft  xjcff  ^RT-^Tft  ’STO  I %-*  TO^ft  g^-^Pft  cfft-XTT  ^ift  | 

xrnxfr  ft  faxro-f  tot  *#t  krTOTO  *nft  i ff  faTOTTro  * fk-ft  fft* 
*rft  \\ 

i x*  i cRt-^f  g*rr-Trr  ^nt-^  % TTtNft^r  TOvft  i wi 
X|f%jf-^n  fk-*rr  fkr-xrr  xs%  k*  i % fNr-TTT  Mfaff-TRT  fk-ift 
ft*  «xff  fS*  si 1 ^Tft-1  TOkft  wfMrt  ***  %*-*  ^T-^T 

RKT  faTO  ^xpift  ITT-^tT  wft-V  *i  l ^ ^ ^ 1 ***“ 

1 tot  *$  f^r-^t  iftft  wit-i  to*  *i«nfMr  ^ xfkrc 

UT  ^ l *T-*fT  fTOT*  % k*  xjf -*  fk  ft  ^TTT  *nNrt  ^ ^-*T 

^ft^qf^-^fk-^T  %*T  TO%  1 

^5T fk-^t fWt-f  n* I ^ f^r  frt^T 

im  lift  ^ «wr%nl  w I ^ x^-^T  ft^  ^ skn-^ 


804  garhwAlI. 

0 

' q®  | fWt-q  Wt  I TO  ft  ^ST-fT  q^  I WT-*TT  ftff-*ft  ife 
ftf  I qf^RTOt  ftx  XTTXT  TO-qrT  TOT  TOT  OTSTO  TOT-tt  TOTft-qf  ^TOt 

Cy  ♦ ♦ Os  ^ • » 

TOT  ^T5T-^T  XTOX  ft^T  TOWT  fXTX-TTT  TXft-qf  XWT  TOt  l 

q*TOt  ftx  f -qTT  fq^T#t  TO  I %-qTT  ftST-^  fawrft-q  qrft-qr  W*ft  | 
TO  qfTO’-qTT  ftX-XT  TO?t  ftX  TOTf  TO  ftW-ft  f«iqu<nl-qr  TOfft  q^ft  TO  | 

fq^rft  qt%  qt  qq-qn  ftx,  qxt  qm  tot  qfqir-?r  to  x%  wft  i 
^XTfrorq^ftqftqTq^f i xmrfTr^fri  qft  iqft  ftf  i to 
<t  &°  xrrTO-TTT  TOTt  qrft-qr  f tot  fqr  to  ^t  tot  w i qq-qrc 

ftX-q  ft^  TO  cT  TO5T  ^ I TOT^t  ^TX  ^tcT  TOT  qTTqft  I qqft-TTT  ffcfT  | 
TO  TO^T  II 

O 

i^i  to  fq3-  qqft-qn  xto  toh  i q fro  TOnft  tot 
fxnft  i frot-q  TOiften  ft%  <j  wrd  tot%-^  qw  i 
ft%  TOt  TOft  ftq  TOT  qxtTOff  TO-HT  *TO  ^ I q-qfT  qT^IT  Xtft  ft 
qri^i  q-^  xtft  q-qr  §xr  frot  ft  tot^  ffft  i qrorr  ftft-qr 
qfeqr-q  ft  ftxf-^  to  ^rnqff-qn  ftw  qqT-qn  to^t  qf*rr-*TT  qx  fq^n  i 
frorft  towt  •TTft-qrT  qtxT  qf  i t-qr  xt€t  fqq  n 

• Cv 

m to  ft  xtft  *qrf  to  ft  ftx  qqr  totoit  totx  ftfq  i 
ct  ff-qn  qrft-q  qfeqT-qr  to^tt  frq  toIP  TOrofTOT  ft  ftxf-q»  qqft 

>8  Cv  • J G\ 

qnft-m  to  fron  i to*ht  qx-q»  to  i ^ ftq  qff  ftq  TOt  TOt  i % 

Cv 

qff-q  #f  qfroT-ft  qTcft  to  qroft  ftq;  tot  q ft  ftxfq  TOTOt-qrr  ftsr- 

v3  \3  • 

qn  q^t-qr  to  qrqT  qf=^t  i to  ft  TOTft  qrfl  $$  i to  TOtft- 
qrr  xtNtt  frox  to^  qTq-qnr  qqrq  Ira  i to  ff  TOTft-q  fxrd  TOrft- 
xnft%  to  xTOT-q^rf  fron^t  ^ i ^xrft  TOrft-q  fti  wtf  wf  t- 
qv-ft  % qft,  q TO  fTOTft  ^tt  | qfqft  TOTft  f qfXTX-qX  q»TO  ftf  I 
TOTOft  wqrft-q  iro-qr  (qq^t-qrr  qnft-qr  to  ftx;  tot  q ft  ftxT  q 
qro^f-qrr  ftsr  qqr)  frorft-qr  *ttot  ^ft^T-qx  qx  f tot  i frorf-^ 
qqqT  iftxn-q  qrft-qr  xtot  wro-qr  i ff-qrT  TOxr-q 

qqft  TOTft-qT  ft%  ^ TO  ^rfT-qft  WTXT  fqXTO-^  t ? I ft  *t  TOt  I 

f qTff-^%i#t-qrft  ftx  qqft  q qift  q^rr  qft-qr  qx  qx  qrfro 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


305 

*i$w£  M^flii-^  tto  fsr^ft  #f  #f-^n  wt-?i 

fq^t  ^5Tt-^r  wi  *tto  i *ttot  *rwr  to-*t  ^nri to  to-*t 
*nrt  fror*  *ttot  wt  ^ TOtftrafan  ^ u 

i * i wf-*  w frt-^^r roN?  ira?TO 

C\  o\  c^  ^ ^ 

^ fapt  i ^r^r  *RT  % Wf{  ?rft  ^tt-*n  wi-fi  i 

%*farc-*TT  ^ WRrot  ^rror  ^rr^t-^f  ^r^r  ^rift  i to-^t  to  *r#t 
*fk  TO-W  ^ $ I HTWSIT-sft  TOT-*T  <f*T  ^fTOT  ^OTFT 

W3T3?  II 


▼ot.  IX,  PART  IT. 


[ No.  2.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY 


306 


Central  Group. 


CENTRAL  FAHARl  (GARHWALl). 


Standard  Diai.ect  ok  SkIxaoar. 


District  Gakhwal. 


PCltB  ATll 
EASTERN  AND 


Specimen  II. 

FASC1T IM-KA  BlllG-Kl  MULAKAT. 
WESTER  N-  OF  HER  OES-  OF  INTER  VIEW. 


(1) 

(i) 

kona. 


in- corner, 


Pahila-jamfma-ma  dwi  nami  bit*  ehbnya. 
j First-tune-in  two  /anions  heroes  were. 

clusro  pasehim-disa-ka  kona-ma 

the-second  icestern-di  red  ion-of  comer-in 


Ek  pui*b-disa-ka  ' 
One  edstern-direction-of 
rahadb-chhayb.  Ek-kb 

dwclling-was.  One-of 


nam  sunl-k  dusrb  jaldb-chhayb.  Ek-kb  "liar  dusra-ka 

name  heard-having  the-second  burning- was.  One-of  house  thc-second-of 


ghar-tb  bava-bavs-kb  bate  chhayb.  Ek  din  purb-kb  bit*  pasebim-ka 

house-from  twelve-years-of  road  was.  One  dag  thc-cast-of  hero  fhe-wesl-of 

bir-ka  satk  mulakat  \va  laran-ku  gaye.  Apna-khan-ku  bara-ku 
hero-of  with  interview  and  fiyhtiug-for  went.  Jlis-own-eating-Jbr  viaticum- for 


satu  li-ge.  Du  I pabar  talc  chain.  Kasia-ma  we-kii 

sat  tit  (pi  nr.)  he-took-away.  Two  watches  during  he-went.  The-road-in  him-to 
ek  baro  lambo  ehaurb  wa  gahvb  talau  mile.  Tab  we-n  apna-pas-ka 

a great  long  wide  and  deep  lake  was-met.  Then  him-by  himself -of -ncar-of 

satu-sani  we-talau-ma  dal-dinya.  Jab  satu  bhiji-gaycn,  lab  wb 

sat  til  ( aco .)  lhat-lake-in  tccre-  thrown.  When  ihe-sattii  was-soaked,  then  he 
kull-satu-ku  khal-gaye.  Pichhari  we-dhbra  ek-bani-per-ksi  mure 
entire-sattu  (acc.)  ale- up.  Afterwards  that- near  a-great-lree-of  under 


se-gaye. 
went-to-slecp. 
aun-wala,  pan! 
comers  water 
dusrl-tarpb 
in-another-direction 


Ye-bieb 
This- men  nwh  ile 

pen-ku 

drinking-for 


we-dhbva-ka  ban-ka  j an  wav  rbj-ka 

that-near-of  forcst-of  animals  (evcry-)day-qf 

•yen.  Talau  sukhb  dekbi-k  tab 

came.  The-lake  dried  seen-haciug  then 


pan! 

water 


dbundan-ku 
search  in g-for 


chali-gave. 


Piehhar: 


/ h ey-wenl-awa  y.  Afterwards 


pan! 

water 


pen-ku  ek  ban-hathi  aye.  We-u  apnl-sund-sani  talau-ina 

drinking-for  a r.  foresl-ele pnanl  came.  TIim-by  his- oxen- trunk  (acc.)  the-lake-iu 

daii.  Panl  ni  milau-te  ek  bar!  kilkar  marl.  TVT-kilkar-te 

was-put.  Water  not  being-got -from  a great  scream  was-struck.  Th  at-scrcam-from 
■we-bir-ki  nld  kb  till, 

that-hero-of  sleep  icas-loosened. 


STANDAltD  DIALECT. 


307 


(2)  Tal)  we-n  gussa-ma.  ai-k  we-hathi-kl  sund  pakyl. 

(2)  Then  him-by  anger-in  come- having  that-elephanl-of  trunk  was-seized. 

We-ku  apna-hatli-te  paiehini-ka  blr-ka  chauk-ma  phek-dine. 

Mim-asfor  his- own-hand- with  the-west-of  hero-of  conrtyard-into  he- wax- thrown . 

We-chauk-ma  pa4chim-ka  bir-ki  nauni  satti  kutni-chhai. 

That-conrtyard-in  wcst-of  hero-of  daughter  paddy  ponnding-was. 

Hathl-ku  anaukhl-bbSti-ko  klro-sl  dekhi-k,  darii-ka-mura  bliitar 

The- elephant  ( acc .)  strange-kind-of  insect-like  secn-hachtg,  fear-of -through  within, 

apni-ma-ka  pas  bbajl-k  gal.  Tab  wi-ki  ma  bbair 

her-own-inother-of  near  fed-having  she- went.  Then  her-of  mother  outside 

ai.  Haihi-ku  ek-naT-kism-ko  klro  samjlri-k, 

came.  The-clephant  (acc.)  a- new-lei nd-of  insect  nnderslood-having, 

apni-dagayyani-ku.  dekhaun-ku  apna-klusa-par  dhav-dine.  Wa-ka 

her-own-companions-to  showing-for  her-own- pocket-on  if-was-put.  Tliere-of 


piclihari  wo-din  piirb-ko  lnr  bhl  bara-bavs-ko  vasta  gluuitfi-ma 

after  ( on-)that-day  the-east-of  hero  also  l wet re-years-of  road  ( a-few-)hours-in 

chali-k  paschim-ka  blr-ka  (leva  pahuclie.  We-n,  ‘tero  l>ap 
yone-haning  the-west-of  hero-of  (at-)abode  arrived.  Tlhn-hy,  ‘ thy  father 

kakli  cliha?’  karl-k,  paschim-ka  bir-ki  naunl-te  puclihi. 

where  is /’  made-having,  the-west-of  hero-of  danghter-from  she-was-asked. 


Naunl-n 

jabab 

dine,  ‘ merd 

bap 

lakhra  katan-ku 

Tlie-daughtcr-by 

answer 

was-given,  * my 

father 

sticks  entting-for 

baril-bars-te 

ucbfi 

dSdo  jayfl-cliha.’ 

Tab 

piirb-ka  blv-an 

twel  v e-yea  rs-lh  a n 

more  mountain  gone-lias.' 

Then 

the-east-of  liero-by 

AvI-naunl-te 

(ladfi-ko 

vasta  piichhe. 

Naunl-n 

batai-dine. 

that-daugliter-from  monntain-of  road  was- asked.  The-daughter-hy  it- was-ex plained. 

Tab  avo  dada-ku  gaye.  Rasta- ma  diviyau-ki  bliet  hoi. 

Then  he  mountain- to  went.  The-road-in  the-two-of  meeting  became. 


Pascbim-ko  btv  sara-banu-ka  baya-baya-dalit-ku  jara-te 

The-west-of  hero  all-forests-of  big-big-trees  (acc.)  root -from 

u-ko  bara-dada-ka  barabav  bdj  apna-sir-ma 

them-of  a-great-mountain-of  equal  load  his-own-liead-on 


ukharl-k, 

tot'n-up-haning, 

rakbi-k 

placed-having 


apna-ghav-ku. 
his-own-liouse-to 

We-ka  boj-ku 
Rim-of  th e-load  (acc.) 
pa6chim-ka  blr-an 

the-west-of  hero-by 

nikali-k  agarl 

evtricated-having  in-front 

voi.  nr,  PART  IV. 


Puvb-kd  bir 
The-east-of  hero 
kliiclu-k 
dragged-h  a ring 
lagave, 
was-a  pplied, 

chali-gaye.  Picbbari 

•i vent-on.  Backwards 


we-ka  picbbari  gave. 

him -of  behind  went. 

ihami-dine.  Jab 

he-was-stopped.  When 

tab  b6j-ku 

then  the-load  (acc.) 

dekhi-k  bole, 

looked-haeing  it -teas -said, 
2 r 2 


an  aii-eli  hay  o. 
coming- was. 

pichliari-te 

behindfrom 

bhari  jor 
heavy  force 


308  garhwalI. 


* are  purb-ka 

bir, 

tero 

nam 

mai-n 

pahil&-t& 

sun-rakhg-chhayd. 

* ah  east-of 

hero, 

thy 

name 

me-by 

before -from 

been-heard-was. 

Tfira-milan-ki 

bari 

chah 

chhai. 

mili-ge. 

mai-ku  bari 

Thy-tneeting-of 

great 

desire 

was. 

To-day 

{thou)-art-met. 

me- to  great 

khusi  hoi. 

Ah 

tu  mai  apas-ma  larai  kari-k 

happiness  became. 

Now 

thou  I 

ourselves- among  fighting  done-having 

dekliula  ki  ham-dviyau-ma  ko  baro  chlia.’  Purb-ka  bir-an 

we-shall-see  that  ns-both-in  who  great  is'  The-east-qf  hero-by 

bole,  * yakli  ta  jangal  chba.  Hamari  har-jit  kai-n 

it-was-said , * here  verily  forest  is.  Our  defeat-victory  whom-by 

janni?  Basti-ma  jaula.  Wakli  larula.’ 

will-be-known  ? Village-in  we-shall-go.  There  we- shall- fight.' 

(3)  Tab  dwiye  basti-ka  rasta  chalya.  Ye-bich  0-sani 

(3)  Then  the-two  the-village-of  on-t'oad  went.  This-meanwhile  them-to 

ek  budali  mill.  Dwiyau-n  budali-ma  bole,  * tu 

an  old-woman  was- met.  The-two-by  the-old-woman-to  it-was-said , ‘ thou 

hamari  larai-ku  dekh.’  Budall-n  fi-ku  bole,  ‘ mero 

our  fighting  {ace.)  see  .*  The-old-woman-by  them-to  it-was-said,  * my 

natl  goru-bhaisa  charaun-ku  ban-ma  jay5-chha.  We-ka  wasta 

grandson  cows-bnffalocs  grazing-for  forest-in  gone-lias.  Him-of  for-the-sake 

roti  li-jandu.  "We-ku  roti  de-k  tum-dwiyau-ki  larai-ku 

bread  I -am-bringing.  Him-to  bread  given-having  you-both-of  fighting  (acc. ) 

dekholo.’  Itna  boli-k  budhiya-n  dwi-birau-ku,  may 

I-will-see ' So-many  said-having  the-old-woman-by  the-two-heroes  {acc.),  with 
lakhrau-ka  boj-suda-ka,  apna-kandha-ina  dhar-dinya.  Pichhari 

sticks-of  load-including,  her-own-shotdder-on  were-placed.  Afterwards 

apna-nati-ka  dhora  gal.  We-ku  roti  dine. 

her-own-grandson-of  near  she-went.  Him-to  bread  was-given. 

(4)  Jab  wo  roti  khai-chuke,  lab  dwi  bir  wakh 

(4)  When  he  the-bread  ate-completely,  then  the-two  heroes  there 

laran-ku  tayar  lioyen.  Ta  wl-ka  nati-n  budhiya-ku, 

fighting-for  ready  became.  Then  her-of  grandson-by  the-old-woman  {acc.), 
apna-goru  -bhaTsau -lak  hrau -suda  dwi-birau-ku,  apni-gati-ma 

his-own-cow8-bujfaloes-stick8-including  the-two-heroes  {acc.),  his-own-lap-of -sheet-in 

rakh-dinya.  Apna-ghar-ku  gaye.  Ye-bich  bathau  hon 

were-placed.  His-own-house-to  he-went.  This-meanwhile  a-wind-storm  to-be 

lagyo-chhayo.  We-bathau-te  wi-budliiya-ko  nati,  may  budali-goru- 

began- had.  That-storm-by  that-old-woman-of  grandson , with  the-old-woman-cows( 

bhaisa,  wa  dwi-birau,  wa  lakhrau-ka  boj-ka,  uri-k  ekjaga 
buffaloes , and  the-two-heroes,  and  the-sticks-of  load-of,  flown-having  a *Hr 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 


300 


pahfiohyd. 
he-arrived. 
bhitar, 


Wakh 

There 


janau 
as-it-were 
dusri-janani-m& 
the-other-woman-to  it 
bole,  * jo  we 
it-was-said,  * if  that 


dwi  janani  satti  kutni-chhai. 
two  women  paddy  pounding-were. 

ghas-ka  saman,  baithe. 

a-pieee-of -grass  like,  he- settled. 

bole,  * mera-akha-te  khar  nikali-de.'  Dusri-janani-n 
was- said,  * my -eye- from  the- grass  extract  .'  The-other-woman-by 
khar  mai-ku-hi  de-dell,  ta  tab  nikali-dOlo.’ 

grass  me-to-only  thou-wilt-give,  verily  then  I-will- extract.' 


Ek-janani-ka  Skha 
One-woman-of  eye 

Tab  w?-janani-n 
Then  that-icoman-by 


Pahili  janani  ¥-karar-par  kahili  hoi.  Tab  dusri-janam-n 

The-frst  woman  this-condition-on  agreeing  became.  Then  the-other-woman-by 

khar-ku.  (budali-ka  nati-ku,  may  goru-bbaisa,  wa 

the-gra88  ( acc .)  [ the-old-woman-of  grandson  ( acc .),  with  the-cows-buf aloes,  and 

dwi-biraQ  wa  laklirau-ka  boj  suda)  nikali-k  apna-khisa-pnr 

the-two-heroes  and  the-sticks-of  load  including ] extracted-having  her -own- pocket-on 

dbar-dinya.  Pichhare-ku  khar-ku  apna-khisa-te  gari-k 

were-put.  Afterwards  the-grass  (acc.)  her-own-pocket-from  taken-out-having 
apna-khaaam-ku  dekhlain.  Wl-ka  khasam-an  apni- janani -ma  bole, 

her-own-husband-to  they-were-shoton.  Ser-of  husband-by  his-own-wife-to  it-was-said, 
* yfl-sab-kirau-sani  hamara-birala-ku.  do-de.  Wo  khai-delo.’  Yu-batau-ku 
* these-aU-insects  (acc.)  our-cat-to  give-away.  He  will-eat-up.'  These-words  (acc.) 


dekhi-k,  dwi  bir,  budali,  wa  budali-ko  nati, 

seen- having,  the-two  heroes , the-old-woman,  and  the-old-woman-of  grandson , 

dari-k,  thar-thar  kSpan  lagya.  Tab 

feared-having , shaking-shaking  to-tremble  began.  Then 

apli§-aphU-ku  duniyS-ki  chijaii-madhye  sab-te 

themselces-themselves  (acc.)  the-world-of  tlimgs-among  all-than 


achhtai-pachhtai-k,  hath  jori 
wailed-lamented-having,  hands  clasped 
wa  w?-ka  khasam-te  pi  eh  h 6 

and  her-of  husband-from  grasp 

gayen.  Apna-apna-gbaru-ma 

went.  Their-own-their-own-houses-in 


bahut 

much 

sabu-n 

all-by 

chlioto  jani-k, 
small  considered-having, 

binti  kari-k,  wT-janani-te, 

supplication  made-having , that-woman-from, 
chhurai-k,  apna-gliar 

caused-to-be-released-having,  their-own-houses 
ai-k,  ek-ek-an  yo  saro 

come-having,  one-one-by  this  all 


bistar  apija-apna-gharwalau-wa-parosiyau-ma  wa  dostau-ma  bole. 

occurrence  their-own-their-own-families-and-neighbours-to  and  friends-to  xcas-said. 

(5)  Sabu-n  kattha  hoi-k  aphn-ku  kucbh  bastu  ni 

(5)  All-by  together  become-having  themselves  (acc.)  any  thing  not 
samjhi-k,  ParameSwar-ko  dhanya  kine.  Aur  kabul  kare,  * he 

(jpnsidered- having,  Ood-of  thank  was-made.  And  confession  was- made,  ‘O 

rarame&war,  bam  Teri-syishti-ma  sab-te  chhdta  chhawau.  Ye-samsar-ma 

God,  we  Thy -creation-in  all-than  small  are.  This-universe-in 


310 


GARHWALl. 


kai-bat-ko  ghamand  adml-ku 

any-thing-of  pride  a-man-to 

baro  aur  ek-te  ek  cblioto 
great  and  one-than  one  small 
klra-ka  saman  chliawaO.* 
insects-of  equal  are' 


ni  karno  chaindo.  Ek-te  ek 

not  to-be-made  is-proper.  One-than  one- 

cblm.  Parumeswar-kl  najar-ma  ham-sab 
is.  God-of  siglit-in  tee-all 


[For  a free  translation,  vide  ante,  p.  165.] 


311 


RAJHI  OR  RAjHWALl. 

This  dialect  of  Garluvall  is  the  language  of  the  Khasiyas  and  Pabilas  (non-thread- 
wearing  castes)  and  is  spoken  throughout  the  centre  of  the  District  of  Garhwal,  over  the 
greater  parts  of  the  Chandpur  and  Dewalgarh  Parganas,  and  also  in  about  thirty  villages 
of  the  adjoining  Patti  Malta  Chankot  in  the  Pali  Pargana  of  (he  Almora  District. 

The  estimated  number  of  speakers  is  as  follows : — 

Name  of  District.  . I 

i 

Garhwal  . . . . . . ■ # \ 

i 

Almora  .........  j 

i 

. ...  i 

i 

Totai.  . ! 

The  following  sketch  of  lliithwali  Grammar  is  based  on  the  version  of  the  Parable 
of  the  Prodigal  Son  and  the  list  of  words  and  sentences  which  follow.  It  does  not 
pretend  to  be  a complete  grammar,  and  most  attention  will  be  devoted  to  those  points 
in  which  the  dialect  differs  from  Standard  Gayliwali. 

Pronunciation- — This  on  the  whole  is  more  nearly  akin  to  that  of  Kumauni,  than 
is  the  case  with  the  Standard  dialect.  The  vowel  <7  is  interchangeable  with  yd  ; thus  we 
have  both  dyd  and  dd,  give,  and  (l yds,  <ld.4,  a country.  When  d is  followed  in  the 
next  syllable  by  d it  optionally  becomes  yd.  Tims,  mdrb  or  mydrd,  my.  In  the  same 
way,  a long  d,  followed  by  o becomes  6.  Tims,  chhdyd,  he  was,  hut  chhdyd,  they  were. 
The  vowel  d,  on  the  other  hand,  may  become  ted  before  d.  Thus,  ghdrt,  a marc,  but 
glued  rd,  a horse. 

A final  d or  d is  quite  commonly  weakened  to  a short  a.  Numerous  examples  of 
this  occur  in  the  specimens.  Thus,  the  oblique  form  of  in  yard,  my,  is  mydrd,  but  in 
sentence  2118,  we  have  mydra  aghin,  before  me.  Similarly,  for  final  d,  wc  have  both 
bacluyu  dya,  and  budtlyE  dyd,  he  came  alive,  in  the  two  passages  of  the  Parable  in 
which  the  phrase  occurs.  Other  examples  are  itdiia-lanrn-na.  Cor  ndnd-laurd-ud,  by  the 
younger  son,  and  gdrl-hd,  having  brought  forth,  hut  afki-ka,  having  run. 

A final  d optionally  becomes  n.  Thus,  in  the  list  of  words,  we  have  man  ft l chhau,  I 
am  striking,  hut  mono  chhdyd,  I was  striking;  for  “going,”  we  have  both  jdnd  and 
jdnu  ; tee-kit  (List  No.  228)  for  ird-ko,  his. 

The  letter  r before  or  after  a consonant  is  optionally  elided.  Thus,  the  list  gives 
hum  mdrnii,  we  strike,  but  ml  mdnd,  1 strike;  ml  mdrtild,  T shall  strike,  but  ham  mala 
(for  world),  we  shall  strike.  The  Standard  Garhwfdi  nakhrd,  had,  becomes  milch b 
in  Rfithwali.  It  will  he  understood  that  this  elision  of  r is  optional.  Thus,  in  the 
Parable  we  have  k.uld  (for  kardd),  1 might  have  done,  and  also  kardu  chltuu.  I am  doing. 

Gender- — The  rules  for  this  are  the  same  as  in  the  Standard  dialect. 

Number- — Tatlbhaea  masculine  nouns,  which  in  Hindi  end  in  d,  usually  end  in  b 
as  in  the  Standard  dialect.  Thus,  Hindi  laundd,  l’athwali  lutird,  a son.  Sometimes, 
however,  we  have  the  d termination,  as  in  glucdrd,  a horse.  In  both  cases  the  nominative 


Number  of  Speaker!). 

•'>0,594 

2,403 

6:1,057 


312 


.A. 

garhwAli. 


plural  ends  in  . a.  Thus,  lavra,  sons  ; ghtodrd,  horses.  It  will  be  remembered  that 
the  final  a may  be  shortened  to  a,  so  that  we  can  also  have  lavra , ghtodra.  Feminine 
nouns  form  their  plurals,  as  in  Standard  dialect,  except  that  I have  not  come  across  any 
feminine  plurals  in  e. 

Case — The  oblique  case  singular  is  formed  as  in  the  Standard  dialect,  with  the  usual 
optional  shortening  of  a final  a.  The  oblique  plural  usually  ends  in  §,  as  in  chdkrd 
tnay-na , from  among  the  servants  ; lauriS^kd,  of  daughters ; pdtrd-kl  dagiri , with  harlots. 
Sometimes  it  ends  in  n as  bdbun-kb,  of  fathers  ; ddmin-ko,  of  men.  In  chhimuld-na,  with 
the  husks,  the  postposition  has  been  added  to  the  nominative  plural,  or,  possibly,  to  the 
oblique  singular. 

The  following  are  the  usual  postpositions  employed  : — 

Agent,  t/a,  la. 

Accusative,- or  ganl. 

Instrumental,  na,  la. 

Dative,  ganl  (to),  khuni  (to),  tha  (to),  h®  (for). 

Ablative,  gam  (from),  makoi  (from),  bat*  (from),  unde  (from  out  of),  may -l a 
(from  among),  se,  te. 

Genitive,  kb. 

Locative,  nid  (in,  into)  ; md  (in,  into)  ; gam  (in) ; par  (on)  ; tal  (under). 

As  examples  we  may  quote  : — 

Agent : — 

nan  a laura-na  bola , the  younger  son  said. 
mi-la  we-ku  lauro  mar  a,  I struck  his  son. 

Accusative  : — 

putgu  bharno , to  fill  the  belly. 

mai-gani  aprid  khilari-ki  char  kai-de , make  me  as  one  of  thy  hived 
servants. 

Instrumental : — 

mi  bhukh-na  marmi-chhatt,  T am  dying  through  hunger. 
jyurd-la  badhyd,  bind  him  with  a rope. 

Dative  : — 

The  usual  word  is  ganl,  as  in— 
bdbu-gani  bola , he  said  to  the  father. 

For  khuni,  which  is  apparently  only  a variety  of  gapi,  see  Nos.  103,  108,  etc.,  of 
the  list  of  words. 

For  the  others  we  have — 

yd  rupyd  tee- tha  de-dya,  give  this  rupee  to  him. 
charauna-kfi  kheda,  sent  (him)  to  feed  (lit.  for  feeding)  (swine). 

Ablative  : — 

The  suffix  regularly  given  in  the  list  of  words  is,  curiously  enough,  gani.  Thus : — 
ek  banya-gani,  (I  bought  it)  from  a shopkeeper, 
t oe-makbi  tod  rupyd  le-le,  take  those  rupees  from  him. 
yakha-bati,  from  here  (List  No.  222). 


31& 


RAjHl  dialect. 

kmoa-undb  pant  gdrd,  draw  water  from  the  well. 

• chij-bast-may-na  merd  bato,  my  share  from  among  the  goods. 

The  postpositions  se  and  te  hayo  only  been  noted  in  ablatives  of  comparison. 
Thus : — 

petydse  bhl  bhindi  rotu, , more  bread  than  even  a bellyful. 

bain-tS  lambo  cha , be  is  taller  than  the  sister. 

sab-te  bhali  lattd,  the  garment  better  than  all ; the  best  garment. 

Genitive. — Examples  of  this  case  will  be  found  under  the  head  of  adjectives. 
Locative — 

apna  tandol-ma  kheda,  sent  (him)  into  liis  hold. 
jetho  lauro  tandol-ma  clihayb , the  elder  son  was  in  the  field. 
we  nana  kura-gani  ran,  he  lives  in  that  small  house. 
khuta-pdr  jorb  lai-dewa,  put  shoes  on  his  feet. 
wt  dal-tal  baithyau  cha,  he  is  seated  under  that  tree. 

Sometimes  the  Locative  takes  no  postposition,  as  in  wai  dydS  bari  bhukh  para,  in 
that  country  a great  famine  fell. 

1/  o 

Adjectives. — These  follow  the  same  rules  as  in  the  Standard  dialect,  remembering 
that  a final  d may  he  changed  to  a.  Thus : — 
bhalb  ddmi,  a good  man. 
bhald  (or  bhala ) ddmi,  good  men. 
bhald  (or  bhala)  adml-kb,  of  a good  man. 
bhali  sisni,  a good  woman. 
bhali  sisni,  good  women. 

The  genitive  of  the  noun  substantive  is,  as  usual,  an  adjective.  Thus  : — 
kai-kd  lauro  and  cha,  whose  hoy  comes  ? 
mi-la  ice-ku  (for  toe-kb)  lanro  mdra , I struck  his  son. 

merd  bdbu-ka  katig  khildd-ki  petydse  bhl  bhindi  rotu  honda,  of  how  many  of 
my  father’s  servants  is  there  bread  more  even  than  a bellyful  ? 
kai  manakho-kd  did  laurd  clihayb,  of  a certain  man  there  were  two  sons. 
wai-ki  gdti  lai-dewa,  put  them  on  his  body. 
syatd  ghiedrd-ki  M/hi,  the  saddle  of  the  white  horse. 


PRONOUNS 

(a)  Personal  Pronouns- — The  first  two  personal  pronouns  are  declined  as 


follows : — 

Singular. 

Nom.  ml,  nit,  I 
Ag.  mi-la,  mai-la 
Gen.  merd,  my  orb 
Ohl.  mat,  mi,  ml 

Plural. 

Nom.  ham,  harnU 
Ag.  hamu-la,  ham-na 
Gen.  hamaro 
Obi.  ham,  hamu 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


tu,  t%,  Thou 
tl-la,  tice-la 
terb,  tyorb 
ti,  tai,  tied 

turn,  tu  mu 
tumd-ln,  tuni-na 
tumdro 
tumjumu 

2 S 


$14 


ga-^hwAlI. 


Examples  are  : — 

ml  dj  bhindi  hi  8, 1 have  walked  a long  way  to-day. 
mx  hhukh-na  marnu-chhaU,  I am  dying  of  hunger. 
ml-la  pap  kaya , I have  sinned. 
jb-kuehh  tnero  lafo  chha,  whatever  is  my  share. 
mydra  aghin  hit,  walk  before  me. 

mai-ganl  kai-de,  make  me  (as  one  of  thy  hired  servants). 
mx-gani  de,  give  to  mo  (the  share  of  the  property). 
tum-na  mai-gatii  hi  del,  you  did  not  give  to  me  (a  kid). 
ham  khdtoa,  let  us  eat. 

fit  saddni  tin  dagirl  ohhai,  thou  art  ever  with  me. 

twe-la  wo  kai-gani  mol  liyo,  from  whom  didst  thou  buy  that  ? 

tybro  nan  kydcba,  what  is  thy  name  ? 

jo  mero  chha,  wo  sab  tero  chha,  what  is  mine  is  all  thine. 

tum-na  ni  del,  you  did  not  give  (etc.,  as  above). 

tiimdro  bhdl  dya,  your  brother  came. 

mi-la  tumdra  dgtir  pap  kaya , I did  sin  before  you. 

turn  pachhin  kai-kb  laurb  dim  clia,  whose  boy  comes  behind  you  ? 

( b ) No  instance  of  the  Respectful  Pronoun  dp,  your  Honour,  has  been  noted. 

(c)  The  Demonstrative  Pronouns  are  also  employed  as  pronouns  of  the  third 
person.  They  do  not  appear  to  have  feminine  forms,  as  in  the  Standard  dialect. 

They  are  thus  declined  : — 

Singular. 

This,  he,  she,  it. 

Nom.  yo , yd 
Obi.  yai,  ye 

Plural. 

Xom.  yo,  yU 
Obi.  yU 


That,  he,  she,  it. 
wo 

icai,  we,  wl 
wo,  tcu 

tin,  tcun,  8,  w8 


Examples  of  the  use  of  these  pronouns  are  : — 

yo  terb  bhai  marlyfi  chhayb,  this  thy  brother  was  dead. 
yo  rupyd  (fern.)  we-thd  de-dyd,  give  this  rupee  to  him. 
yd  kyd  hunai-chha , what  is*  this  that  is  happening? 
mi-la  yai-jug-md  pap  kaya,  I have  sinned  in  this  age. 

wo  hiti-ka  wai  dydh-ka  kai-ki  dagiri  rana  baithb,  he  having  gone,  began  to 
live  with  a certain  man  of  that  country. 
twe-la  wit  kai-gani  mol  liyo,  from  whom  did  you  buy  that  ? 
tcai-la  8-gani  bat-deya,  lie  divided  (tlie  property)  and  gave  to  them. 
tcai  dydS-ka,  of  that  country  (see  above). 
we  bhiiuli  manga,  beat  him  well. 

we-ko  bhai  we-ki  baiv-te  lambb  cha,  his  brother  is  taller  than  his  sister. 
wo  id  ddl-tal  baithyau-cha,  he  is  seated  under  that  tree. 
we-makoi  wit  rupyd  le-hi,  take  \ hose  (plu>\  fem.)  rupees  from  him. 

8-mS  eh  nan " laura-na  bola,  among  them,  the  younger  son  said. 


eAthI  dialect. 


315^ 


(d)  The  Reflexive  Pronoun  is  dphu,  self,  gen.  apno.  Thus  : — 
wai-la  ek  dphu-ganl  buldya,  he  called  one  (of  his  servants)  to  himself. 
mi  apnd  bdbu-gaiil  jaulo,  I will  go  to  my  own  father. 

(e)  The  Relative  Pronoun  is  jo  or  ju,  who.  No  instances  of  the  Correlative 
sd,  he,  she,  it,  that,  occur  in  the  specimen,  hut  it  doubtless  exists  in  the  form  given 
below.  Wo  may  give  the  declension  of  these  two  pronouns  as  follows 


Relative.  Cobbelatiye. 


Singular — 

Nom.  jo,  ju 

so 

Obi.  jai,je 

tai,  te 

Plural — 

Nom.  jo 

so 

Obi.  jaii 

lau 

Examples  of  the  ltelative  arc  : — 

jo  wai-gani  chhayo,  (lie  wasted)  what  was  to  him,  i.c.  what  he  possessed. 
yd  lauro  jo  tumdrl  sab  chlj  khdl-gaya,  this  son,  who  devoured  all  your 
, property. 

U chhimuld-na  jau-gani  sungar  khdnda-chhaya,  with  the  husks  which  the  swine 
were  eating. 

(/)  The  Interrogative  Pronouns  are  kb,  who  ? and  kyd , what  ? Kb  is  declined 
like  70.  Thus  : — 

turn  pdchhin  kai-kb  lauro  anu-cha,  whose  boy  comes  behind  you  ? 
kyd  has  ke  or  ki  for  its  oblique  singular.  Thus  : — 

yd  kyd  hunai-chha , what  is  this  that  is  happening  ? 
ki-le,  for  what  ? i.c.  why  ? 

(g)  The  Indefinite  Pronouns  arc  kui,  anyone,  someone,  and  kuchh,  anything, 
something.  Jb-kut  is  whoever,  and  jb-kuchh,  whatever.  Thus  : — 

wai-ganl  kit  l kuchh  ni  dendb-chhayb,  no  one  was  giving  him  anything. 
jab  wai-gaui  kuchh  ni  rayb,  when  nothing  remained  to  him. 

The  oblique  form  of  kal  is  kai,  as  in  : — 

kai  manakha-kd , of  a certain  man  (there  were  two  sons). 

wo  wai  dyaS-ka  kai-ki  dagirl  raya  baitho,  he  began  to  dwell  with  a certain 
(man)  of  that  country. 

(A)  Other  Pronominal  forms  noted  are  : — 
iff  or  itig,  so  many,  so  much. 
katug  or  katig , how  many  ? how  much  ? 
yakha,  here. 
wakha,  there. 
kakhap,  somewhere. 

CONJUGATION. 

A.— Auxiliary  Verbs  and  Verbs  Substantive. 

The  Present  is  : — 

, Singular.  Plural. 

chhu,  chhau,  chhaM,  I am  chhaioa,  we  are 

chhai,  chhai , thou  art  chhawd,  ye  are 

chha,  cha,  he  is  chin,  they  are 

VOL.  IX,  PAUT  IV. 


2s  2 


4J16  GAKHWilit. 

Note  the  form  cha,  instead  of  chha  for  ‘ he  is  It  is  the  form  regularly  given  in 
the  sentences  at  the  end  of  the  List  of  Words. 

Examples  are  : — 

mi  marnu-chaU,  I am  dying  (of  hunger) . 

tu  saddnl  mi  dagirl  chhai , aur  jo  mero  chha,  wo  sab  tero  chha,  thou  art  ever 
with  me,  and  what  is  mine,  that  is  all  thine. 
tyoro  nau  kya  cha,  what  is  thy  name  ? 

tumdrd  bdbu-ghar  kalug  laurd  chhi,  how  many  sons  are  there  in  your  father's 
house  ? 

The  other  forms  wall  he  found  in  the  List  of  Words. 

The  Fast  is  rnasc.  sing,  chhayd  or  chhoyo,  plur.  chhayd  or  chhdyd : fem.  sing, 
and  plur.  is  chhai  for  all  three  persons.  Thus  : — 
jo  wai-ganl  chhayd  phuk-phaki  deya , lie  wasted  what  there  was  to  him,  i.e. 
what  he  possessed. 

kai  manakha-kd  did  laurd  chhayd,  of  a certain  man  there  were  two  sons. 
wai-la  %,-ganl  jd-kuchh  chlj  chhai  bat-deya , he  divided  to  them  whatever  things 
there  were. 

B — Finite  Verb. 

The  Infinitive  or  Verbal  Noun  closely  follows  the  Standard  dialect.  The  strong 
form  ends  in  no,  which,  as  in  the  Standard,  becomes  no  after  n,  r,  r,  or  l.  Thus,  khdno, 
to  eat,  mdno  (for  mdrnd),  to  strike.  An  example  is  apnb  putyu  bharno  chdndb-chhayo, 
he  was  wishing  to  fill  his  belly. 

The  -weak  form  ends  in  na  (na)  and  is  usually,  but  not  always,  oblique.  Thus  : — 
Directs  : — 

khusl  karna  aur  khu6  hit  no  thllc  chha,  to  do  happiness,  and  to  be  happy,  is  right. 

Oblique  : — 

Singular — 

charauna-ku  kheda,  sent  him  to  feed  swine. 

bdjna-aur  nuchna-ko  dhuyel,  the  sound  of  music  and  dancing. 

jdna-kl  man  nl  kaya,  he  did  not  make  a mind  of  going,  he  refused  to  go. 

So  inceptive  compounds,  as  : — 

rana  baitho,  he  began  to  remain  (with  a man  of  that  country). 
khmi  karna  baitha,  they  began  to  make  rejoicing. 
wai-ganl  buthanna  baitha,  he  began  to  reconcile  him. 

The  Present  Participle  has  two  forms.  In  one  (as  in  Standard  Garhwali)  do 
(obi.  da)  is  added  to  the  root.  Thus,  mdrdb  (obi.  mdrda),  striking.  After  a long  vowel 
we  have  ado  (obi.  nda)  instead  of  do  (da).  The  feminine  ends  in  di  or  ndl,  according  to 
circumstances.  The  Participle  has  a weak  form  in  da  (nda). 

The  other  form  is  the  Kumauni  present  participle  in  iib  (no),  which  is  often  written 
nu  (nu). 

An  example  of  the  oblique  present  participle  is  : — 

wakha  kulcaram-pdr  birarda-birarda,  while  wandering  about  in  evil  actions. 
Other  examples  of  this  participle  wil1  bo  found  under  tho  head  of  the  present, 
imperfect  and  past  conditional  tenses.  It  will  be  remembered  that  when  r precedes  a 


HATH!  DIAIiBCT. 


ai7 


•consonant  it  may  be  optionally  elided,  so  tlxat  we  have  both  kardb  and  kado,  doing,  and 
mdrnu  and  mdnu,  striking. 

The  Past  Participle  closely  follows  the  Standard  dialect.  There  is  one  form  in  o, 
yd,  yti  or  ycm,  as  in  baithb,  seated,  mdryo,  struck,  baohlyu,  saved,  bailhyau,  seated,  and 
another,  corresponding  to  the  Standard  form  in  e or  ye,  ending  in  e,  ye,  a or  ya,  thus, 
tndra,  struck,  dye  or  dya,  came. 

The  Future  Passive  Participle  ends  in  wo,  as  in  : — 

tumdro  lauro  bolna  j ug  ko-ril  rayo , I did  not  remain  worthy  to  be  called  thy 
son. 


The  Conjunctive  Participle  is  formed  as  in  tlie  Standard  by  adding  i to  the  root, 
to  which  ka  is  usually  added.  Thus,  hiti-ka,  having  walked.  Numerous  examples 
occur  in  the  specimen.  Irregular  is  kai-ka,  having  done,  from  karno  or  kano,  to  do. 

The  Imperative  second  person  singular  is  the  same  in  form  as  the  root.  Thus, 
mar,  strike  ; khd,  eat ; jd,  go,  and  so  on.  In  the  Standard  dialect  the  second  person 
plural  is  formed  by  adding  d.  This  is  as  usual  liable  to  be  shortened  to  a in  Rath  wall, 
thus,  mdra,  strike  ye  ; hita , go  ye  ; khuta-pdr  jbro  Idt  deica  (with  ic  inserted  between  the 
two  vowels),  put  ye  shoes  on  his  feet.  With  the  full  long  d,  and  an  added  y,  we  have 
badhyd  in  List  No.  236. 

The  Old  Present)  usually  employed  as  a Present  Subjunctive  or  as  an  Im- 
perative) is  the  same  as  in  the  Standard.  As  in  ml  nuirU,  I may  beat ; ham  khdtoa, 
pitoa,  aur  snndar  ratoi,  let  us  eat,  let  us  drink,  and  let  us  remain  happy.  In  each  of 
the  first  plurals  of  tin;  latter  example,  a to  lias  been  inserted  between  two  concurrent 
vowels. 


The  Present  tense  has  two  forms.  The  first  is  made  by  conjugating  the  present 
participle  with  the  present  tense  of  the  verb  substantive,  as  in  Hindi.  Any  form  of 
the  present  participle  may  he  used.  Thus  : — 

mi  bhdkh-na  marnd-chhaE,  I am  dying. 

mi  turndrl  mlnat  kardb-chhau,  I am  doing  thy  service. 

kai-kb  laurd  dnu  cha,  whose  boy  comes  (behind  you)  ? 

tod  khdl-gaui  gbr  char  nun  In  cha,  he  is  grazing  cattle  on  the  top  of  the  hill. 

The  second  form  is  made  by  adding  terminations  to  the  present  participle.  The 
forms  given  in  the  list  of  words  are  : — 


Sing.  Plur. 

1 . mdnu , I strike  mdrnu 

2.  mdrnl  mdrnl 

3.  main  mam 


Note  in  the  above  how  r is  optionally, 
example,  from  the  verb  jdno,  to  go,  is : — 

Sing. 

1.  jdvu 

2.  jam 

3.  jdn 


and  almost  at  random,  elided.  Another 

Plur. 

jdnit 

jdnl 

jdni  or  jdndin 


As  an  example  of  the  use  of  this  tense,  we  may  quoto  : 

merd  bdbu  tee  ndnd  kurd-gani  ran,  my  father  dwells  in  that  small  house. 


818 


ga.rhwA.l1. 


The  Imperfect  is  formed,  also  as  in  Hindi,  by  suffixing  the  past  tense  of  the  verb 
substantive  to  the  present  participle. 

t oo  3 chhimuld-na,  jau-gant  suiigar  khdnda-chliaya,  apnb  putgu  bharnd 
chandd-chhayo,  lie  was  wishing  to  fill  his  belly  with  the  husks  which  the 
swine  were  eating. 

t cai-gani  kill  kuchh  m dendb-chhayb , no  one  was  giving  anything  to  him. 

The  Future  tense  is  thus  conjugated  : — 

I shall  strike. 

Sing.  Plur. 


1. 

mdrulb  (or  -Id)  or  mdrlu  (mulu) 

maria  (maid) 

2. 

maril 

mdrlyd  (malya) 

3. 

vi  drill 

maria  (maid) 

An  example  is  : — 

mi  apnd  bdbd-ga  ni  jaulb  aur  teat -genii  bblltt,  I will  go  to  my  father,  and  will 
say  unto  him. 

There  are  no  doubt  feminine  forms  also,  as  in  the  Standard,  but  none  have  been  noted. 
The  Past  Tense  is  formed  from  both  forms  of  the  Past  Participle,  as  in  the  Standard. 
Prom  the  Past  Participle  in  o,  yd,  yU  or  yau  we  have : — ■ 

Transitive  Verbs : — 

tumaro  bachan  atal  ni  kayo , I did  not  disobey  your  order. 
ttoe-la  wo  kai-gani  mol  liyb,  from  whom  did  you  buy  that  ? 
tum-na  mai-gani  ek  balur  bhi  ni  del,  you  did  not  give  me  even  a (female)  kid. 
fcai-ka  bdbu-la  bhukki  pel,  his  father  placed  a kiss  (fern.). 

Intransitive  Verbs  : — 

mi  ab  tnnidro  laurb  bblna  jug  ko-ni  rayb,  I did  not  rejnain  (i.e.  I am  not) 
worthy  to  be  called  thy  son. 

jab  Mai-gani  kuchh  nl  rayb,  when  nothing  remained  to  him. 
teb  tcai  dvaS-ka  kai-ki  dagiri  rana  bait  lib,  he  began  to  remain  with  a certain 
man  of  that  country. 

tab  wai-gani  sudh  (fern.)  ai,  then  memory  came  to  him. 

Examples  of  the  Past  tense  formed  with  the  Past  Participle  in  e,  ye,  a or  ya  are : — 
Transitive  Verbs : — 

mi-la  pap  kaya,  I did  sin.  " 
laura-na  bbla,  the  son  said. 
toai-la  bat-deya,  he  divided  (the  property). 

bdbu-la  miit/d  (fem.)  kaya , the  father  made  (i.e.  felt)  compassion. 

suna,  lie  [heard  (the  sound  of  music). 

toai-la  buldya,  pn.chha,  he  called  (a  servant),  he  asked. 

pdya,  he  got  (him  safe  and  sound). 

Intransitive  Verbs : — 

terb  bhdi  bachiyu  dye,  thy  brother  came  alive. 

jab  teb  dydl-ka  nerd  dya , when  he  came  near  the  house. 

barl  bhdkh  (fem.)  para , a grea*  famine  foil. 

icb  garib  hoi- gay  a,  ho  became  poor. 


rAthI  dialect. 


319 


kakhap  par-deg  hl-gaya , he  went  away,  somewhere,  to  a foreign  country, 
too  apnd  babu-ganl  hl-ga , (a  shortened  form  of  gay  a),  he  went  away  to  his  father. 

The  Perfect  tense  may  be  formed  either  by  conjugating  the  Past  Participle  with 
the  present  tense  of  the  verb  substantive,  as  in  mi-la  mdra-chha,  I have  struck,  or  by 
conjugating  the  Past  Participle  with  suffixes,  as  in  JUtE,  I have  walked,  and  so  on  (only 
in  the  case  of  intransitive  verbs)  as  in  the  present  tense  formed  in  the  same  way  from 
the  present  participle.  This  may  possibly  be  only  a form  of  the  past  tense,  as  is  noted 
in  the  case  of  intransitive  verbs  of  the  Standard  dialects. 

The  Pluperfect  tense  is  formed  from  the  Past  Participle,  and  the  Past  tense  of  the 
Verb  Substantive,  but  in  the  only  examples  available,  the  verb  substantive  employed  is 
not  chhayo,  but  the  Jaunsari  to. 

Thus : — 

harchi  gai-td,  he  was  lost. 

bhindi  din  (plur.  inasc.)  nl  hbi-ta,  many  days  had  not  passed. 

Another  form  of  the  Pluperfect  is  made  with  the  suffix  la.  Two  examples  occur  in 
the  list  and  specimens.  These  are : — 

(List  No.  193)  ml-la  mdrydla,  I had  struck  ; and 

(Parable) — 

harchi  gai-td,  pdiydla,  he  was  lost,  and  became  found.  Pdiydla  is  Pluperfect 
of  palno,  a passive  of  pdno,  to  find. 

In  another  Ratliwali  version  of  the  Parable,  which  is  not  printed,  we  have  also 
phuk-phak  dyale , lie  squandered.  The  same  version  has  pdile  instead  of  pdiydla,  and 
also  teri  chlj-baat  khavcdle,  (thy  son  who)  devoured  thy  property. 

The  Passive  Voice  can  be  formed  by  conjugating  the  Past  Participle  with  the 
Verb  Substantive. 

Thus  mi  mara  chhau,  I am  beaten  ; ml  mdra  chhoyd,  I was  beaten. 

As  in  Kumaunl,  a passive  is  also  formed  by  adding  i to  the  root,  as  in  mariytt, 
dead ; bachiyU,  saved  ; pdiydla , he  was  found. 

The  List  of  Words  (201)  gives  mdrdld,  for  * I shall  be  struck  \ This  is  evidently  a 
potential  passive,  and  means  ‘ it  will  be  possible  for  me  to  be  struck  ’ like  the  Hindi 
dikhana,  to  be  visible,  from  dekhnd , to  see. 

The  only  forms  of  a Causal  Verb,  charauaa-ku,  for  feeding  (swine),  and  charamda - 
cha,  he  is  grazing  (List,  229),  show  that  causals  are  made  as  in  the  Standard  dialect. 
Examples  of  Compound  Verbs  are : — 

Intensives : — 

bdt-deya,  he  divided. 

hi-gaya,  ho  went  away. 

hoi-gaya,  he  becamo,  and  many  others  in  the  Specimen. 

Inceptives : — 

These  are  formed  with  baithno.  See  under  the  Infinitive. 

Desideratives : — 

Formed  with  chdno,  to  wish,  as  in  bliarnd  chdndd - ‘hhayb,  he  was  wishing  to  fdl 
(his  belly). 

The  usual  Negative  is  nl.  We  have  the  Rajasthani  negative  kd-nt,  not  at  all,  in 
mt  ab  tumdro  lauro  bolnajug  ko-ni  rayd , I am  not  at  all  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son. 


320 

[ No.  '3.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Northern  Group. 

CENTRAL  PAHARl  (GARHWlLl). 

fiipf  ob  RAthwAli  Dialect.  District  Ga^hwAl. 

f ft  re^n  re*T  i #rer  *re  *ift  fhf-sr  rerrereft 

retre  sift  *f:-*t*  ret  $re  ftre-rerer-refre-re  trt  refst  re  sff-sift  % i 
7W  5-re  #-reft  ret  ire?  ftre  ret  refs  5*  i freft  f*si  ft  ftf-re 

ft  SIFT  ^f-ST  re*  lisft  f -*T  TO  *T*SJ  ft  **  fk  *W  IPTOI- 

*k  fresre*  frerrere  ret  re-reft  reft  revre-reirft  5*  i re*  5-reft  ire  ft  reft 

7i*  * renre  *ft  rerer  rere  fk  ret  sift*  fti  **  i fk  ft  fsft-rer 

• ^ • 

% *nre-*r  rer-ft  gfreft  1st  i re-re  re-reft  rerere  sftre-ref  *jres; 
rerkr-re  ^ i fk  ret  ^ frerereT-re  ref-reft  rerer  retre  re*  rereft 

C\ 

resre  rerret  retret  reft  i fk  5-reft  ff  ire  ft  **t  reft  i 
re*  5-reft  gre  reTt  fk  5-re  *tre  ft  rere  *t*-*i  reifrere  frerrekt-ft 
ft  ff ft  rets  ft*  fk  ff  sjre-re  reresr  ref  i ff  *ft-re 
rerereT  *T*-reft  ffret  fk  5-reft  retrere  ft  *Tre  *t*  ft-re  5 ^*-*t 
fk  grerre  reirefiH  rerre  *r*  i sff  re*  rerekt  retret  retrere  *ft  ret-ft 
re*t  i re-reft  rewr  frerekt-ft  reire  re  * i re*  ret  freft-*?  rererer 
*T*-reft  ft  re  i *r  *t  st*t  reft  ft  5-re  *T*-re  re-reft  *fft-re 

©V  * <\ 

rerrer  re*  fk  resft-re  re-re  rere-*TT  fre^ft-re  re-ft  reft  ref  i reti- 
re re-reft  retre  rets:  rerre  ft-re  5 ^re-reT  fk  resnr  reirefre*  reTre  re* 
fk  frerr  grekt  retret  retrere  re*  ret-ft  kit  i re*  srr^-re  rerereT 
renrere-reft  rerre  ft  rere-re  reft  reren  rer^t-re  re-ft  renft  reif-^re  fk 
5-re  rerre-reft  sf^ft  fk  ^s-reK  retret  rent -**  fk  rere  reref  ftref 
fk  gs**  t*t  i re-rert  *fc  $*t  retret  reft^  reret  frer  reft^  rer*  i 
rerft  re-ft  rerf*Tre  i re*  ret  s§ft  resre  5s  n 

5-ret  rest  *ftret  sfrre-reT  reft  i fk  re*  ret  renre-re 
ret*  Tirereirere  sn**-ret  f fre  re*  i fk  re-re  rererer  reireff-ref* 


RAT  Hi  DIALECT.  321 

V 

q <rq  ^qq  qq  gft  qf  wr  w i q-q  t-qqt  qtq 

gft  cj^TTt  mi  qrq  qk  gqrrr  qro-q  qqt  qq  %-<snq 

t-qnft  wft  *pft  <|«n^r  qro  i m.  t-q  *tq  *m  qk  ^ft?n:  qro-qt 
qq  qt  qq  i m t-^t  w\\  ^n q q-q*ft  ^qki  wz  i I- 

q qrfcqgft  qtq  qft  qrq  qt  q??t  qrq  gtft-f%^t-q  g*n<t  *ftqq 
qcr^t  $T  qkqnft  giTTtt  ^r^pr  ws  #t  qqt  qk  gq-q  fr-q*ft 
qnft  q*  qpp-*¥t  q*t  Me  iff  wot  ^ ^fqft  ^5ft  | 
qq  rjqkt  qt  qft^t  ^ xnw^t-^t  qfqft  rJOTTTt  mi  %3T  Wit  qq 
grot  qrot  q#  gq-q  q-qgft  qqt  WTWt  q?q  I OTW-W  t-q^t  qt«T 
#t  qK  w qqiqt  iff  qfq^t  M qk  Wt  qft  q qt  qq  tfft 
$ i qr  ^Jt  qsqq  qk  wq  qqt  w i %-qii:  qt  qft  mi 
qfttf  qqt  fvK  q’ft^  \ q-qt  fe  qriqrq  11 


VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


322 


C No.  3.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Northern  Group. 

CENTRAL  PAHARI  (GARHWALl). 

Ratiu  on  RatiiavalI  Dialect.  District  Garhaval. 

transliteration  and  translation. 

cliliaya.  ff-ma  ek-nana-laura-na 

were.  T hem-in  one-young  er-son-by 

babu,  jo-kuchh  chij-bast-may-na 
* friend , father , whatever  goods-chattels-in-from 


Kai-manakha-ka 
A-certain-man-of 
babu-gapi  bola 

the-f ather-to  it-was-said 


(Iaa'I  laura 

two  sons 

k», 
that. 


‘ yar, 


mero 

bato  clilia, 

mi-gani 

do.’ 

Tab 

Avai-la  u-gani 

jo-kuchk  cliij 

my 

share  is, 

me-to 

give.* 

Then 

him-by  them-to 

whatever  things 

cliliai, 

bSt-doya. 

Bhindi 

din 

ni 

hol-ta  ki 

nana-laura-na 

were. 

we  re-divided. 

J fany 

days 

not 

become-were  that 

the-younger-son-by 

sab 

kutri  kai-ka 

kakhap 

par-dci 

hi-gaya,  aur 

all  a-bundle  made-having  somewhere  foreign-country 
Avakha  kukaram-par  birarda-birarda  jo 

there  bad-action-on  wandering-wandering  what 

pliuk-phaki 
having-squandered 
wai-dyai 
{in-)  l hat-country 
kiti-ka  Avai 

gone-having  t liat-counl  ry-of  a-certain-one-of  icith  to-remain 
Avai-gani  apna-tandol-ma  sungar  charauna-kU 

him-as-for  his-own-Jield-in  swine  feeding-for 
S-cbliimula-na  jau-gani  sun  gar  kbanda-chhaya 

those- husks-by  which  ( acc .)  tlie-swine  eating-were 
ckando-chhayo,  aur  Avai-ganl  kul  kuclih  ni 

wishing -was,  and  him- to  anyone  anything  not 


went-away , and 
ivai-gaal  chhayo 
hini-to  teas 


deya. 

Jab  AA'ai-ganI 

kuclih 

ni  vayo. 

tab 

gave. 

When  liim-to  anything 

not  remained , then 

bari 

bhukh  para,  aur  avo 

garlb 

hoi-gaya. 

Aur  avo 

a-great 

famine  fell,  and  he 

poor 

became. 

And  he 

dyaS-ka 

kai-ki  dagirl 

rana 

baitho. 

Wai-la 

began. 


wai-gani 

him- to 


sudh 

memory 

katig-khilarl-ki 

how-many-servants-of 


ai,  aur  Avai-lu 

came , and  him- by 

petya-se  bill 
bcllyful-than  even 


bola 

it-was-said 

bhindl 
more 


Him-by 
khuda.  Aur  avo 

he-was-sent.  And  he 

apno  putgu  bharno 

his- own  belly  to- fill 

dendo-cliliayo.  Tab 

giving-was.  Then 

ki,  * mera-babu-ka 

that,  * my -father -of 

lionda,  aur  mf 

become,  and  I 


rotu 

breads 


bhukh-na 

marnu-clihau. 

m 

uthi-ka 

apna-babu-gani 

jaulo  aur 

htmger-by 

dying-am. 

I 

arisen-having 

my  - own-f  ather-  to 

will-go  and 

wai-gani 

bollu  ki, 

“ yar. 

babu, 

mi-la  yai-jug-ma 

aur  tumara 

him- to 

I-will-say  that. 

“friend, 

father, 

me-by  this -age -in 

and  of-you 

I 


K&THI  DIALECT. 


agtir 
before 
rayo, 
remained. 


pap 

sin 


kaya, 

wa8-done. 


mai-gam 
me  (ace.) 


% ;* 

m?  * ab  tumarO.  lauro 

I now  your  son 

ap^a-kliilari-ki  char  kai-de.”  ’ 
your-oion-servan  ts  - of  like  make.”  ’ 


apna-babu-gani  lii-ga.  Par 

his-own-f ather-to  went-away.  But 

wai-gani  deklii-ka  maya  kaya,  aur 

him  (acc.)  seen-havmg  compassion  was-made,  and 
bilki-ka  wai-ki  bliukki  pci.  Laura-na 

dung-having  him-of  kiss  was- placed.  Tlic-son-by 
babu,  1111-la  yai-jug-uia  aur  tumara  agtir 

father,  rne-by  this-age-in  and  of-you  before 

tuinaro  lauro  bolna  jug  ko-ni 


323 

bolna  jug  ko-ni 

to-be-called  jit  at-all-not 
Tab  wo  liitl-ka  * 

Then  he  gone-having 
wo  tada  chhayo  ki  wni-ka-babu-la 

he  distant  teas  that  him-of -the-father-by 

atki-ka  wai-ka-gala-par 

run-having  him-of -neck-on 

vai-gani  bola,  ‘ yar, 

him-to  it-icas-said,  ‘friend, 
pap  kaya,  aur  pbir 

sin  was-done,  and  again 
Par  babu-la 


rayo.’ 


your  son  to-be-called  Jit  at-all-not  I -remained.' 

apna-ehakar-gani  bola  ki,  ‘ sab-te  bbali  latta 

his-own-servants-to  it-was-said  that , * all-than  good  garment 


But  the-father-by 
gari-ke 

brouglx  t-forth-havi  ng 


wai-ki  gati  lai-dewa  ; aur  wai-ka  hatli-gani  mudri,  aur  khuta-par 

him-of  (on-) person  put-on  i and  him-of  liand-to  a-ring,  and  foot-on 

joro  lai-dewa ; aur  ham  kliawS  piw5  aur  sundav  raws ; 

shoe  put-on ; and  we  may-eat  may-drink  and  happy  may-remain ; 

ke-lai,  yar,  mero  lauro  mariyn  chhayo,  pbir  baehlyS  aya ; harclii 

because , friends,  my  son  dead  was,  again  alive  came ; lost 

gai-to,  paiyala.’  Tab  wo  khusi  karna  baitha. 

gone-teas,  icas-found.'  Then  they  rejoicing  to-make  began. 


* 

Wai-ko  jetho  lauro  tandol-ma  chhayo. 

Him-of  the-elder  son  the-Jield-in  was. 

neru  aya,  tab  bajna  aur  miclina-ko  dhuyel 

near  came , then  music  and  dancing-of  sound 


Aur  jal) 
And  tchen 
suna. 

icas-heard. 


wo  dyal-ka 
he  the-housc-of 
Aur  wai-la 
And  him-by 


apna-chakro-may-na  ck  aphu-gani  bulaya,  pucliha  ki,  ‘ yo  kya 
his-own-servants-infrom  one  himself -to  was-called,  was-asked  that,  ‘ this  what 
hiinai-clilia  ? * W ai-la  wai-gani  bola  ki,  ‘ tuinaro  bhai  aya,  aur 

becoming-is  ? ’ Him-by  him-to  it-was-said  that,  * your  brother  came,  and 

tumara-babu-la  blialo  khanku  kaya,  ke-lai  ki  wai-gani  bhalo  khusi 

thy-father-by  good  food  was-made,  because  that  him-asfor  well  happy 

khu&al  paya.’  Par  wai-la  ro$  kaya,  aur  bhitar  jana-ki  man 

safe  he-was-got.*  But  him-by  anger  was-made,  and  within  going-of  mind 

ni  kaya.  Tab  wai-ko  babu  bliair  aya,  wai-gani  buthauna 

not  was-made.  Then  him-of  the-father  outside  came,  him  (acc.)  to-reconcile 

baitha.  Wai-la  babu-gani  bola  ki,  ‘ dekh,  ml  iti  bars 

began.  * Him-by  the-f ather-to  it-was-said  that , 'see,  I so- many  years 

VOL.  IX,  PABT  IV.  T 


324 


GA^HWALl. 


tuli-biti-na  tumari  miuat  kardo-chhafl,  aur  kabhi  tumaro  baohan 
pawed- having  your  service  doing-l-am,  * and  ever  your  word 

atal  nl  kayo,  aur  tum-na  mai-gani  kabhi  §k  balur  bhi  nl 

disobedience  not  was- done,  and  you-by  'me -to  ever  one  kid  even  not 

(lei,  kl  m?  apna-abtu*dagirl  khu&  kado.  Par 

was-gicen,  that  1 my-own-friends-with  rejoicing  might-have-made.  But 

tumaro  yo  lauro  ju  patrS-ki  dagiti  tumari  sab  chiz  khtii-gaya,  jaso 

your  this  son  who  harlots-of  with  your  all  goods  devoured , as 

ayo,  taso  tum-na  wai-gani  bhali  kbanki  kaya.’  Babu-la  wai-gani 

he- came,  so  you-by  him -for  good  food  was -made.'  The-father-by  him-to 

bola  ki,  *yar,  laupa,  tCi  sadani  mf-dagirl  cbhal,  aur  jo  mero 

it-wae-said  that,  * friend,  son , thou  always  me-with  art,  and  what  mine 

chlia,  vo  sab  tero  chlia.  Par  khu£i  karna  aur  kbus  huno  thik 

is,  that  all  thine  is.  But  rejoicing  to-malce  and  happy  to-be  right 

chlia,  ke-lai  ki  yo  tero  bhai  inariv  u chliayb,  phir  bachiyS  aye ; 
is,  became  that  this  thy  brother  dead  was,  again  alive  came ; 

harchi  gai-to,  phir  paiyala.’ 

lost  gone -was.  again  was-fonnd * 


325 


LOHBYA. 

This  dialect  is  spoken  in  the  Lohba  Patti  of  Pargana  Chandpur  in  British  Garhwal. 
It  is  also  spoken  in  fourteen  neighbouring  villages  in  Patti  Palla  Genwar,  of  Pargana 
Pali  in  the  district  of  Almora.  The  total  number  of  speakers  is  reported  to  be  : 

Name  of  District.  Number  of  Speakers. 

Garhwal  8,100 

Almora 1,648 

Total  . 9,748 


Lohbya  is  hardly  worth  considering  as  a separate  dialect.  It  closely  resembles 
Rath!,  any  differences  being  due  to  the  admixture  of  other  neighbouring  dialects.  A 
few  lines  from  the  Lohbya  version  of  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son  will  therefore  lie  a 
sufficient  example. 

A long  and  excellent  folk-tale  in  this  dialect  will  be  found  in  Pandit  Ganga  Butt 
Upretl’s  Hill  Dialects  of  the  Kumaun  Division , pp.  72  ff.  To  this  the  student  is 
referred  for  further  information.  In  the  present  specimen,  the  only  word  which  calls 
for  special  notice  is  kajai  or  kojai , a man.  We  may  compare  with  this  the  word  kajjd, 
a Jat,  used  by  the  Gipsy  tribe  of  Slisls. 

[No.  4.]  ~ 

SPECIMEN  OF  LOHBYA. 

m\  i ot-ht  wter  wut  w- 

• • 'w 

in  tNPr  far  n w win  *rf£t 

% I IW  f&ft  I «n?cT  f^T  t 

sni-faR  win  ^ f^t  u 


TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 

[ No.  4.] 

Eka-kajai-ka 


One- man- of 
apjui-buba-  ma 
his-own-fath  er- to 
mero  bSto 
my  share 
b?it-dim. 
teas- divided-out 


dwi  laura 

tioo  so  tie 

bolo  ki, 

it-wa8-8aid  that , 
hon,  so  mi 

may -be,  that  to-me 

Bahut  din 
Many  days 


chhava. 

were. 

e buba, 

O father, 
de-do.’ 
give-away.' 
ni  lioya-chhaya 
not  become-were 


U nu  -ma  chhota-laura-la 

Them-among  tlie-younger-son-by 
apna-dliarta-dad-ma-na  jo 
your-own-property-in-from  what 
Tab  wai-la  apni  jfulad 
Then  him-by  his-own  property 
wai-clihota-laura-na 
that-younger-son-by 


upnu 

his-own 


bSto  kattha  kari-kin  dur  pavde4 

share  together  made-having  a-far  foreign-country 

jai-kin  luchachhuyo-ma  apna-b§ta-ki  sab 

gone-having  debauchery-in  his-oton-share-of 


all 


chale-go,  aur  wakha 
went-away,  and  there 
chiz  phuk-dini. 

things  were-squandered. 


326 


BAD  HA  NT. 

,4. 

This  dialect  is  spoken  in  the  centre  and  west  of  Pargana  Badhan  of  British  Garhwal, 
by  a population  estimated  at  11,108.  Like  Lolibya,  it  hardly  differs  from  Rathi,  and  a 
very  brief  notice  will  suffice.  I merely  give  the  principal  grammatical  forms,  and  a short 
extract  from  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son. 


Nouns- 

SlyOCLAB.  pLUBAL. 


Nominative. 

Oblique. 

Nominative. 

Oblique. 

gliorb,  a horse 

ghord 

ghbrd 

ghorS 

bdhu,  a father 

bdhu 

habit 

baba 

kukur,  a dog 

kukur 

kukur 

kukurS 

lauri,  a girl 

lauri 

lauri  or  laure 

lauriyb 

Ghord , as  elsewhere  in  Garliwali,  may  become  ghbra.  Similarly,  myoro,  my,  obi. 
sing,  mytira  or  myura. 


Postpositions. 


Agent,  la  or  l,  na  or  n,  by. 

Instrumental,  la  or  l,  na  or  n,  by. 

Dative  (and  Accusative),  that,  m9,  sani,  khanl,  khuni , haul,  to;  lai,  te,  for. 
Ablative,  te,  bati , from. 

Genitive,  kb  ( kii , ki),  of. 

Locative,  nia,  mat,  many,  in,  on ; par,  on  ; madlie , from  among. 

Pronouns- 


First  and  Second  Persons. 

Singular. 


Korn. 

mi,  mat,  I 

lii,  thou 

A o* 

mil,  mc-la 

III,  ttceda 

Gen. 

merb , myoro 

terb,  tybrb 

Obi. 

ml,  me,  mat 

Plural. 

ll,  ttce 

Nom. 

ham 

turn 

A cp 

hamnl 

tumid 

Gen. 

liamarb,  hamdro 

tumaro,  tumaro 

Obi. 

ham,  hamu 

turn,  turnu 

The  obi.  forms  of  myoro  and  tyoro  are  vnydrd  ( mydra ) and  tyard  ( tydra ) respectively. 


Demonstrative  Pronouns. 


This,  he. 

Singular. 

That,  lie. 

Nom. 

yd 

mb 

Obi. 

yai,  ye 

Plural. 

tcai,  ice,  toi 

Nom. 

yd,  y9 

teb,  tea,  a 

Obi. 

''V 

yu 

icun,  un,  tcunu,  unit,  tett,  9. 

The  Eeflexive  Pronoun  is  aphii,  genitive  apnb. 


badhAnI  dialect.  327 

Belative  and  Correlative  Pronouns. 

'Who.  That.  ■'* 


Nom. 

J* 

Singular. 

80 

Obi. 

jai,je 

tai , te 

Nom. 

jo 

Plural. 

80 

Obi. 

jau,  janu 

tau , tanu 

The  Interrogative  Pronouns  are  ko,  who  ? and  kyd,  what  ? Kb  is  declined  like 
jo.  The  obi.  sing,  of  kya  is  ki  or  kl,  as  in  ki-le,  why  ? 

The  Indefinite  Pronouns  are  km,  anyone,  someone  (obi.  kai)  and  kuchh,  any- 
thing, something. 

Auxiliary  Verbs  and  Verbs  Substantive. 

Present. 


Singular. 

Plural. 

i. 

ch% 

chd,  cha 

2. 

chd,  cha 

chii 

3. 

chd,  cha 

chd,  cha 

Or  we  may  have  chhti,  and  so  throughout. 

The  past  is  chiyb  or  c/myo,  plur.  chiyd  or  chayd  ; fem.  sing,  and  plur.  chi.  Or  we 
may  have  chyo,  chliiyo,  chliayb  or  chhyb,  and  so  throughout. 

Finite  Verb. 

The  Infinitive  ends  in  no  (w it)  or  no  (, nu ) as  usual,  with  an  oblique  in  na  (na)  or 
nd  ( na ).  Thus,  hitnb,  obi.  Mina  or  hifna,  to  go.  Tf  (ho  root  ends  in  r,  the  r may  be 
dropped  throughout  before  n or  l.  Thus  from  mar,  infinitive  mar  no  or  tndnb,  future, 
mdrlo,  or  mala.  The  distinction  between  no  and  no  is  very  laxly  observed. 

The  Present  Participle,  as  usual,  follows  the  Infinitive. 

The  Past  Participle,  as  usual,  (‘lids  in  b,  or  in  e (which  may  be  dropped),  or  in  yE. 
Thus,  hi  to,  kite,  hit,  or  hityU,  gone. 

The  Conjunctive  Participle  ends  ill  i,  to  which  khan,  kan  or  ka  may  be  added, 
as  hiti,  liiti-khan,  etc.,  having  gone. 

The  Noun  of  Agency  ends  in  tier,  as  in  hit  tier,  a goer. 

Imperative,  2nd  singular  hit,  go  thou ; plural  hitd,  go  ye. 

Tho  Present  (I  go,  I am  going)  as  usual  has  two  forms. 


First  Form. 


Singular. 

Plural. 

1. 

hitnu-ch® 

hittid-cha 

2. 

hitnu-cha 

hit  nd-chu 

3. 

hitnu-cha 

hit  na-ch  a 

Second  Form. 

Singular. 

Plural. 

1. 

hit  nft 

hitnU 

2. 

hit  an 

hitnd 

3. 

hifari 

liitni 

328 


oakhwalI. 


From  the  root  mar , strike,  we  have  mam®,  or  mu  nil,  and.  so  on. 

'Imperfect,  hituu  (hit  no,  hit  at, i)  chhyb , I was  going,  etc.  From  the  root  khd,  we 
have  kha-chhaya,  they  were  eating  (a  Kumaunl  form). 

Future,  I shall  go. 


Singular.  Plural. 

1.  hitlu,  hitld,  hitnu  hitld 

2.  hitlyd  hit  I yd 

3.  hitld  hitld 

From  the  root  mar , mdrlu,  or  maid,  and  so  on. 

Past,  I went. 

Singular.  Plural. 

1.  hit®  hit ® 

2.  Into  hi/d 

3.  hi  to  hi/d 

Or  hite,  hit,  hity®  throughout. 


For  a Transitive  verb,  wc  have  ward,  mare,  mar,  or  mdry®  throughout,  with  the 
subject  in  the  Agent  case.  Mdro,  of  course,  changes  for  the  gender  and  number  of  the 
object,  but  the  others  are  unchangeable. 

Irregular  Pasts  noted  are  gayo,  gyo,  go,  ge,  or  gay®,  I went ; ditto  or  diyo,  gave ; 
lino  or  liyo,  took,  and  so  on. 

Perfect — 

hitytt’Cha,  I have  gone.  So  hoyU-cha,  he  has  become,  chary®-cha,  he  has 
mounted,  and  ay®-cha,  he  has  coine. 

Pluperfect — 

hilyU-chhiyb,  he  had  gone.  For  the  Pluperfect  in  Id,  we  have  mil  mdriyald  or 
mdriydl,  I have  or  had  struck. 


[No.  6.] 

SPECIMEN  OF  BADHANT. 

^ *ll<4fl  m f&QT  I W •TPTT  *T 

• ©V  • 

g far  % ^ If  srfz  ?r 

vj  Vj 

% f^rr  i H fa*rr  i wr 

fm  •trt  fefarft  w wst  w %^tt  gw  § 

fan;  t*nfanrr  If  fw  *rtt^  * 

WRR  MiWRf  I 5R  H 

©V  • 

7R  I gw  W HTft  ‘snrr  vft\  ?r  t w?t  i cp 

wr  sni  t gw  tSK  w w wft  *rt  $ ^ $ 

win  w i w iwr 

V3  • '>3 

*rn*  ^rf  ww  wft  vxitt  fwtfr  i ^ at  5 

Nj  SJ  ^ 


tfl»uru 


BADHANl  DIALECT. 


329 


wft  I *T*T  $ ^rrt  I ^ t TO 

«rt  *jf% ^¥  ^ *ror  ?R  fwr  W fa^rr  toit 

TOT  3|  | If  TfTO  3TTOft  TOT  # WR , ?R  ^*T  ffa€t  II 

[ No.  6.] 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 

Kai-admi-ka  dm  cbhicbirl  chliiya.  Unu-madhe  nanfi- 

A-certain-man-of  two  sons  were.  Them-from- among  the - 

clihicbirl-na  apna-bubajl-niu  1)6l6  ki,  ‘ ho  bubajx,  mal-asbab-mai 

yonnger-son-by  his-own-father-lo  it-icas-said  that,  ‘ O father,  the-property-in 

mei'i  bat  mai-sani  nyarl  de-diya.*  Tab  xvai-la  apno  mal-asbab 

my  share  me-to  separately  give-away * Then  him-hy  his-oicn  property 

bati-diyo.  Mast  din  ni  lioya  phir  nana-cbbicbiri-la  sal) 

was-divided-out.  Many  days  not  became  then  the-yoanger-son-by  all 

ikatba  karl-khan  haika-mulak  nai-ge.  Phir  Ava  jai-ka 

together  made-having  {to-)  a not  he  r- country  away-icent.  Then  there  gone-having 

blit  yemaniya  kavo  be-kubi-mai  din  katne-katne  apno 

also  thus  was-done  un- wisdom- in  days  in-cutting-in-cutting  his-own 

mal-asbab  pbuk-pbak-karl-dlnl.  Jal)  wai-la  sab  mal-asbfib 

property  was-icasted-away.  When  him-by  all  property 

ural-diye,  tab  xvai-mulak-mai  bharl  kahar  paro.  Tab 

icas-squandered-aioay,  then  that-conntry-in  a- heavy  famine  fell.  Then 

xvai-kham  gavibl  lagl.  Tab  f>  waklia  jal,  katti 

him-to  poverty  ivas-attachcd.  Then  he  there  having-gone,  somcivhcre 
wai-mulak-raner-madhe  ek-ka  dagru  lagl-gb,  jai-la  Avai-kbanI 

that-country-dweller-from-among  onc-of  with  icas-joined,  whom-by  him-as-for 

apna-pugra-inahg  sun  gar  cbavauna-lai  khedo.  Aur  un-cbbemla-sanT, 

his-own-ficlds-in  swine  feeding -for  lie-was-sent.  And  t hose-husks  (ace.), 

jin-kliuni  sun  gar  kha-cbhaya,  apno  pet  bharno  chano-clihiyo. 

which  {ace.)  tlie-sioine  eating-icere,  his-own  belly  to-fdl  wisking-he-was. 

Aur  kui  wai-kliani  kuehli  ni  deno-chlinyo.  Tab  Avai-kbanI  yad 

And  any -one  him-to  anything  not  giving-was.  Then  him-to  memory 

ai.  Tab  wai-la  bOli,  * mera-bubaji-ka  katti-bburiyo-khanl 

came.  Then  him-by  ( a-icord-)was-said , * my-faiher-of  how-many-labourers-to 

petya-tS  put!  kbana-bani  bon-ckbiyo,  raaT  bina-petya  lnarnu-cbbu. 

bellyful-tlian  more  cating-for  becoming-was,  1 withou  t-bellyful  dying-am. 
Mai  ab  apna-bubaji-pas  nai-janu,  tab  unu-ham  bolulo  ityadi.’ 

T now  my-aion-father-near  away-will-go,  then  him-to  I-will-say  etc.' 

VOL.  IX,  PA11T  IV.  2 V 

■fe' 


330 


DASAULYA. 


This  dialect  is  spoken  in  Dasani i Pargana,  and  in  the  adjoining  parts  of  Painkhanda 
I’argana  of  British  Garhwal,  by  an  estimated  number  of  17,022  people. 

It  is  not  a real  dialect,  being  simply  Ra(hl  with  a few  local  varieties  of  pronuncia- 
tion. This  will  be  evident  from  the  short  oxtract  from  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son 
annexed.  Comparison  will  show  that  it  differs  from  Badhani  principally  in  preferring 
the  present  participle  in  do  to  that  in  no,  but  even  this  may  be  a matter  of  personal  equa- 
tion of  the  writers  of  the  two  versions.  We  may  note  the  past  tense  in  Id  of  a passive 
formed  by  adding  ?,  in  the  word  not  hi ydiydlo,  had  been  squandered.  Note  also  the  word 
Teayd,  they  were  desired  (i.e.  he  wished  to  eat  the  husks).  This  may  be  a past  tense  of  the 
verb  hah  no,  to  say,  (quasi,  he  said  for  eating),  but  I am  not  certain  as  to  the  form.  We 
may  also  note  that  the  oblique  plural  ends  in  au  and  u (©)  instead  of  the  Bathani  5,  but 
this  also  may  be  merely  a matter  of  spelling. 

Those  who  desire  further  information  about  Dasaulya  will  find  a long  and  excellent 
folk -tale  in  that  dialect  on  pp.  78  and  ff‘.  of  Pandit  Ganga  Dutt  Upreti’s  Mill  Dialects 
of  the  Kumaun  Division. 

[ No.  6.] 

SPECIMEN  OF  DASAULYA. 


3ft  ^ 3t  ft*  to  i I 

f^ftt  i to  ftt  fm  fftr  ^nftrftt  wot  tott  to 
^ ftt,  ^rfc  to  TOffi-TO  fro  ^ ft  *r 

to  to  i to  to  fw  *rf$3TTOwr  to  ft  ttt 

*rft  to  i n ftt  *rfk  ft4  nt  ^rfa:  to  to  *fit 

«fNT  Ttftt  I TO  ftt  TOTO  %TOTT  %^t  | ft  *T 

©v  v 

TO  TO  TO  TOT  TOR  TOW  TOT  I wi  ft 

TOft  <^1<U  W ift  ftt  TOT  WWT  II 

[No.  6.] 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 


Kai-admi-ka  dui 

A-certain-man-of  two 


Jarlk  clihya. 

sons  were. 


Tanu-ma 

Them-among 


bold,  * he  buba,  mal-magaki  jo  mero 

it- was- said,  ‘ O father,  the-property-out-of  what  my 

mat  dewa.'  Wai-ka  babu-na  bati-dino. 

to-me  give.’  Mine- of  the father-hy  it-was-divided-out . 


bato 

share 

Mast 

Many 


kSnisa-na 


the-younger-by 

howa, 

so 

may -be, 

that 

din 

bhl 

days 

, * even 

DASATJLYA  DIALECT. 


331 


ni  lioya  ki  kaniso  lauro  apno  bato  sab-kuchh  li-ka, 

not  became  that  the-younger  son  liis-own  share  everything  taken- having, 

pardeS  chali-go,  aur  wakha  . besarmai-ma  din  katdo-katdo 

a-foreign-land  went-away,  and  there  shamelessness-in  days  cutting-cutting 

tai-na  apno  dlian  sab  nathiyai-dino.  Jab  sab-kuchh 

him-by  his-own  wealth  all  was-squandcrcd-aioay.  When  everything 

nathiyaiyalo,  tab  wai-mulak-ma  bail  bbukh  pare.  Ta  so 

had-been-squandered , then  that- country -in  a-great  hunger  fell.  'Lhen  he 

garib  hoi-go,  aur  wakha-ka  ralmawalau-ko  naukar  liuyo.  Tanu-na  so 

pooi%  became,  and  there-of  the-dwellers-of  servant  became.  Them-by  he 

apn£-klietu-ma  sungar  charauna-liani  khedo.  Tai-na  janu- 

their-own-fields-in  swine  feeding -for  icos-sent.  Ilim-by  what- 

anna-kel-chlulkau-ham  sungar  khandu-ehhaya,  apliu  khaija  kaya. 

grain-of-husks  (acc.)  the-sioine  ealing-ioere,  himself  to-eat  were-wished. 

Kul  wai-kani  kbana-ku.  blii  ni  denda-clihaya. 

Any-persons  him-to  eating-for  even  not  gicing-were. 


vol.  ix,  j-art  iv. 


332 


majh-kumaiya. 

This  dialect,  as  its  name  indicates,  is  a border  form  of  speech,  between  Kumanni 
and  Garhwiili.  It  is  spoken  in  the  upper  part  of  Badhan  Pargana  of  British  Garhwal 
in  the  tracts  neighbouring  on  Almora  District,  and  also  in  some  villages  in  Patti  Malla 
Katyur  and  Talla  Danpur  of  Pargana  Danpur  of  Almora  District,  where  it  borders  on 
Garhwal.  In  Almora  if  is  often  called  Do-sandhi,  or  the  ‘union  of  the  two  (languages).’ 


The  number  of  speakers  is  estimated  as  follows : — 

Name  of  District.  Number  of  Speakers. 

Garhwal  • . •••  ^8j031 

Almora  4,380 

Total  . 33,011 


Like  Badhani,  it  is  simply  a form  of  Eatlii.  But  it  also  freely  uses  Kumauni  forms, 
and  it  is  really  a mixture  of  Kumauni  and  Garliwali,  in  which  the  latter  predominates. 

A short  extract  from  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son  will  show  its  nature.  Wo 
may  note  Kumauni  forms  such  as  Ml  (Iv.  kai),  anything ; hem,  anyone ; kari-ber,  hav- 
ing done ; kayo,  he  said ; and  imperfects  like  kha-ch/iiyd,  they  were  eating,  etc. 

There  are  few  other  peculiarities  which  arc  not  mere  differences  of  spelling.  There 
is  the  usual  indefiniteness  about  final  d and  u in  words  like  and,  jam,  instead  of  nnu  and 
jand.  The  Ablative  termination  clihi  or  chhai  may  be  compared  with  the  Jaunsari 
locative  suffix  chit.  Sam,  the  termination  of  the  dative,  is  here  sttttt,  while  in  Standard 
Garhwiili  it  may  he  si  ah 

Instead  of  kdfne  avo  find  Mtene,  on-cutting.  In  jau,  I will  go,  the  final  Id  of  the 
future  has  been  dropped,  and  avc  liaA'C  a new  termination  of  the  conjunctive  participle  in 
jdl-bafi,  haA'ing  gone,  and  ufhi-ba/7,  having  arisen.  We  may  compare  this  with  the 
Kumauni  bait,  Avhich  in  that  language  is  the  termination  of  the  Ablative. 


[ No.  7.] 

SPECIMEN  OF  MAdH-KUMAIYA. 

# Wl  t^TT  fmi  I *TT  f 

wt  wTf  ^«rfrr-*nr  #r  ^ i cm 

% % wfrT  ^ 3?  I f^T  fm  fW^T 

fT  ^ 4 # i 

wit  <3w*r  m mzw  wft  ^srt  fwi  i ^ 

m I 5pit  wr  w£t  ^qrp?T  w€t  \ ^ 

qf  t wwfs  % wwt  i ww  I |sj  ?rr  qf  fN  tsat 

t ^ ^ *tt  'sift  wz\wt  i ^ ^ 


mXjh-kumaiyX  dialect. 


333 


fwfrrat  ^ ipi*  *if  fwr  ^ %qt  i ^ ^ 

I *pft  %t  fwr  i I Tpft  %?t  *i=n:  wr  ere  I 

% f % ^TT  ®FT'  3TRT  3TT%TT  qRT  WW  ^ ^TT^T 

t fw^rr  % ww  ^r  *k«m  tst  i ?3<ffr  ^rtpijT  wto 

°S  G\ 

wi  vm  *%  4h  I S ^krNrr  ^srrf^  11 

[ No.  7.] 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 

Kai-maTs-ka  dm  chela  cb  biyft.  Uno-ma  kSisa-le  babu- 

A-cer  tain-man- of  two  sons  were.  Them-among  the-yonnger-by  thefather- 

chlif  hole,  ‘au  babu,  sampatti-ma  jo  merd  baklt  cliha  tai-gani 

to  it-was-said,  * O father,  tlie-propcrty-in  what  my  share  is  that  (ace.) 

mai-suni  dewo.’  Tab  wai-le  unu-gani  apnl  sampatti  bSti-de-cbba. 

me-to  give Then  hhn-hy  them-to  his-own  property  icas-divided-out. 

Bhaut  din  m hoya-clihiya  kdisd  chelo  sab-kuclih  yek  bat 

Many  days  not  heeome-were  the-youngcr  son  everything  together 

kari-ber  dur  des  nhai-gayG.  Aur  \\fi  jfu-bati 

made-having  afar  country  away-icent.  And  there  gone-having 

lucbcbapan-ina  din  katdm-katCMie  apni  laltipatti  udai-dii. 

debauchery-in  days  a-cntting-a-cutting  his-own  goods  toere-squandered-away. 

Jab  u sab-kuebb  udal-clmkb,  tab  wai-jaga-mii  bard 

When  he  everything  squandered-completely , then  tliat-placc-in  a-great 


akal  pavo. 

Tab 

u baro 

kiln  gal 

hai-gayd. 

Tab 

u wai-des-rauneraii- 

famine  fell. 

Then 

he  very 

poor 

became. 

Then 

he  tli  a t-co  u n i ry-d  wel  l ers- 

ma  yek-ka 

no 

U'fl 

rauna 

baithyd, 

jai-le 

u 

apna-khetS-ma  smigrd 

in  one-of 

near 

to-dicell 

began, 

xchom-by 

he 

h is-own-ficlds-i  a swi  ue 

charauna-ham  palhayd.  Aur  u und-chhimiyo-ganl  jand  sungar  kha- 

feeding-for  icas-scnt.  And  he  those- husks-icith  which  thc-swine  eating- 

chhiya  apnu  pet  bbarnu  cha-chhiyd.  Aur  kivai  wai-gaiu  kel 

icere  his- oxen  belly  to-JW  wishing-was.  And  any-persons  him-to  anything 

nl  dl-clihiya.  Tab  wai-gam  ehet-kbabar  bliavd,  aur  tab  lvai-le  kayo 

not  giving-tocre.  Then  him-to  memory  became,  and  then  him-by  it-was-said 

ki,  * mera-babu-ka  kaiik-kam-dbandfi-karanerd-ka  kbana-tc  japhii 

that,  * my -father -of  how-many-icork-cmploymcnt-doers-of  eating-than  more 

rota  liu-ckliiya,  aur  maT  bbiikb-ld  mavnfi-rayn.  Mi  ufhi-bali 
breads  becoming -icere,  and  I hnnger-by  dying-remained.  I a risen- ha  ring 
apna-babu-ka,  pas  nhai-jau,  aur  wai-ehbai  bolola,  ityadi.’ 

my-mcn-father-qf  near  away-icill-go,  and  hint- to  1 -will-say , etcetera. 


334 


NAGPURIYA. 

This  dialect  is  spoken  in  the  Nagpur  Pargana,  and  in  the  adjoining  parts  of  Pargana 
Painkhanda  in  the  north-west  of  British  Garhwal,  by  an  estimated  number  of  51,831 
people.  It  is  not  really  a separate  dialect,  being  practically  the  same  as  Dasaulya 
and  Majh-Kumaiya.  This  will  be  evident  from  the  extract  from  the  Parable  of  the 
Prodigal  Son  given  below. 

The  following  points  (they  are  hardly  peculiarities)  may  be  noted.  The  use  of  the 
wonl  baikh , a corruption  of  bekat  or  bekti,  a person  : of  se  as  a postposition  of  the 
ablative  ; and  of  the  oblique  plural  in  u in  nattkru. 

The  Demonstrative  pronoun  so  has  its  oblique  plural  tau.  The  word  for  ‘ self  * is  dpi i, 
not  dphu.  As  in  DasaulyS,  the  present  participle  in  ndo  appears,  as  well  as  that  in  no. 
We  find  the  Kuinauni  future  in  jail  and  bo  lit,  and  the  common  change  of  final  e to  a in 
dina.  Note  the  past  tense  in  did  in  nr  ay  die. 


[ No.  8.] 

SPECIMEN  OF  THE  NAGPURIYA  DIALECT. 

^ *Nr  3fT  5*  «fNnr  w*rr  i <ff  to  #®t  p t 

% tot  wt  ttot  w *it  if  % i to  I 

TOt  t ^ ^ fro  i tot  fro 

% m toto  tot  ^rk  tot  *rf  ^ttot  fro  *fr?rr 

*TRT  *#t3T  I 3Rf  I i(  ^ ^ST*TO  TO  TO  Wft  TOTST  Tt 

♦ » 

ftt  I TO  Wrt  ^ I TOR  ITT  TO  ^T 

tow  i ^ w t wt^T  w towt  ittot  tit  to* 

♦ t \|  \J 

fro  I t W^T  *T  Wt  ftif  TT*TT  icTT^T  TOT  WTO  TOT  S’fT  I 

* vj 

t TO  ft  ^ froT . TOt  I TO  Wt  ^ I TO  t ^ST 

if  S*T  TOT  WT  W TO  wNiW  W WTW  W TO  *feT  fWTOiT  TO  fTO 
f?  ^ HTOt  TO  I 3f  fti  WWT  TOT  *¥  TOTrf^  II 

w\  ♦ si  Cv  'N 


[No.  8.] 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 


Kai-baikli-ka 
A -certain-person  - of 
buba-se  bole, 

the-father-to  it-was-said. 


dui 

laura 

chhaya. 

Tau-madhe  lura-laura-na 

two 

sen  ** 

were. 

Them- among  the-yonngei'-son-by 

‘h§ 

buba. 

mero  b5to  mal-ko  chha, 

* 0 

father. 

what 

my  share  the-property-of 

nagpuriyA  dialect. 


335 


so  mai  dS.* 
that  to-me  give* 
Mast  din  ni 
Many  days  not 


Tab  buba-na 
Then  the-father-by 
hoya  luro 

became  the-younger 


wai-kani  wai-ko 
him- to  him-of 
lauro  apno 
son  his-own 


bato  de*dine. 

share  was-given-away . 
bato  le-ka 

share  taken-having 


pardeS  chala-ge,  aur 

a-foreign-land  toent-atoay,  and 
aur  apno  mal  khoye. 
and  his-own  wealth  was-lost. 


takka  badmasi-ina 
there  debauchery-in 
Jab  wai-na  sab 
When  him-by  all 


apna  din  kkoya, 

his-own  days  tcere-lost, 

urayale,  tab 

Uad-been- squandered , then 


wakha  bliarl  akal  pare,  aur  0 garib  koi-ge.  Aur  lakha 

there  a-great  famine  fell,  and  he  poor  became.  And  there 


jai-ka  wai-gau-ma  ek-baikh-ka  dagra-ma 

gone-having  that- village-in  a-persun-of  vicinity -in 


ralina  lage. 

to-remain  he-began. 


Tai-baikh-na  wai-laura-ku  apna-pilgra-ma  sungar  kerna  kliede. 

That-person-by  that-son-asfor%  his-own- field-in  swine  to-watch  he-was-sent. 

Tai-laura-na,  jo  ckkime  sungar  kkanda-okhaya,  so  apu  kkaga 

Thatson-by,  what  husks  the-swine  eating-ioere,  those  he-himself  to-eat 


tkalirc.  Wai-tal 

it-was-intended,  Jlim-to 

ckete.  Tab 

came-to-his-senses.  Then 


koi  dkan  bi  ni 
anyone  money  even  not 
wai-laura-ua  bole, 

th  at-son-by  i t-  was- said, 


dindo-ckkayo.  Tab  6 

giving-was.  Then  he 

* mera-buba-ka  ta 
my-father-of  verily 


kai-naukru-ku  kliana-se  kai-roia-nimka  bacli-dina,  mai 

seceral-servants-to  eating -than  several-bread-loaves  were-left-over-and-above,  I 

bhukk-na  marno-ckkau.  Mai  kkaro  koi  apna-bulm-md  jaS, 

hnnger-by  dying-am.  I erect  having-become  my -oion-father- to  icill-qo, 

bolfi  ityadi.’ 
will-say  etcetera 


330 


salaimt. 

With  Nagpuriya  wc  conclude  our  survey  of  the  Aryan  dialects  of  the  north  o 
British  Garliwal.  Further  north  still  Are  come  upon  a number  of  forms  of  Tibetan  de 
scribed  in  Yol.  Ill,  Part  I of  this  Survey,  pp.  100  ff.  Cher  the  Southern  Parganas  o 
the  district,  south  of  the  Hath!  dialect,  we  come  to  Salani,  named  after  the  three 
Parganas  of  Malla,  Talla,  and  Ganga  Salan.  The  dialect  is  also  spoken  in  tin 
Parganas  immediately  to  the  north  of  the  three  Salans,  and  in  the  western  portion  ol 
Pargana  Pali  of  Almoin.  GarliAvali  is  also  reported  from  the  neighbouring  districts  oi 
Delira  Dun,  Sahara npur,  Bijnor,  and  Moradahad,  and  Are  may  assume  that  here  also  il 
is  spoken  in  the  form  of  Salani. 

The  estimated  number  of  speakers  is  therefore  : — 

Name  of  District.  Number  of  Speakers. 


Almora 

» 

L 

■ 

15,170 

Garliwal 

. 

. 

m 

. 

207,802 

Delira  Dun  . 

• 

• 

• 

• 

5,000 

Sahara  npur  . 

• 

• 

0 

• 

• • 

250 

Bijnor 

. 

■ 

0 

• 

• 

1,000 

Moradahad  . 

• 

• 

• 

• 

t » 

Tot  at. 

500 

229,758 

Salani  is  practically  the  same  as  Srinagariya,  the  standard  form  of  Garlnvali.  This 
will  be  evident  from  the  version  of  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son  annexed. 

The  only  differences  to  he  noted  are  the  following.  In  the  Standard  dialect,  Avords 
which  in  Hindi  end  in  e,  end  in  a short  unpronounccd  a.  In  Salani,  to  judge  from  the 
spelling  of  all  the  specimens  received,  this  final  a is  pronounced,  so  tliat  the  postposition 
of  the  agent  case  is  na,  not  n,  and  the  suffix  of  the  conjunctive  participle  is  ka,  not  k. 
It  Avill  he  remembered  that  the  same  occurs  in  all  the  other  dialects  of  Garliwali. 
Another  example  of  this  tendency  to  pronounce  a final  a is  in  the  word  kuchha,  any- 
thing, Standard  kuchh.  In  the  vorb  substantive  wc  have  cha  as  well  as  chha  for  ‘he  is,* 
a change  which  also  occurs  in  other  dialects. 

The  only  new  form  which  occurs  in  the  specimen  is  liondena,  becoming,  in  the 
passage  where  the  son  remembers  that  his  father’s  servants  used  to  get  much  bread 
to  eat.  A similar  form  will  he  met  in  the  Tchri  dialect. 


337 


[ No.  9.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Northern  Group, 

CENTRAL  PAHA  III  (GARHWALT). 

SalA.nI  Dialkct.  District  Gauiuval. 

Specimen  I. 

# WUT  qTT  3*  WQT  I .f?  HT  qqqqT  q qq^T  TO  HT 

ftqft  % qqT  fft  ^rrar  mq  qf  ft  qqt  qfst  ftq  ft  If  ft  to  i m 
I q f qq  #N  qqft  ht^t  m^r  qfft  trot  i f «|  ffq  ft  ftf 
TO  f%  qroft  qtft  qq  qffT  qjft  f f qft  qft 

fk  TO  TOqq  qf  f<?q  ffqfq  qqft  HT^r  cTT^T  ffetTf  fksft  I ^ 
ft  qq  qqft  qf  qqnq  qqrr  ffk  ft  qrmq 

ftf  qft  I fk  ft  ^ni.  qf  I TO  qTT  TfqqTqf  qf  q ^ qiT  TO 

qro  qpft  # q ft  fq#f  qf  qqq  qqkr  qr  qff  ft?ft  i qk  fr 

^ ®fpiT  q wf  qr  qqq  TOt^T  TO  qnqt  q?  q*q  qtft  ^ft  fftq 

D & '-J  Cv 

ft  q qr  ft  fft  wft  I qq  t qr  ftq  qift  ffk  t q ft*ft 
^tt  to  qrr  qrqqT  ft  tj^t  qr  qrprr  q fqf  ?kf  ftfq  qk  q 

TO  *T  HTrn  1F3T  I ^ TOUT  TO  q qt€t  qk  qf  qf  ft^€t 

^ c\  J ®\ 

% TO  i'  ^ M ^ 3*5t  qk  q?Tq  qiT  qtq*T  qTq  qTT  | q qq 
^rrq  ^t  qtft  ftqq  qnqqr  ft  i q qr  qw  qMi  qf  q to 

«KT  qTTWT  qWT  I Hq  ft  qf  TOT  TO  qTT  qTH  TOQt  I qT 

ft  ft  wft  ffr  t q»T  to  qr  q f*#t  qr  to  qf  qk  ftit  q? 
t qrr  tot  qr  krest  qr  q ^ft  fkft  i fWr  q q qf  fkat 
f qqT  fft  q q qPT  f q«5St  qiM  qfT  qT^  qTT  qk  q 
qq  qrq  ^t  qkt  ftro  qtro  ft  i q^*q  qqT  q qqqrr  qNq 
qff  ftqst  qq  q q^c  qrq^T  fqqnft  qt  ^ \ q^Tt  to  i q qq 
tot  qq  qft  ^q  *=rff  qq  ^qT  qqrf  fqT  \ fk  qq  ftq^qT^q 
qrqqf  qtqqrc  i froTi  fqt  ft  qqt  ^ft  q5^  ^ft  qq  qfft  qf 
q^r  qft  fqiq  trot  qf  i qq  ft  qiq^q  qrq  qq^T  h 

-Z  x 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV, 


338  ga^hwAlL 

I q?t  wst  qhrr  qtqqi  qf  sqfr  jft*  snr  qt  qffr  ^ ^^t 
q^tqr  qfafr  qq  wt^T  qh  qrqnr  ^ q^  qqqt  i qk  t q qwr 
qwf  qf  q qqr  qr  ’nw  iqq  qqni  qr  q$rr  qt  q*T  q i q q ^ 
.rf  «Mt  mnft  ^4  *rf  * . ^ mrm  y.x^  * ^ 

fqrqT#.  fqr  qr  qqt  qqr  wft  \ qrq  t qr  qwr  qrat  qk  fqq 

sj  C\ 

qf  qrqr  i 5 qren  t qqr  qT  qni  ^ If  qqkr  qqft  i 

Cy  v*  »y 

q q qrqqn  qqT  qr  qqTq  <ff^qr  fqr  %*!T  W qcRT  f^T  % qiq 
%qT  q?T^  qk  qnfr  qrq  qrr  ^qq  qf  £T*sfr  qk  qrrq  q qrqf  q uqr 
tffqf  qf  qff^fr  qt  $f  qwr  ^qqft  qn  qfq  qrq^  qrc^t  I xrtn 

qm  qt  qfqr  qt  qraq  qrr  <fvsj  qqqt  qrq  mq  *irf  qt  qqit 

fT  qt  qT  qit  crqrt  ft  qro  q I q*T  qraT  q^r  qrt  i qqT 

n!  & \J 

q qtqtif  % qfqr  ^ Tt^  trr  ^t^t  qk  €t  qr$  *tk  w qt  qq 
qft  w i qfq  qiqsq  qr^^  Tgsft  ¥tq  wtt  fqrqii  fqr  tt 
?kt  qrt  qqf  wtt  qqf  qq  wq  qift  fqqf  qt  n 

C\  Cy 


< mo* 


[No.  9.] 

INPO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Northern  Group. 


CENTRAL  1’AIIARI  (UARHWALl). 


SAIiANI  DiAIiECT. 


Orsrnrtr  (jarhwal. 


Specimen  |. 

transliteration  and  translation. 


I\  ai- j ha  n a-k  a,  d ui 

A-certain-man-of  two 

apna-buba-ma  l)6l  yO, 

his-own- father- to  it-wm-mid. 


nauna  chliaya.  U-ma 

son#  were . Them-o  many 

‘ lie  buba-ji,  inal-tal-inuf  jo 

i 0 father,  the-pro/jert;/*'/ n which 


kansa-ua 

the-youuger-by 

nioro  batho 
tu;/  share 


liowa 

may -he 

mal-tal 

property 

nauiio 

son 

wakha 
there 
Jal» 
When 

parvo 
fell 


so  mai  di-dewa.*  Tab 

that  me  give-away Then 

batl-diuyo.  Bhi  ruble  din 

was-d  i oidecl-o  ut.  Many  days 


sab-kucbha 
every  thing 
luehpan-ma 
dehanchery-in 


knri-ka 

mode-having 


katthii 
together 

din  bitaunda 
days  a-tcasting 


apno 

his-own 


wai-na  n-ka 
him-by  them-of 
ni  hove-ehha  vii 

e « 

not  become-were 

dftr-des-ku 
distant-eountry-to 
mfd-tal 

property 


apno 

his-own 


Inch 

between 

k i kan  so 

that  the-yonnger 

diall-ijayo,  aur 
went-away,  and 
bitax-dinyo. 
icas-squa  ndered-away . 


wo  sab  kucblia  urai-ehukyo, 

he  all  things  had-sqnandered-eomplelel //, 

aur  \vb  kant^al  hm-gayo,  am*  wo 

indigent  became,  and  he 

kai-ka  yakha  ralma 

a-certain-one-of  near  fo-liee 

charauna-ku  bhoji-dmyb. 
swine  feeding- for  tcas-scnt-aieay. 


sungav 


and  he 
lalmwalaii-md-na 
inhabitants- i a- from 
pui'rau-ma  sun^ar 
ficlds-in 
jaii-ku 
which  (ace.) 
aur  kui 
and  anybody 
ayo  aur 

came  and 

khana-te  bliinddo 
eating-than  mcrre 
uthl-ka 

arisen-having 

VOL.  IX,  PAET  IV. 


khanda-ehhaya 
l h e-swine  caii  ng-ieere 
wai-ku  kucblia  11I 
him-to  anything  not 
wai-na  bolyo, 

him-by  it-icas-said. 


MaT 

f 


roti 

bread 

apna 

my-otcn 


hondena 
is-becoming 
buba-inH 
fa  thereto 


apno  pel 

his-own  belly 
dendo-cliliayo. 
giving -was. 

* mera-lmba-ka 
1 my-father-of 
aur  mai 
and  I 

jauld  aur 

will-go 


tab  wai-dds-ma  akal 

then  that-coiinfry-in  famine 

jai-ka  wai-des-ka 

gone-ha  r i ng  that-country-of 

laa:yo,  jai-na  wo 

began,  whom-by  he 

Aur  wd  d-cbbukelau-te 

And  he  those-husfcs-with 

bliarnu  clnindo-chhayo, 

to-fill  wishing-was, 

Tab  wai-ku  bos 

Then  him-to  recollection 


kat  na -hi-bburtyaii-ku 
hoxc-man  y-eren-ser  rants-  to 
bhukli-na  marnO-chhaii. 
hunger-with  dying-am. 
O-mfi  hollo,  “ ha 

and  him-to  I-wiU-say , “ O 

2 x i 


340 


GA^HW-Sfcl. 


buba-ji,  mai-na  swarg-te  ulto  aur  ap-ka  sam^g  pap 

father,  me -by  Heave  n-from  opposite  and  your-honour-of  before  sin 

karo.  MaT  ab  ap-ko  nauno  bolna  layak  ni  chhaQ ; 

was- done.  I now  your-honour-of  son  to-say  worthy  not  am; 

mai-ku  apna  bhurtyau-ma-na  ek-ka  barabar  banfiwa.”  ’ Tab  wo 

me  (ace.)  your-own  servants-in-from  one-of  equal  make.”  ' Then  he 

utki-ka  apna  buba-ka  pas  cbalyo.  Par  wo  dur-hi  chhayo 

arisen-having  his-own  father-of  near  went.  But  he  far-off-even  was 

ki  wai-ka  buba-ku  wai  dekhi-ka  daya  al  aur  dauri-ka  wai-ka 

that  him-of  father-to  him  scen-having  pity  came  and  run-having  him-of 

gala-par  chip{I-ka  wai-ki  bhukkl  lini.  Nauna-na  wai-ma 

neck-on  clung-having  him-of  kisses  icere-taken.  The-son-by  hini-to 

bolyo,  * lie  buba-ji,  mai-na  swarg-te  ulto  aur  ap-ka 

it-was-said,  1 O father,  nie-by  Heave  n-from  opposite  and  your-honour-of 

sainne  pap  lcare,  aur  mai  ab  ap-ko  nauno  bolna  layak 

before  sin  was -done,  and  I now  your-honour-of  son  to-say  worthy 

nl  ehhaa.’  Pavautu  buba-na  apna  naukru-ina  bolyo, 

not  am.'  But  the-father-by  his-own  sercants-to  it-was-spoken, 

‘ sab-te  sundar  kapra  nikali-ka  wai-ku  pairal-dewa.  Wai-ka 

* all-than  beautiful  clothes  lake n-out -having  him-on  put.  Ilim-of 

hath-par  giiUM  aur  khulfau-par  jntla  pairal-dewa.  Aur  liam-log 

hand-on  a-ring  and  feet-on  shoes  put.  And  we-people 

khaula  aur  finand  karla ; ki-lai  ki  yo  mero  nauno 

shall-eat  and  merriment  shall-make ; what-for  that  this  my  son 

maryO-clihayb,  ab  bacbi-gaye ; liarchyS-chhayo,  pliir  mili-gaye.’  Tab 

dead-was,  now  saved-went ; lost-was,  again  found-went .'  Then 

wo  anand  karna  lagya. 
they  merriment  to-make  began. 

Wai-ko  jetlio  nauno  pSgara-ma  chhayo,  aur  jab  wo  audo 

Him-of  the-elder  son  - field-in  was,  and  when  he  coming 

aundo  ghar-ka  najik  pahuchyo,  tab  bajau-aur-nachna-ko 

coming  house-of  near  arrived,  then  musical-instrumenis-and-dancing-of 

sabd  sunyo.  Aur  wai-na  apna  bhurtyau-ma-na  gk-kfi. 

sound  was-heard.  And  him-by  his-own  servants-in-from  one  ( acc .) 

apna-pfis  bul&i-ka  puchhyo,  ‘yo  kya  cha ? * Wai-na 

of- himself -near  called-having  it -was -asked,  ' this  what  is?'  Him-by 

wai-ma  bolyo,  ‘ tumai'o  bhai  ayn*chha,  aur  tuinara  buba-jl*na 
him- to  it-was-said,  * your  brother  come -is,  and  your  father -by 

sundar  khanu  kare ; ki-lai  ki  wo  bhald  change  paye.* 

good  food  ' teas -made ; what-for  that  he  well  healthy  was-fouhd.  ' 


SAXJLNl  felAXEOT. 


84.1 


Farantu  wai-kCL  * gussa  ay 6 aur  bhittra  janu  ni  chayo.  Yai-wasta 

j But  him- to'  anger  came  and  inside  to-go  not  he-wished.  This-for 

wai-ko  buba  bbair  ai-ka  wai-ku  manauna  lagyo.  Wai-na 

fiim-of  the-f  other  outside  come-having  him  ( acc .)  to-appease  began.  llim-by 

apna  buba-ku  jabab  dinyo  ki,  * dekha,  mai  itna-dinu-te 

his-own  father -to  answer  was- given  that,  ‘ see,  I so-many- days- from 

ap-ki  s6wa  kardu,  aur  kakhi  ap-ko  hukm  ni 

your-honour-of  service  ( am -)  doing,  and  ever  your-honour-of  order  not 

talyo,  aur  ap-na  kakhi  maT-ku  ek  chhauno  bln  ni 

was-transgressed,  and  your- honour -by  ever  me-to  a kid  even  not 

dinyo,  jo  mai  apna-dagryau-ka  s§th  anand  kardo. 

was- given,  that  I my-oton-companions-of  with  merriment  might-have-made. 

Parantu  ap-ko  yo  nauno  jo  patru-ka  dagra  apno  mal-tal 

But  your-honour-of  this  son  who  harlots-of  with  his-own  property 


khai-gaye,  jabare-lii  wo 
at  e-up,  when-even  he 

sundar  khanu  kare.’ 
good  food  was-made 
mera  dagra  chhai,  aur 
me-of  with  art,  and 


ghar  aye,  tabarc-lri  ap-na 

home  came,  then-even  your -honour -by 

Buba-na  bolyo,  * he  nauna, 

Th e-father -by  it-was-said,  * 0 son, 
jo-kuchlia  mero  chha,  so  sah 

ivhatever  mine  is,  that  all 


wai-ka-wusta 
him-of -for 
tu  rojjc 

thou  daily 

tero  chha. 

thine  is. 


Parantu 

But 


anand  karnu  aur 
merriment  to-malee  and 


khuSi  honu  cliaindo-chhayo ; ki-lai 
glad  to-be  proper-was ; what-for 


ki 

that 


yo  tero  blial  maryu-chhayo, 

this  thy  brother  dead-was, 


bachi-gaye ; harckyu-chhayo,  pher 
saved-went ; lost- was,  again 


mili-gaye.’ 
found -went V 


TEHRT  GAf?HWALT  OR  GANQAPARIX^ 

The  State  of  Tehri  Garhwal  lies  to  the  west  of  British  Gartiwal,  from  which  it  is  separ- 
ated along  the  southern  portion  of  its  boundary  by  the  river  Ganges.  Its  H&nguago  is  a 
recognised  dialect  of  Garliwall,  known  as  the  Tehri  dialect,  and  also  by  people  of  Garh- 
wal and  Almora,  as  “ Gangapariya  ” or  the  language  of  the  country  beyond  the  Ganges. 
The  number  of  speakers  is  estimated  at  240,281. 

Immediately  to  the  west  of  the  Tehri  State  lies  the  Jaunsar-Bawar  tract  of  the 
District  of  Debra  Dun,  the  language  of  which  is  the  Western  Bah  ay  i Jaunsari.  As 
might  be  expected,  the  Tehri  dialect  shows  distinct  traces  of  the  latter  form  of  speech, 
the  most  important  of  which  is  the  frequent  use  of  the  word  tliayb  instead  of  chhayo, 
to  mean  ‘ was.’  Compare  the  Jaunsari  thb. 

It  is  reported  that  the  dialect  varies  from  place  to  place  over  the  whole  State.  This 
is  to  be  expected.  The  specimens  given  below  represent  the  form  of  speech  current  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Tehri,  the  chief  town  of  the  State.  The  specimens  consist  of  a 
version  of  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son,  and  of  a well-known  folk-tale, — the  fable  of 
the  Bundle  of  Sticks.  Another  (and  excellent)  example  will  be  found  on  pp.  GG  and 
ff.  of  Pandit  Ganga  Datt  Upreti’s  Hill  Dialects  of  the  Kumaun  Division. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  give  a complete  sketch  of  the  grammar  of  Tehri  Garliwall.  It 
will  be  sufficient  to  note  the  principal  points  of  divergence  from  the  Standard  dialed. 

Nouns- — The  principal  postpositions  are: — 

Agent,  na. 

Dative- Accusative,  kii,  ka,  sani ; for,  lai. 

Instrumental,  na,  se,  te. 

Ablative,  muje,  se,  te;  from  among, md-na. 

Genitive,  kb  ( ka , ki). 

Locative,  ma,  rn&. 

The  locative  postpositions  are  used  after  verbs  of  saying,  like  the  Standard  ma. 

Substantives  and  adjectives  make  their  oblique  forms  as  in  the  Standard.  The 
plural  oblique  terminations  are  an  and  it,  both  of  which  are  frequently  nasalized.  Thus, 
bubau-kb  or  bubau-kb,  of  fathers;  oia  usii-kb  or  mansU-kb,  of  men. 

Adjectives  follow  the  same  rules  as  in  tin;  Standard.  Por  ‘one’  the  word  bar  (/at 
(i.e.  barkat,  good  luck)  is  usually  employed  in  counting. 

Pronouns  closely  follow  theJStandard.  The  usual  oblique  form  of  lit,  thou,  is  hcai, 
as  in  twai-na  (ag.  sing.).  Similarly,  the  agent  singular  of  mat,  I,  is  mai-na  or  mai-na. 

Por  yb,  this,  he,  and  wo,  that,  lie,  we  have  : — 

This,  lie,  she,  it.  That,  he,  slic,  it. 


Mnsc. 

K.  tu. 

Singulm . 

Muse. 

Fein. 

Nom. 

yb 

yd 

wo,  tea,  U 

wd 

Old. 

yc,  yai 

IMmal. 

ice  wai 

Wl 

Nom. 

ye,  yb 

too,  u 

(3) 

Obi. 

yau  (yau),  yu  (yfi) 

u (S) 

Gen. 

inaro , 

yu-ko 

unaro, 

U-kb 

The  Reflexive  Pronoun  is  dph  7,  self;  genitive  apno.  Aphu-ma  is  “amongst 
themselves.” 


TKUItt  DIAL  ECT. 


343 


The  Relative  and  Correlative  Pronouns  are : — 

Relative.  Correlative. 


Singular. 


Nom. 

jo 

so 

Ohl. 

jai 

Plural. 

tai 

Nom. 

j* 

se 

Ohl. 

jgd  (jyfi) 

tyu  (tyti) 

The  Interrogative  Pronouns  are  kb  (declined  like  jo),  wlio?  and  kyd  or  kydjo 
(cf.  Jaunsari),  ohl.  Ice,  what  ? 

the  Indefinite  Pronouns  are  kill  (obi . knl),  anyone,  someone,  and  kichhu  or 
knchh,  anything,  something. 

The  Verbs  Substantive  are  : — 

Present,  I am,  elc. 


p.ural_ 

1.  clthftUy  oh  ha  a,  chhayd 

2.  ck /tat  chhaydl 

3.  eh  ha  eh  liana 


Chha  may  also  he  used  for  any  person,  as  in  til  ah  amnia  tydr  chlta,  thou  art  ready 
to  die. 

The  usual  past  is  thayb,  was  : plural  thayb  ; fern.  sing,  and  pi  nr.  that.  The  Stand- 
ard chhayd,  etc.,  is  also  frequently  employed. 

Finite  Verb. — 'The  rnlinitive  closely  follows  the  Standard  dialect.  The  strong 
form  usually  ends  in  «,  as  in  honfi,  to  be,  mdrnu,  to  strike;  but  o also  occurs  in 
yaan,  to  sing,  ndc/nib,  to  dance.  The  weak  form  ends  in  a,  as  in  /idea,  cliaranna , kanta. 
The  usual  rules  for  a and  n apply. 

The  Present  Participle  is  formed  as  in  the  Standard,  either  with  do  or  ait  (nil). 
Thus,  mdrdo,  hbndo,  c/iarannu  (sentence  2291. 

The  Past  Participle  also  follows  the  Standard,  ending  in  e,  yd,  and  t/ii,  with 
oblique  forms  in  e,  yd  and  ya.  Thus,  mire,  mdryo , mdryU,  gayff,  gay'o,  baithyu,  and 
(ohl),  chalyd,  gage,  he  wont  away;  holy  a a prat,  beyond  (or  in  disobedience  to)  what  is  said. 

As  examples  of  the  Future  Passive  Participle,  wc  have  in  the  second  specimen 
Jtam-ua  kanu  ran  a (for  rahna)  khdaa,  how  is  it  to  be  dwelt,  to  be  eaten,  by  us  ? i.e.  how 
are  we  to  live  and  cat  ? 

The  Conjunctive  Participle  is  practically  the  same  as  in  the  Standard.  Thus, 
mari-ka,  having  struck. 

The  Imperative  follows  the  Standard.  Thus,  indr,  strike  thou  ; mdrd,  strike  ye. 

The  Old  Present  occurs  in  ho  a,  I may  be  ; indrau,  I may  strike  ; jeu,  lot  us  eat. ; 
mdnau , let  us  celebrate.  It,  so  far,  agrees  with  the  Standard. 

The  Present  has  two  forms  as  in  the  Standard.  The  tirst  is  a present  definite, — 
mdrdb  chhau , I am  striking.  The  second  is  conjugated  as  follows 


Singular.  Plural. 

1.  niardau,  mardu  ladrdd 

2.  mdrdi  mbrddi 

3.  mar  da  marddna 


844 


garhwAlL 


Similarly,  jdndtt,  I go  ; khdndana,  they  oat ; rakhddna,  they  keep. 

For  the  Imperfect,  wo  havo  mat  mdrdd  thayo , I was  striking ; so,  in  the  second  speci- 
men, jdndo  thayo,  he  was  knowing  ; and  ratchda  thayd,  they  were  keeping.  In  the 
Parable  we  have  a weak  form  of  the  Present  Participle  in  denda  thayo,  (no  one)  was 
giving. 

For  the  Fixture  wo  have  in  the  masculine  : — 


Singular.  Plural. 

1.  mdrlo  mdrld 

2.  maralyo , mdrilb  maralyd,  mdrld 

3.  mdrld  mdrld , mdrilyd 

Similarly,  jaulo,  I will  go  ; hollo,  I will  say  ; rahl't  (fem.),  she  will  remain  ; rahla , 

you  will  remain  ; hold,  you  will  he. 

The  Past  To  uses 'closely  follow  the  Standard. 

Thus  .— 

icai-na  mure,  he  struck;  tcai-na  ni  chdyd,  he  did  not  wish  ; tum-na  line,  you 
took  ^sentence  240)  ; u-na  torena,  they  broke  (the  sticks). 

For  intransitive  verbs  we  have  : — 

rdyb,  I remained  ; chalyo,  I went  ; ghvmyo  (sentence  221),  I walked  about, 
and  also  : — 


Singular. 


Plural. 


1.  gayeti,  I went  gayd 

2.  gaye  gayd 

3.  gaye  gayena,  gain  a 

Similarly,  hoye,  he  became  (22.">i  ; lagena,  they  began  ; lydyena,  they  brought ; 

tufena , they  broke  (intransitive). 

The  Perfect  and  Pluperfect  are  equally  regular.  We  have  mile  chha,  he  has  been 
found  ; dye  chha , lie  lias  come  ; haifhyu  chha,  ho  is  seated  (230)  ; mare- thayo  or  maryU 
thayo,  he  had  died  ; harche  thayo,  or  harchyU  thayo,  he  had  been  lost. 

We  h ave  an  instance  of  a potential  comjiound  in  (second  specimen)  kai-na  ni  fa, 
saki,  no  one  could  break.  Xote  tba*  sakl.  is  treated  as  transitive. 

The  negative  is  ni. 


indo-aryan  family. 


Northern  Group. 


TeiirI  Dialect. 


CENTRAL  PAHARl  (GARlIWALl). 

State  Tehri  Garhwal. 


Specimen  I. 

to?  wut  ft*arg  sr^rr  i ftorr-«r  ^rrwr  *r  ^rwr  *tt 

f^r  % fa*TO  €t  fret  fft  TOt  W if  % l cPf  I ^ ffTTO 

^ *rft  ffft  i fror  ff  tt?tt  ^rrwr  ^ 

qfSt  m TOT  fT  TOT  TOOT  TO  ’fk  TO  TO*?t  dft  OT 

| ffk  TO  TO  gkt  =5%  t f OT  TOt  TOfT*t  TO 

ft  fkt  i to  I frr  ^rr  tot  *roft  m %tt  wri 

TO  I f «T  ft  TOOT  ftTOT  OT  *OTC-TOfal  $ft  I | OT  TO?  *ri 

, f TOTH*  ft  TOT  ^TTTO  TOWt  fz:  wf  l WT  ft  l-TOftff  TOt  I 

to  ft*  *f  OTf  ^ ft%  Ittt  to  to  toot  ft  tops  ^ fnf  ftzt 

w fk  If  *£ft  *rfY  I If  OT?t  W TOOT  TO  * wkrt  flk  t *T 
ftTOt  f%  f TO  * *T  TO$TO  TO  fk  TOT  OTTO  gk  ^k 

TO  ff  ^Tt*T  4t  ff  Tft  ff»  ffc  *ft  *Tt -tt*  l "T  ftTOT  TOai  I * ^ 

toot  *ro  ott  to  ot  totto  TOt  i to  * tout  ot«£  TOt 
g *ft  srft  ffr  f f *#t  ^ I to  OTft  ^ot  ot*  to: 

^tft  gr  ft  tot  to  ir£  i ^ftrr  *jjft  ff  i *ksiT*  * f ^ ft%  ffr 

% TO  ft  *T  TO^TO  OT  ffk  ATT  OTTO  3T*T  TO  ff  ft*T 

Os. 

ft  ff  ^ ffr  nit  4kro  tott  wt^  i f m ^tw  ^ 
TO^tT  ^TTO  ff  fti  fft  ^tTO  ^ TOST  TOgT  »nft  TOT  fk  I TO3T 
fK  g ^TT  TOT  TO  Tfcrft  ^ ^ TO  frtTT  ITOT  ^ TO 
fh:  ^pft  Tnff  ft  wrf  fft  fit  ft  tt!  TOt  to  to  w 

TO%  TOt  to  ffft  ^ i to  ft  *gft  gtro  ^nt  ll 

2 Y 

T°I..  IX,  PART  IV. 


346  GAKHWALl. 

fth  ^ ftt  sftt  hWm  ^NrgT  ftf  «rcfr  i ^ §tt  ^tt  ^ 

Os  * 

*nftt  *fk  ^Twr  i 7iw  xrc?  *9rren:  ftfcsni  ^ xi#  f^  ^ 

wr  S5  i t ft  *tt  ftrft  fftr  ^ft  «*tt  *nft  w titt  w ^ 

^ ^ ♦ 

fw*m  *ift  ?t  far  ft  ^nft  TTsft  xpft  mft  i ft  xj^rr  ftti  *ir 
fire  srro  f%  ^T^t  i ?r^  I ^t  ht  *ni  ftt  *^rrft  i $ ^ 

C\  Gs 

*rw  ftr  ftr  fttft  fftr  ftcr*n  ft  If  ftft  j 

ftTT  ott?t  f*r  wrr  i xncg  ft  ^ ft  fft 

f^ft  fft?  ^wr  ^*r#r  *r¥  i *r«r  ftft  ftt  ^hsro 

*nft  ft  *t  ftft  *rnrr  w ^r^t  ft  ^ ft  *irr  *nw  fft^nn 

C\  x • 

I ft  *r  ft  *ff  fttft  t ^TT  ?T  €^Tft  ft^T  XTPET  $ | ftt  fftiS  ftlt 

C\  Os 

^ ftt  ^ft  w i ftr  *pft  fNr  xpft  xr^ft  $4  % *tt4  fft 

& 

ftlt  *J<3T  TT^  «rftt  *rft  snfr  ftt  fftft  $ II 


347 


[ No.  10.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


Northern  Group. 

CENTRAL  PAHlRt  (GARIIWALl). 


TehkI  Dialect. 


State  Teuri  Gartiaval. 


Specimen  |. 


TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 


Ek-jhana-ka 
One-man-of 
apna-bCLba-ma 
his-own-father-to 
mero  clilia 

mine  is 

batl-dine. 

was-dividcd-out. 


dill  naunyal 

two  sons 

bole  ki, 

it-icas-8aid  that, 


thava.  IJ-ma-na  kansa-na 

were.  Them-in-from  the-younger-by 

* he  buba,  birsat-ko  batho  jo 

* 0 father , tho-property-of  share  which 


mai 
{to-)  me 

Aur 

And 


de.’ 

give. 

bbinde 

many 


Tab  Avai-na  birsat  u-sani 

Then  liim-by  the- property  him-to 

din  ni  hova  kansa-naunval-na  sal) 

days  not  became  thc-younger-son-by  all 

katho  kari-ka  ek-dur-des  dialya-gaye,  aur  Avakba  apni 

together  made-having  (to-)a-distant-country  it-was-gone,  and  there  his-own 

roji  ku-karm-ma  udaye.  Aur  jab  sab  kbarch-kari-dmke 

livelihood  ccil-deeds-in  tcas-squandered.  And  when  all  spent-complctely-was 

wai-des-ma  baro  akal  pare  aur  avo  kaiigal  Ilona  lage.  Tab 

that-country-in  great  famine  fell  and  he  indigent  to-be  began.  Then 

ek-bara-adml-kfi  dera  jfu  la  go.  Wai-na 

a-great-man-of  {to-)  house  going  he-attached-himself. 

“ sungar  cliarauna  blieje ; aur  wai  yii 

swine  to-feed  icas-sent ; and  {to-)  him  this 

sun gar  khandan, 

th  e-swine  are-eating, 

ni  denda-tliayo. 

not  gicing-icas. 


Avai-des-ka 
that-country-of 
wo  apna-pogva-mnt 
he  his-oum-field-in 

tlmi,  * Avai-busa-se  jo 

* that-chaff-with  which 
kui  Avai-sani 

anyone  him-to 

bole,  * mcra 
il-was-said,  ‘ my 

aur  mai  bhuko 
and  I hungry 

aur  wai-mS  bollo  ki, 

and  him-to  I-will-say  that, 

tera  samnS  kasur  kare ; 


was, 

P 

because 


apao  pet 
my-oten  belly 
Tab  lios-nia 
Then  sense-in 


babu-ka  katna-lii  majuru-ku  bbinde 

father-of  how-many -even  labour  ers-to  much 

mardau.  Mai  uthl-ka  apna  buba-in8 

am-dying.  I arisen-haoing  my-own  father- to 


JELim-by 

ebah 

desire 

bharau 

I-may-fill 

ai-ka 

come-hacing 

rota  ddin, 

bread  is, 
jaulb 

will-go 


“ he  buba, 

“ 0 father, 

aur  ab 


thee-of  before 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


sin 


toas-done ; and  now 


mai-na 

me-by 

ye-i 

this- even 


Parameswar-ka 

God-of 

jog  bhl 
icorthy 


aur 

and 


m 

even  not 
2 y a 


GARHWAU. 


:M8 

rayo  ki  pher  tero  naimyal  bolya-jaH.  Mai-ku 

1- remained  that  again  thy  son  I-may-be-called.  Me  {acc.) 


apna- ma  j ur  Ci- madlie  bk-ka  barabar  banau.”  ’ Tab  uthi-ka 

yo  it  r-own -l  a bo  urers-among  one-of  equal  make."  ’ Then  arisen-having 


apna  babii-mu 

ebale. 

Aur 

\va 

a In  dur  tbayb 

ki  wai 

his-own  father-near 

lie.- went. 

And 

he 

yet  far-off  was 

that  him 

dekki-ka  wai-ka 

buba-sani 

dayii 

five, 

aur  daurl-ka 

wo  gala-par 

seen-having  him-of 

father-to 

pity 

came, 

and  run-having 

he  neck-on 

bhete.  Bhaut  bliuki  peye.  Naunyal-na  wai-ka  bole 


was-embraced.  Many  kisses  tccre-placed.  The-son-by  him-to  it-was-said 


ki, 

‘he 

biiba,  mai-na  Parameswar-ka 

aur 

tern, 

samne  kasur 

kare ; 

that. 

‘ O 

father,  me-by  God-of 

and 

thec-of 

before  sin 

w as-done  ; 

aur 

ab 

ye-i  jog  bbi 

ni 

clibaU 

ki  pher  terb 

naunyal 

and 

■now 

this-even  worthy  even 

not 

I -am 

that  again  thy 

son 

ganya-jau.’  Parantu  wai-ka  babu-na  apna  ckakru-ma  bole 

I-may-be-counted.'  But  hint -of  father-by  his-oton  servants-to  it-was-said 

ki,  ‘achchba-te  achcbha  kaprii  gadi  lyinva  aur  wai  pairawii, ; 

that.  ' good- than  good  clothes  having-taken-out  bring  and  him  put-on; 

aur  wai-ka  liath-par  mudri  aur  khutau-par  jura  pairawii,  aur  hamu 

and  hhn-of  hand-on  ring  and  feet-on  shoes  put-on,  and  tee 

sabh  jo 5 aur  kbusl  nmnau ; ke-lai-ki  merb  yo  uaunyal 

all  moy-eat  and  rejoicing  may-celebratc ; what-for-lhat  my  this  son 

mare-tbayb,  al)  bache-cbba ; barche-thavo,  ab  mile-chha.’  Tab  wo 
dead-teas , now  sared-is ; lost-was,  novo  got-is.'  Then  he 

khuSi  kavna  lage. 

rejoicing  to-make  began. 

Aur  wai-kb  tbulo  uaunyal  pogra-inS  thayo.  Jab  dera-ka  dhora 

And  him-of  elder  son  field-i/n  was.  IFhen  home-of  near 

aye,  ganb  aur  nacbnO  sune.  Tab  ek  chakar  bolai-ka 

he-came,  singing  and  dancing - were-heard.  Then  a servant  called-havwg 

pucbhe  ki,  ‘yo  kya  chbar  ’ Wai-na  wai-mS  bole  ki, 

it-was-asked  that,  ‘ this  what  is  ? ’ ILim-by  him-to  it-was-said  that , 

‘ tero  bliula  ave-ekha,  aur  tera  buba-na  bar!  jimman  kare ; 

‘ thy  young er-br other  come-is,  and  thy  father-by  great  feast  was-made ; 

ya-na-ki  wai-sani  raji-khuSi  paye.  Wai-na  guasa 

this-by-that  him-as-for  safc-[and-)sound  he-was-found.  Ilim-by  angry 

hbi-ka  bbitra  janii  ni  ebayo.  Tab  wai-ka  babu-na  bbair 

become-having  inside  to-go  not  was-desired.  Then  him-of  father-by  outside 

ai-ka  wb  manaye.  Wai-na  babu-rn5  jubab-ma  bole 

gone-having  he  was-appeased.  Jlim-by  the-father-to  answer-in  it-was-said 


TEHRl  DIALECT. 


349 

ki,  * dekh,  yetna-barsu-te  maT  teri  tahal  kardau ; kabi  tera 

that , ‘ see , so-many-years-from  I thy  service  am-doing ; ever  thy 

bfriya  uprat  ni  clialyo ; parantu  twui-na  kabi  ek  chcnkliO 

what -was- said  beyond  not  (I-)went ; but  thee-by  ever  a kid 

maT  ni  dinyo  ki  apna-dagfyau-dagri  khu£i  manaii. 

(to-)me  not  was-gioen  that  my-ovon-compa  n ions-wit  h joy  1-may -celebrate. 

Aur  jab  tero  yo  naunyal  aye,  jai-na  tSri  maya  patrii-dagri 

And  when  thy  this  son  came,  whom-by  thy  fortune  harlots-with 

udaye,  twai-na  wai-ka-wasta  jimman  hare.’  Wai-na  wai-ka 

vo  as-squandered,  thee-by  him-of-for  a-feast  was -made Uim-by  him- to 

bole,  * lie  nauna,  tii  sadauc  mera  pas  chha.  Jo-kichhu  rnero 

it- wets -said,  * O son,  thou  ever  me-of  near  art.  What-ever  mine 

chha,  so  tero  chha.  Phcr  khu6i  lionu,  k'nu6i  manauni  wajabi 

is,  that  thine  is.  But  glad  to-be,  joy  lo-celebrate  proper 

chhai  ; ke-lai-ki  tero  yo  blmla  maryu-thayo,  so  bachc ; 

was;  tohat-for- that  thy  this  brother  dead- was,  he  was-saved ; 

harchyS-thayo,  so  mile-chha.’ 
lost-was,  he  got-is .’ 


850 


[No.  II J 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Northern  Group. 

CENTRAL  PAHlRl  (GARHWALl). 

Tehri  Dialect.  State  Tehri  Garhwal. 


Specimen  II. 

*F3i  ?n  D3T  qqq  win  qn  fqi  qfqnq  w t 
*nqf  qf  qqf  l^t  qqf  qqf  i wm  fq  t^t^t  qqr  i *rq  <a? 

C\  C\ 

WTW  qrq  qq  qq  qt  qq  qri  qfST  ftf  qf  qw  qiq  qf  qqr 

Ov  C\ 

qfr  wt  qrq  q qrqq  ^qq  fqf  % qqi  ct  <qq  qrq  ^ snr  $ 
$ $ qq  ^ qsri  wt  fqf  w q qrr  qrq  qqm  q*q  ^ wrcr  i 
qqT  *TPHqt  £ qqT  f%  q ^TRi  qf  It  TW*H  I qq  I q ql  qf 

C^,  C\ 

qtq  fit  gq  qq  qnmr  qq?  qqr  wff  ffqiqt  ^ q qqrqT  i q qq 

^fqrqq  I qq  I q qt%  fqf  gq  qf  W$f\  q*ft  qf#t  q#t  qpft  qf 

qt^T  i ^ q qq  q»T  i ht  qT  qft  ^ q fq  qfq  q^t  i qq  I 
• • 

q qrS  fqr  qq  qft  wqf  qf  $ft  qqq  qqq  qfrfT  i ^ q qq  qqq 
qqq  qnft  qf  qfiq  q qTrqT  zz*  \ qq  q qn  qqn  qiq  q qfq 

• C\  ^ 

fq  qq  qf  qT  f qqq-qqq  ^ I ifTT  qrq  fWT^f  qq  qq  qii  qf  fTqraf 
qff  ^ qff  nqr  s^q'Twr  q qqTrr  fq  qrr  qqqt  i 

qh  qf  qqTTT  ffq  mz  Tq^t  q qq  ^ crcf  qqq  qqq  qrt- 

qiq  qfqi  qfr  qqrft  qft  fq  qfT  i qq  qq  qfqn^  q qr 
qjq  q»qq  qfr  <qfc  qqr  q qq  qiq  fqqVf#r  qf  tot  qftq  11 


351 


;[  No.  II.  ] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


TEmtl  Dialect. 


Northern  Group. 

CENTRAL  PAIlARl  (GARIIWALI). 

State  Teiiri  G arhwal. 

Specimen  II. 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 


Ek-gaS-ma 

ek 

budya-jha  na-ka 

bbinde 

naunyal 

tliaya. 

Aur 

se 

One-village-in 

an 

old-person-of 

many 

sous 

were. 

And 

they 

sab  a,pliu-ma 

ek-ko 

bairi 

ek 

tliayo. 

Salukat 

ni 

all  themselves-among 

one-of 

enemy 

one 

was. 

Unity 

not 

rakhda-tliaya. 

Jab 

n-ko 

babii 

mama 

Inge, 

tab  avo 

sabe 

to-keep-they-used. 

When 

them-of 

father 

to-die 

began, 

then 

they 

all 

bliai 

katha 

hoi-ka 

apna-babu-ma 

g»ya. 

aur 

apua 

brothers 

together 

become-having 

their-own-father-to 

icent. 

and  their-own 

babu-mS 

bolna 

lagena 

ki,  ‘ 

lie  buba,  tii 

ab  marna-ku 

tyar 

father- to 

to-say 

began 

that,  ‘ 

0 father,  thou  now> 

die- to 

ready 

cliha.  Kuchh 

ham-ku 

adrii-ja, 

ki  liaui-na 

tem-mama 

uprSt 

kanu 

art.  Something 

ns- to 

advise. 

that  us-by 

thy -death 

after 

how 

rana 

to-be-lived 
‘ y« 


khana.’  U-ko  buba 

to-be-eaten .'  Them-of  the-Jathe/ 

aphu-ma  bail*  rakhdaiia.* 

* the. se  themsel ves-a mong  enmity  entertain  .' 

bole  ki,  ‘ tum-sab-jkana  ek  ek 

it-was-said  that,  * you- all-men  one  one 

mai-mS  lyawa.’  Wa  sablie  lyayena.  Tab 

me- to  bring'  They  all  brought. 

* turn  yau  chhattyau-sani  kattlri 

' you  these  sticks  ( acc .)  together 

ff’-na  tanne  kare.  Par 

Them-by  so  it-icas-done . lint 


jando-i-tliayo  ki, 

knowing-even-was  that, 


it-tcas-done. 

Tab  wai-na  bole 

Then  him-by  it-was-said 

chhatti  alag  alng 

the- sticks  separately  separately 

alag  alag  karl-ka  toycua  ta. 

separately  separately  made-having  were-broken  then 


tor-saki. 

broken-could-be. 

kholi-ka 

untied-having 


Tab 

then 

chhatti 

stick 

wai-na  bole 

him-by  it-icas-said 

gaddi  bSdln-ka 

a-bnndle  tied-having 

gaddi 

bundle 

ki, 

that, 
toya.’ 

break.' 


Then 


wa 

that 


wai-na  u-ina 

him-by  them- to 

rigali-ki 

ringal-bamboo-of 

ki, 

that, 

toy  a.’ 

break' 


m 

not 


isa  vasar 
easily 


kai-na 
any-one-by 
‘ab  gaddi 

‘ now  the-bundle 
Tau-na  jab 
them-by  when 
tutena. 

they-  were-broken. 


852 


GABHWALl. 


Tab  O-ka  budya-babu-na  bole  ki,  * tum*ka  ya-i 

Then  t hem-of  the-old-father-by  it- was- said  that , ‘ you-to  this-even 

adun  padun  chlia.  Mera-marna  pichliari  turn  sab  hhai  y? 

advice  instruction  is.  Jkty-dying  after  you  all  brothers  this 

rigali-ki  gaddl-ki  tarau  ok  jyu-syii  rahla,  ta  turnaro 

ringals-of  bundle-of  like  one  mind-sense  will-remain , then  of-you 


km  kuclili  ni 

anyone  anything  not 

ralili  ta  turn 

will-remain  then  you 

barobftd  hola,  aur 
ruined  will-become , and 

Tab  sab-naunyalu-na 
Then  all-sons-by 


kar-sakyo  ; aur  jo  tuinara  bicli  phut 

do-conld ; and  if  of-you  among  disunion 

yau-chhattyau-ki  tarau  alag  alag 

these-sticks-of  like  separately  separately 

tumaro  kui  dharo  dagro  ni  kara.’ 

of-you  any-one  help  companionship  not  will-do 

ya  bat  Kabul  kare,  aur  sukh-se 

this  adnice  accepted  was-made . and  comfort -with 


sab-e  bhai  mili-chuli-ka  rahna  lagena. 

all  brothers  joined-wnited-  having  to-lire  they-began. 


353 


LIST  OF  STANDARD  WORDS  AND  PHRASES  IN 
CENTRAL  PAHART. 


TOt.  IX,  pam  ip. 


354 


LIST  OF  STANDARD  WORDS  AND  PHRASES 


English. 

Kuiuaunl 

(Standard). 

Kama  urn  (Klinsparjiya). 

l 

Kumauni  (SCriyill),  \ 

* _ 

1.  One  . 

• 

• 

• 

fik  . . 

• 

Ek  ( one  or  a),  kai=(a) 

• 

Rk.  . 

• • . 

2.  Two  . 

• 

ft 

ft 

Dwi 

• 

• 

Dwi  . . . 

• 

Dui  • 

• * . 

3.  Three 

4 

ft 

ft 

Tin 

• 

• 

Tin 

• 

Tin 

• • • 

4.  Four  . 

• 

• 

Char 

Char 

• 

Ch&r 

* • 

5.  Five  . 

• 

ft 

Pgch 

ft 

ft 

Pach  . . • 

• 

Pilch 

6.  Six  • 

• 

• 

Clihai 

ft 

• 

• 

Clihai  . 

Clihai 

• • • 

7.  Seven 

ft 

Sat 

• 

• 

Sat 

Sat 

• • • 

8.  Eight 

• 

ft 

Ath 

• 

Ath 

Ath 

• . 

9.  Nine  • 

• 

ft 

Nau 

• 

ft 

Nau 

Nan 

• • 

10.  Ten  . 

• 

• 

Das 

ft 

• 

• 

Das 

t 

Das 

• • 

11.  Twenty 

• 

• 

Bis 

• 

• 

• 

Bis  • 

Bis 

. 

12.  Fifty  . 

• 

ft 

Pachas  . 

ft 

Pachas,  pachas 

Pachas  . 

• * • 

13.  Hundred 

• 

ft 

San 

! 

Sau 

Sau 

... 

14.  I 

• 

• 

Mai 

| 

Mai,  ml  ; (obi.)  mai,  mi 

. i 

Mai 

| 

• ' • 

15.  Of  me 

• 

• 

Mere,  myoro 

i 

Myar  ; (obi.)  myar 

Merfl;  maisu 
me). 

or  mala  (/o 

1G.  Mine  • 

• 

ft 

Mero,  myoro 

• ; 

Myar;  (obi,)  myar 

MfirO 

• 

17.  We  . 

• 

ft 

ilam 

• - 

1 

i 

1 

i 

Ham ; (obi.)  hamfl 

Ham,  hftro 

• • • 

18.  Of  us 

ft 

• 

Hamaro  . 

ft 

! 

• 1 

Hamar;  (obi.)  hamar 

HamarO ; hamasu  or  hamas 
(to  us). 

19.  Our  . 

• 

ft 

Ilamaro  . 

■ 

R.'imar  ; (obi.)  hamar 

HamarO  . 

• • 

20.  Thou 

• 

Tu 

ft 

ft 

Tu  ; (obi.)  twfi 

TaT 

ft  • * 

21.  Of  thee 

• 

• 

Ter«»,  tyfcro 

ft 

• 

1 

• 

Tyar  ; (oil.)  tyar 

TerO ; twaisu 
thee). 

or  twais  (to 

22.  Thine 

ft 

• 

ft 

Tero,  tytfro 

ft 

ft 

Tyar ; (obi.)  tyar 

TerO 

• • • 

23.  You  , 

• 

ft 

, Turn 

ft 

• 

Turn ; (obi.)  tumO 

Turn 

• • ‘ 

24.  Of  you 

• 

ft 

ft 

; Tumaro  . 

! 

• 

• 

• 

Tumar;  (obi.)  tumfir 

• 

Tumaro ; tumasu  or  turn  as 
( to  you). 

25.  Your 

ft 

ft 

Tumaro  • 

• 

ft 

Tamar ; (obi.)  tumar 

• 

TnmarO  • 

• • • 

355 


IN  CENTRAL  PAHArT. 

— ■ — j *- 

Qafhw&ll  (Standard).  Odjhwalt  (Ri(lil).  j Oafliwali  (Tolirl).  Engliih. 


6k 

• 

• 

• ; 

fik  . 

• 

! 

. , Rk,  bargat 

• i 

J.  Oue. 

Dwi 

• 

m 

• , 

Dwi 

- 

. | Dwi,  dui  . 

• ; 

2.  Two. 

Tin 

• 

• 

- 

Tin 

. Tin 

i 

‘j 

o.  Three. 

Char 

m 

# 

• 

Char 

i 

i 

. Char 

i 

• | 

4.  Four. 

rack 

• 

• 

• 

4b 

• 

Pack 

. Pack  • 

' i 

5.  Five. 

Chhai 

« 

• 

• 

• 

Chhai  • 

. Chhai  . 

' i 

6.  Six. 

Sat 

• 

• 

• 

Sat 

. Sat 

i 

* i 

7.  Seven. 

Ath 

• 

• 

• 

Ath 

. At 

. 

S.  Bight. 

Nau  * 

• 

• 

• 

Nuu. 

• 

. N au 

# 

9.  Nine. 

Das 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Das 

• 

. Das 

• 

10.  Ten. 

Bis 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Bis 

. Bis 

- 

11.  Twenty. 

Pachas 

■) 

• 

• 

• 

Pachas,  pachas 

. Pachas 

i 

12.  Fifty. 

Sau 

« 

Sau 

. Sau 

1 

1 

13.  Hundred. 

Mai 

« 

• 

• 

Mi 

. Mai,  mi  (ubl.  mat) 

i 

i 

*| 

14.  I. 

MerO 

• 

• 

• 

MflrO,  my <5 rd  . 

. Mertf 

i 

15.  Of  ine. 

Mertf 

• 

• 

• 

■ 

Mertf,  mytfrO 

. Mertf 

i 

16.  Mine. 

Ham 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Ham 

. If  am,  liamtl  • * 

• 

17.  We. 

HamarO 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Barnard  . 

. Iiarn  a rtf  . 

• 

IS.  Of  us. 

i HamarO 

! 

• 

• 

• 

Hamartf  . 

. llama  rtf  . 

• 

19.  Our. 

Td 

• 

Tu 

. TO  (obi.  twai)  . • 

• ; 

20.  Thou. 

Tflrtf 

• 

• 

; Tertf,  tyOrtf 

i 

• 

Ttfrtf  . . • 

21.  Of  tbeo. 

| Tflro 

• 

• 

• 

. 

! To  rtf,  tytfrtf 

i 

• 

. Tfirtf 

• 

22.  Thine. 

Turn 

• 

• 

• 

; 

I 

Turn 

• 

. Turn 

• 

23.  You. 

TumarO 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Tumfl.rO  • 

• 

. TumarO  • 

24.  Of  you. 

Tumflro 

• 

• 

• 

TumarO  • 

# 

. TumarO  • 

• 

25.  Your. 

VOL. 

PART 

IV. 

Kumauni  (Khaaparjly&). 


Kamiunl  (SftriyilQ. 


ooG — Central  PahapI . 


G&rhwUl  (Standard). 

WO  • • • 

W6*ko,  H-ko  • 

| W0-kOf  H-kO  . 

i 

Wo  . 
w3-ko,  S-ko  . 
W3*ko,  3-kO  . 

Hat 


LfthO 
Sono 
ChSdi 
Baba 
! Mu,  bol 


CUffhwill  (Bltbl). 

.Wo  ... 

. Wi-kO  . • 

• Wi-kO  • • • 

• W3,  wo  . • • 

• Un&rO 

• UnarO  • * • 

. H at  • • « 


. Lokhar  . 

I 

. j SunO  • 

• ‘ ChSdi 

i 

I 

. ! Biibfl,  buba 

• Boi  • 


Bhiii,  dadd  (elder),  bhnla  Bhal 
(younger). 

Bain,  didi  (elder),  bhnli  Bain  . • 

(younger). 

Admi,  m&nkhi  • . • Adori,  manakha 

Jananl  ....  Siani 


* Gafhw&U  (Tehrf).  9h 



Wo,  wa,  0,  bo  . • . i 26.  Bs. 

Wai-ko,  tai-ko  . . . .27.  Of  him. 

i 

Wai-kO,  tai-kO  • • . ! 28.  His. 


Wo,  3,  0,  s$ 

UnarO,  3-kO,  ty3-kO 
UnarO,  ft-ko,  ty3-kO 
Hath 


KhntO  • . • 

KhntO  . . 

. ! KhntO 

j 

i 

• 

Nak  • • • 

Nak  . • 

. ! Nak 

L 

• 

i Akbo  • • • 

l 

AkhO  . • • 

. AkhO  . • 

• 

1 

; GichO  . • • • 

GlchO  • • • 

j 

. ■ Gichcho  • 

• 

i Uat  • • • 

I 

1 

I)  <*it  . • • 

i 

. Dat 

• 

I 

! 

Kan  i • • 

i 

Kanur  . • 

i 

i 

. Kan,  kandud  . 

• 

j Bal  • • • 

i 

Latnla 

. Bal,  latla 

• 

i Sir  . 

i 

Mfin 

. Mund,  kapal 

1 

1 Jib  • • • 

Jib 

. Jibh  • 

1 

Pet  • • 

LadOrO 

i 

. Pot  go,  pet  • 

• 

! Pith  • 

. Pntho  • . 

. ! Pichhado,  pith* 

• 

Lokhar,  loho 
SonO 

Cliadi  . a 
BabO,  bnba 

Bai,  ija  • 


. 29.  They. 

. . i 80.  Of  them. 

! 

. . ! 31.  Their. 

i 

. 32.  Hand. 

. . | 33.  Foot. 

I 

. . 34.  Nose. 

. . 35.  Eye. 

. , 36.  Month. 

. 37.  Tooth. 

. . 38.  Ear. 

. . i 39.  Ilair. 

. . 40.  Head. 

. . 41.  Tongue. 

. 42.  Belly. 

. . 43.  Back. 

. . 44.  Iron. 

. 45.  Gold. 

. . 46.  Silver. 

. . 47.  Father. 

_ 43.  Mother. 


Bliai  (general),  di<ift  (elder),’-  49.  Brother, 
bhula  (younger).  • 

Baini,  bain  (general),  didi  , 50.  Sister. 
(elder),  bimli  (younger). 

I 

MaTs,  mankbi,  roanas  . 51.  Man. 

Janani,  bail  ban,  kajap  • 52.  Woman. 


Central  Pahaji — 357 


— r- — 

£sglUh. 

Ktunaunl  (Standard). 

Kuraauni  (KhaapaijiyA). 

Kamaunl  (Sdriy&ll). 

— —— 

58.  Wife  . 

• 

a 

• 

Syai^i,  jwe 

• 

• 

• 

Syaiul,  jwg 

• 

JOi  . 

• 

m 

54.  Child 

• 

• 

• 

Balak 

• 

a 

• 

Balak,  nan 

/ 

• 

Nantlnan 

■ 

55.  Sou  . 

• 

ft 

• 

Chelo,  ohyBlo 

• 

• 

Cliyal ; ( plur .)  chyal 

Chela 

• 

56.  Daughter 

• 

ft 

• 

Cheli 

• 

• 

* 

Cheli 

• 

Ciigli 

• 

57.  Slave 

• 

• 

• 

Chiikar  . 

• 

a 

Chakar,  nankar 

• • 

Kaini 

* 

• 

58.  Cultivator 

• 

• 

• 

Ki&iii 

t 

• 

i 

. ' Ki:‘iin,  kkgti-kamuner 

Jimdar  . 

• 

59.  Shepherd 

• 

• 

... 

• • • 

Gwal  (r>,wheril) 

’ ‘ 

Gwalo 

• 

60.  God  • 

• 

• 

• 

Pann&war 

• 

a 

• 

Pa  rings  war,  Tswar 

Panmgchhar,  Parmgsar 

• 

61.  Devil . 

• 

• 

• 

Blifit 

a 

a 

• 

BlitU 

. 

• 

62.  Sun  „ 

• 

• 

Snraj 

• 

a 

• 

Sfiraj,  snrj 

Surj 

• 

• 

• 

63.  Moon . 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Chanarma,  jfiu 

Jfin 

• 

• 

• 

64.  Star  . 

• 

• 

• 

T&ri 

• 

• 

Trim 

• • 

Tara 

• 

• 

i 

• j 

65.  Fire  . 

• 

• 

' 

Ago 

• 

Agau,  bhlner  . 

• • 

Ago 

• 

• i 

i 

66.  Water 

• 

• 

1 

• j 

Parii  . 

• 

a 

• 

Piini 

i 

Pani 

.! 

67.  House 

• 

• 

! 

.! 

i 

Gharf  kufo 

• 

a 

• 

Ghat  , kur 

• -i 

Ghaiir,  ghar 

« 

• i 

68.  Horse 

• 

• 

i 

• j 

Ghofo 

• 

a 

Gli  war 

chart 

• 

• 

69.  Cow  . 

• 

• 

_ i 

Goru 

• 

i 

Gtfru 

• • , 

Gorfl.  . 

' 

• 

70.  Dog  • 

• 

• i 

i 

Kukur 

a 

Kukur 

• • 

Kukur 

• 

• 

71.  Cat 

• 

• 

• 

Biralu 

• 

- * 

* 

Bind  u 

• • 

Biralfl 

• 

ft 

72.  Cock  . 

• 

• 

j 

Kukuro  • 

■ 

i 

I 

Kukur 

• • 

Kukuyd  • 

• 

ft 

73.  Duck 

• 

• 

I 

• 

i 

Batak 

i 

i 

i 

Bai  nc,  badik  . 

• • 

j 

PajliyO 

• 

• 

ft 

74.  Ass  » 

• 

• 

j 

i 

Gadha 

• 

1 

i 

i 

| 

Gadha 

i 1 

Gadha  . 

• 

• 

• 

75.  Camel 

• 

• 

IJt 

9 

j 

i 

j 

ft  . . 

i 

TJt.fcu 

• 

■ 

76.  Bird  . 

• 

• 

i 

i 

Charo 

a 

i 

.] 

Char 

i 

i 

I 

4 • j 

Challa 

• 

• 

77.  Go  . 

• 

iTsl  • • 

a 

; 

* 

lji  • • 

e • 

Ja  . 

• 

* 

78.  Eat  . 

• 

• 

• ! 

i 

Kha 

• 

! 

i 

• 1 

! 

1 

Kha 

• • 

Kha 

• 

• 

• 

79.  Sit  . 

• 

• 

i 

i 

i 

i 

Baith  • 

• 

.! 

i 

i 

Baith  • • 

• » 

i 

Has 

• 

• 

* 

358 — Central  Pahayl. 


Garhwill  (Standard). 

Gafhw&U  (B&tM). 

i 

1 GarhwWI  (Tehri). 

i 

Englisb. 

Swaii?,  jan&nl 

• • 

• 

Sain,  swin 

i 

. I'Swain  . . . • . 

53.  Wife. 

NaunO 

• • 

• 

Laupfl 

. Naiinfi  • 

54.  Child. 

NaunO  • 

• • 

• 

LauyO 

. Larik,  naunO  , 

55.  Son. 

Nannl 

• • 

• 

LaujI 

. Beti,  nauni  . . 

; 50-  Daughter. 

Kaini,  chhOfa 

• • 

• 

Kami,  chhflra  . 

. ChbOra  . . . 

57.  Slave. 

Jimdar 

• • 

• 

J mid&r  . 

1 

Kibfin  . . . . 

: 58.  Cultivator. 

Bakhrft-w&lo 

• • 

Biikrya,  . 

Bakrfiwfilft 

! 59.  Shepherd. 

1 

ParmSfiwnr 

• • 

• 

. PanimSchhar  . 

. Is  war,  d6wta  . 

; 60.  Cod. 

i 

Bhfit 

• • 

• 

j 

! Phut 

i 

. KhabCs,  bhftt  . 

1 61.  Devil. 

i 

Suraj  • 

• • 

i 

j Sfiraj 

i 

. Snraj,  gham 

G2.  Sun. 

Child,  jfln 

• • 

• 

Cliiid,  jfin 

. .Tfin,  chan  drama 

G3.  Moon. 

Gainii 

• • 

• 

Gaina  . . . 

. Gaina,  tar  a 

, 64.  Star. 

j -AR  • 

• • 

• 

i 

i Ag 

. Ag  • 

; 65.  Fire. 

| Pan! 

! 

• • 

, i Pani 

. Pani  . 

, GG.  Water. 

1 

j Ghar  . 

i 

• 

KurO 

. Kfirrt,  dtjrfl 

, 67.  House. 

1 

GhflrO 

• • 

. j (ihwiij-a  . 

. GhflrO 

. 68.  Horse. 

1 G ftrii 

i 

• • 

, 1 Gjiurfi 

. Gnuri 

. GO.  Cow. 

! Kutta 

i 

• • 

1 

Kuknr 

. Kukar  . . • 

. 1 70.  Dog. 

i 

I 


Biralo  ( [maso .)  ; birall  (/ew.)  BirftlO  ( jnasc .)  ; birfili  ( fem.\ 

Birali") 

• 

• 

71. 

Cat. 

KukhyO  . • 

j 

Kukhjft,  mair  . 

lCukhrO  . 

• 

72. 

Cock. 

Badak 

I 

Badak  ...■ 

Lbitak,  jal-kukbyO 

• i 

73. 

Duck. 

Gadda,  gadfO  • 

Gaddii,  gadj-rt  . 

j 

Gadha  . 

• 9 

7 k 

Ass. 

tTth 

I 

. i 

! 

J 

tit  ...... 

fith 

m • 

• 

75. 

Camel. 

Pakshi  . 

i 

1 

Pnthil  . . • • 1 

Pa  cliche  . 

• 

• 

76. 

Bird. 

Ja  . 

• 

J A • • • • • j 

Hit 

• 

77. 

Go. 

Kha  • • 

1 

Klui  .... 

Kha 

• 

78. 

Eat. 

Baith  . 

• ! 

Baith  ...» 

Baith 

i 

i 

• 

79. 

Sit. 

Contra!  P&hftft — £59 


BngUah. 

Knmannl  (Standard). 

Kuntiml  (Khuparjiyi), 

KumobI  (BMgrlll). 

80.  Come  . 

• 

• 

A . 

• 

e 

* 

A 0 0 0 0 0 

A • • • 

• 

0 

81.  Beat 

• 

• 

Mar 

■ 

• 

e 

• 

Mti  0000 

M&r  • • 

0 

• 

82.  Stand  • 

• 

• 

Thar  ho  • 

• 

e 

• 

Th&y  hew  • 

Th&rO  hen  . 

. 

0 

88.  Die  • 

• 

• 

Mar  • 

• 

e 

• 

Mar  • • 0 • 

Mar  • • 

0 

e 

84.  Give 

• 

• 

De . • 

• 

e 

• 

DS  .... 

DS 

0 

88.  Run  • • 

e 

e 

Daily 

• 

e 

e 

Dan?  0.0. 

Daily 

. 

0 

86.  Up  . 

• 

• 

Ma}i 

e 

• 

e 

Mali  .... 

Mali  • • 

• 

• 

87.  Near 

• 

e 

Najik  . 

• 

0 

• 

Najdik,  najik  • 

Najik  • • 

. 

• 

88.  Down 

e 

• 

Tali 

e 

e 

• 

Tali  .... 

Tali 

. 

• 

89.  Far  • 

• 

e 

Tiro  . 

• 

0 

e 

Dflr,  tar  • • 

Tara,  tar& 

0 

• 

90.  Before 

• 

• 

Aghin  • 

e 

0 

Aghil  .... 

Aghil  . 

• 

• 

91.  Behind 

• 

Pachhin  • 

• 

e 

• 

/ 

| Pachhil  .... 

Pachhil  . * 

• 

• 

92.  Who  P . 

• 

• 

Ko 

a 

* 

• 

1 kfl  ..a. 

Ko 

. 

• 

93.  What?  . 

• 

• 

Kya,  ke 

• 

m 

• 

1 

KyS,  kfi  . 

Kyi 

. 

• 

94.  Why  ? . 

• 

• 

Kd-lai 

• 

• 

e 

Kilaik  . . . . 

! 

Kya-lM  . . 

. 

a 

95.  And  • 

• 

• 

A nr  • 

• 

# 

e 

| Haur  . • . - • 

Aar  . . 

• 

• 

96.  But  ■ • 

* 

• ; 

Par 

• 

• 

• 

! 

j Par  . . . • 

1 

Par 

i 

. 

• 

97.  If  . 

e 

• 

Jo  . 

• 

• 

• 

i 

! Jft  0 0 0 . 

| Jab 

i 

. 

e 

98.  Ics  • • 

. 

• 

Hoy 

• 

a 

e 

HOy,  an 

i 

Hai  • • 

0 

• 

99.  No  . 

• 

• 

Nai 

0 

0 

e 

Nai  • 0 • . 

NaT 

. 

e 

100.  Alas 

• 

• 

Hai 

• 

0 

e 

Aha,  hai  . . 

H&i 

. 

4 

101.  A father  • 

• 

• 

Bab  « 

• 

0 

e 

j 

Bab ; (i ag .)  babai-1  • 

Babn  • ^ 

. 

e 

102.  Of  a father 

• 

• 

B&ba-ko  . 

• 

0 

• 

B&b-k  j (Jem .)  babai-k  cr 
babe-k ; (marc.  obi.) 

baba-k. 

B&bu-ke  • • 

. 

e 

103.  To  a father 

• 

• 

Bab-ka^i , 

0 

0 

e 

Bab-ka^i  . • 

Babu-khf,  b&bns 

# 

e 

104.  From  a father 

• 

• 

Bab-hai  • 

• 

0 

e 

Bab-thai,  -hai  • • 

Babn-hwai 

0 

e 

105.  Two  fathem 

• 

• 

■ 

Dwl  b&b  . 

0 

0 

e 

Dwi  bab  . . • 

Dni  babn  0 

0 

e 

106.  Fathers 

• 

. 

Bab  • % 

0 

• 

e 

Bab ; (ag.)  babe-1  • . • 

Babn 

0 

e 

360 — Central  Pah&yl. 


Gft|-h»Ml  (Standard). 

m 

Oarhwall  (BathI). 

j I 

G&rlnvall  (Tehrl).  j 

Engl  foil. 

A • 

m 9 

• A • . • * • 

i*  _ ! 

. i Aw  . . . . j 

1 

80.  Come. 

Mar 

• 

\ 

Mar 

1 „ i 

. 1 Tkech,  kilt 

81.  Beat. 

Kkajrd  ho 

• 

. Thado  ltd 

. i trth  .... 

82.  Stand. 

Mar 

* Mar 

i 

. 1 Mar 

i 

83.  Die. 

De 

• 

. D6  ... 

• a • ■ a 

81.  Give. 

Daur 

. 

. Daur 

. Atlllv  • • a a 1 

85.  Run. 

Math<5,  dills 

• 

• Ubal  . . • 

. ATch,  mat  by  e . . . j 

86.  Up. 

Najadik  . 

• 

. Najik 

. Dhffra,  nOdiT 

87.  Near. 

B6f,  tal  . 

.Tal  ... 

. Tal,  nis,  bera 

i 

88.  Duwn. 

Dur 

• 

Tiida 

. Dur 

I 

83.  Fur. 

Agari 

• 

. Aghin 

. Paile,  agayO  . . . ! 

90.  Before. 

Pichhayi 

• 

. Pachhin  • . 

. Paithar,  pichhare  . . | 

91.  Behind. 

Ka 

. K« 

. Ko  . . . . ; 

1 

92.  Who? 

Kya 

i 

• 

. Kya 

1 

i 

. Kjfl-jO  a a . • j 

I 

93.  What? 

Ke-lai 

• • 

. Kl-lS 

I 

• Ke-kft,  kS-liii  . • . j 

! 

94.  Why  ? 

Aur,  ar  . 

• * 

. Aur 

• Ar  . . . 

95.  And. 

Par 

• • 

. Par 

. j Par,  parantu 

96.  But. 

Jo  . 

• 

. Jo  . 

. JO,  agar  .... 

97.  If. 

Ha  . 

. Hi! 

. Ha 

98.  Yes. 

Na 

• a 

. Na. 

a N"  a a • • • 

99.  No. 

Aha 

• • 

. Are,  darft 

. Gajab  .... 

100.  Alas. 

Baba 

• • 

. BfibO  . 

. BOba  . 

101.  A father. 

* 

Baba-ko 

• • 

. BabiVkO 

. BOba-kO 

102.  Of  a father. 

Bab3,-kfL 

• a 

. Bilbo.  khu$l 

. BOba-kO  .... 

103.  To  a father. 

Baba -to  , 

• • 

. Baba  gajil 

. BOba-muje,  babii-sS  . 

104.  From  a fathei 

Dwi  baba 

• • 

. ; Dwi  baba  • 

1 

. Dwi  buba 

105.  Two  fathers. 

Baba 

• ■ 

• Baba  • • • 

. BOba  . 

106.  Fathers. 

VOL.  ir.  FART  IV. 


Central  Pahayl-— 361 
3 A 


English. 

Ku  inn  uni  (Standard). 

i . 

Kumaunl  (Khasp&rjiyn). 

Kumaunl  (SSriyali). 

107.  Of  fathers 

I 

! Bahai)  a-ko 

i 

1 

Babo-k  ; ( fem.)  bft  b o-k  ; 
(muse.  obi.)  baba-k. 

Babun-ko 

108.  To  fathers 

Baban-kani 

Babo-kaui 

Babnn-khT,  babuns  . 

109.  From  fathers 

Baban-hai 

Babo-thau  -hai 

Babnn-hwai 

110.  A daughter 

Cheli  .... 

Cheli : (ag.)  cheli-1  . 

ChSli  .... 

ill.  Of  a daughter  . 

1 

: Cheli-ko  .... 

i 

Cheli- k ; (fern,  and  masc. 
old.)  cheli-k. 

ChGli-kO  .... 

112.  To  a daughter 

i Cheli-kani 

I 

1 Cheli-kani 

Chelis  .... 

118.  From  a daughter 

j Cheli-hai 

j 

ChSli-tlmi,  -hai 

Cheli-hwai  . . 

114.  Two  daughters  . 

1 

i 

i DwI  cheli 

1 

Dwl  eheliy 

Dili  cbelin 

115.  Daughters 

Cheli,  clieliyS  . 

Cheliy\  chfcliy  ; ( ag ) 

eheliy  o-l. 

Chelin  .... 

116.  Of  daughters 

Chelina-ko,  cbeliyana-ko  . 

CheliyS-k ; ( fem.)  cheliyn-k  ; 
(masc.  oil.)  eheliy a-k. 

Chglin-ko 

117.  To  daughters 

| Chelin-kani,  cheliyan-kani  . 

Cheliyo-kani 

Chelin-khT,  cbelins  . 

118.  From  daughters 

Chelin-hai,  cheliyan-hai 

Cheliyo-thaT,  -hai 

Clieli-hwai  . 

119.  A good  man 

!- 

Ek  bhalo  adimi 

Ek-bhal  mais  (ag.  bhal 
maisai-1) . 

Bk  bhalo  (or  niko)  mais 

120.  Of  a good  man  . 

fik  bhala  adimi- ko 

i 

Bk-bhal  mais-k  ; (fmn. ) 
inaisai-k  or  maise-k ; 

(masc.  obi.)  rnaisa-k. 

Ek  bhala  (or  nika)  mais-kfi 

121.  To  a good  man  . 

Bk  bhala  adimi-kani  • . j 

i 

Bk-bhal  mais-kani 

Ek  bhala  maTs-khi  or  maisas 

122.  From  a good  man 

• 1 
i 

Bk  bhala  adimi -hai  . . j 

Bk-bhal  inais-thaT,  -hai 

Bk  bhala  inaTs-hwai  . 

123.  Two  good  men  . 

i 

Dwl  bhhla  adimi  . ■ 

Dwi  bhal  mais 

Dui  bhala  mais 

124.  Good  men  . 

Bhala  adimi  . - . j 

1 

Blial  mais ; (ag.)  bhal 

maiso-1. 

Bhala  mais 

125.  Of  good  men  # , 

i 

Bhala  adimina-ko~  . . j 

i 

Bhal  maiso-k ; (masc.  obi.) 
maisa-  k . 

Bhala  maisaun-kO 

126.  To  good  men 

l 

Bhala  adimin-kani  . . { 

i 

i 

Bhal  maiso-kani 

Bhala  maisaun-khi  or 

inaTsanns. 

127.  From  good  men  . 

I 

Bhala  adimin-hai  . j 

i 

Bhal  maisu-tha?,  -liaT 

J Bhala  maTsauu-hwai . 

128.  A good  woman  . . 1 

1 Bk  bhali  syaini  . 

j 

Bk  bhali  syaini 

I 

; Ek  niki  syani  . 

129.  A bad  boy  . . 

l 

! Bk  kharab  chclo 

! 

1 

£k  kharab  chyal 

Bk  ghinnfi  chelO  • 

! 

130.  Good  women  . . ' Bhali  syaini,  or  bhali  syai- 

niyS. 

Bhali  syai^iiyS  (syainiy) 

Bhali  syanin  • 

131.  A bad  girl 

Bk  kharab  cheli 

Bk  kharab  cheli 

Bk  ghinni  chfili  • 

132.  Good 

Bhalo  .... 

Bhal  .... 

Bhalo,  nikft  . 

133.  Better 

Aur  bhalo 

Ha ure  bhal  • 

Aur  bhalo  • 

362 — Central  Paharl. 


Garb  wall  (Standard). 

Babaau-kfl 

Biibaau-kn 

Babaau-td 

Nanni 

Naunl-kO 

Naunl-kfi 

Nauni-tS 

! 

! 

| Dwl  liauni 

i 

| 

i Nauai 

I 

Nauniyau-kfl 
Nauniyau-ku  . 

i . „ 

Nauniyau-te 
Kk  bhalfi  ad  ml  . 

Pile  bhala  adml-ko 
Ek  bhalii  adml-kfi 
I Kk  bhalii  fid  ml -to 

i 

| Dwi  bhala  adml 
Bhala  adml 
Bhalii  adiniyau-kfl 
Bhalii  iidmiyau-kn 
Bhalii  adiniyau-te 
Ek  bhall  janam 
Ek  nakhro  naunft 
Bhall  janani 
Ek  naklirl  naunl 
Bhalo 

Anr  bhalfl,  -te  bhalo 


Gafhwali  (R&thl). 

. Babun-kO 

, Babun-khuni  • 

| 

• , Babun-ganl 

• Laurl  . • 

. Laup-kO 

. Laurl-khmii 

i 

. Laurl  ganl  .. 

. Dwl  laurl 

. Laurl 

. Laurio-kO 
. Laurio-khuni  . 

. Laurin  ganl 
. Kk  bhalo  adml  * 

. f]k  bhala  iidmi-krt 
. Kk  bhalii  adml-khunl 

„ F]k  bhala  aduil-gani  , 

i 

% Dwl  bhala  adml 
. Bhalii  adml 
. Bhala  admin-kft 
. Bhala  iidmin-kliunl 
. Blmla  adiniu-ganl 
. p]k  bhall  sisal  . 

. p]k  naklifJ  laurO 
. Bhall  sisnl 
. p]k  nakhl  laup 
. BhalO 
. Aur  bhalfl 


Garhwttll  (Tebrl). 

Bubau-kG 

Bnbau-kn 

, Bubau-muje,  -se 

. Naum 

. Naunl-kfi 

. Naunl-ku 

. | Naunl-muje,  -se 
i 

. ' Dwl  naunl 
. Naunl 

. Nauniyau-krt  . 

. Nauniyau-ku  . 

# Nauniyau-muje,  -Be  . 

. Bhalfl  maims  . 

. Bhala  m;in;is-kfl 
Bhalii  manas-kf; 

Bhala  maims -niuje*  -Be 
Dwi  bhala  maims 

' Bhala  manas  . 

bhala  maiisu-krt 
Bhala  mansu-kn 
Bhala  mnnsu-mnje,  -se 

i 

i Bhall  k a jan 

4 i 

I 

% ! p]k  naklii A uanniviil  . 

B ■ Bhuli  knjiin 
I 

! Ek  nnkhrl  naunl 

• ; 

j 

i 

. Blinl3 

# 

. Bhalfl 


English. 

. 107.  Of  fathers. 

. 108.  To  fathers. 

, 109.  From  fathers. 

i 

. ' 110.  A daughter. 

i 

. 111.  Of  a daughter. 

. j 1 12.  To  a daughter. 

| 

, j 113.  From  a daughter. 

. ' 114.  Two  daughters. 

i 

. 1 113.  Daughters. 

. 110.  Of  daughters. 

i 

i 117.  To  daughters. 

I 

. I 118.  From  daughters. 

j 

. ! 119.  A good  man. 

! 

. ' 120.  Of  a good  man. 

i 

• 

I 

. i 121.  To  a good  man. 

i 

| 122.  From  a good  man. 

i 

i 

I 1 23.  Two  good  men. 

i 

124.  Good  men. 
j 123.  Of  good  men. 

i 

. i 12b.  To  gi-od  men. 

j 

i 

j 

| 127.  From  good  men. 

j 

] 28.  A good  woman . 
129.  A bad  boy. 

];30.  Goi'd  women. 

131.  A bad  girl. 

132.  Good. 

. 133.  Bettsr 

Central  Pahafi— 363 
3 a 2 


VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


tinglibli. 

Kumauia  (Standard). 

Kuuiannl  (Ehasparjiya). 

K unman  I (SCriy&li). 

134.  Rest 

. Saban-liai  bhalo 

• 

• : 

Sabo-hai  bhal  . 

• 

• 

Sab-hwai  bhalo 

• • 

135.  High 

. ' Ucho 

• 

• 

fjch 

• 

• 

AlgO 

• ♦ 

136.  Higher 

. Aur  uclio 

• 

• 

Hau i*6  fich 

• 

Aur  algO  • . 

• • 

137.  Highest 

. Snban-hai  ucho 

a 

i 

Sabo-hai  uch  . 

• 

Sab-hwai  algo  . 

• . 

138.  A horse 

. Ghoro  • • 

• 

i 

Gliwaj* 

• 

Ghoro 

• 

139.  A inure 

. Gliori 

• 

Ghwflri  • • 

Gliori  • 

i 

i 

140.  Hoi^es 

. Ghwara  . 

• 

• 

Gliwapa,  ghwar 

Glirtjii 

• • i 

i 

]41.  Hares 

. Gliori,  gliopiyS- . 

• 

• : 

GhwOii  . • 

( rhflriii 

1 

• • ! 

142.  A ball 

. Balad  . . 

• 

• 

Balad  . • 

Bald 

143.  A cow 

. Goru 

• 

- 

Gftrn 

Gfiru 

» 

i 

• • i 

144.  Bulls 

. Balad 

• 

Balad  . • 

Bald 

i 

145.  Cows 

. Goru 

* 

• 

Gfiru  • 

G or  nail  . 

i 

• ■ i 

I 

146.  A dog 

Kukur 

• 

Kuknr  . 

« 

Kuknr,  dhSfc  . 

i 

•j 

147.  A bitch 

. Kutiya  . 

• 

• 

Kutiya,  kutiy  . 

Kuknr,  chhanpi 

. 

148.  Dogs 

. Kukur 

• 

Knkura,  kukur 

Kukur 

j 

149.  Bitches 

. Kutiya  . 

- 

• 

Kutiya,  kutiy  . 

Chhaufin 

. 

150.  A he-goat  . 

. Bakaro  . 

• 

• 

Bakar 

Pakarfi  . 

151.  A female  goat 

. Bakari  . 

• 

Bakari 

• 

Bakari 

• 

152.  Goats 

• Bakara  . • * 

• 

Bakara,  bakar 

• 

Bakara  • 

a • 

153.  A male  deer 

. Hiran 

• 

• 

Hira$ 

Harin 

• • 

154.  A female  deer 

. Ilirani  • 

• 

• 

Hiram 

• 

Harini 

• 

155.  Deer  • 

. ITiran 

• 

• 

i 

Hiran 

i 

I 

• 

Harin 

• 

156.  I am 

. Mai  chli  3 

• 

• 

Mi  chh  3. 

• 

Mai  chhS 

• • 

157.  Thou  art  • 

. * Tu  chhai,  {Jem.) 

chh§ 

• 

Tfi  chhai  • 

Ta?  chhai 

• 

158.  He  is 

i 

; • ; chh 

• 

• 

0 chh  . 

• 

• 

U chh  . 

• * 

159.  We  are 

• | Ham  cbh3 

• 

• 

• 

Ham  chhU  • 

* 

• 

Ham  chhl 

• • 

160.  Yon  are 

• ! Turn  chhan 

i 

• 

Turn  chhan 

• 

• 

Turn  chhan 

• 

364— Central  Pahafi. 


1 

1 

Oarbwill  (Standard).  1 

Garb  wall  (Ka^bl). 

Gafhwilj  (Tchrl). 

English. 

Bahuh-hl  bhalo,  sab-tfc  bhalo  Bnhut-hi  bhalo 

* 

• 

BiifO-bl  bhalo 

• 

• 

• 

134.  Best. 

tTohO  . • 

! 

Ucho 

• • 

• 

ftebo 

• 

• 

135.  High. 

Aur  ticho,  -tfi  ticho 

Aur  uchO 

• • 

fjcho 

- 

136.  Higher. 

Bahut-hl  ticho,  sab-te  fk-h'. 

Bahut-hi  ucho 

• 

• 

BayO-hi  3obo 

• 

137.  Higlieut. 

Ghojra  . 

Ghwfifa  . 

• 

• 

GhOfO 

• 

: 138.  A horse. 

Gh0|4  • 

GhOfi 

• 

• 

GliOfl 

' 139.  A mare 

GbOra  . 

1 

Ghwara  • 

Ghora,  , 

: 110.  Horses. 

GhOfi  .... 

GhOfi 

• 

’ 

GbOriya  . 

' 141.  Mares. 

| Bald,  at* 

Sad,  bald 

* 

Sad,  bald 

• 

! 

142.  A bull. 

i 

! GOr  .... 

i 

GaurO 

• 

Gaurl 

ft 

143.  A cow. 

j Bald.  sap 

Sad,  bald 

• 

>ad  • 

• 

144.  Bulls. 

i ,« 

(iaupa  .... 

Go  fa 

• 

! 

l 

| Gaura  « 

i 

• 

145.  Cows. 

j Kutta  .... 

Knkur  . 

• 

i Ktikar 

• 

146.  A dog. 

Kutti  . 

Kukur  . 

- 

j 

: Ktikari,  ktiti 

i 

1 47.  A bitch. 

: Kntta  .... 

Knkur 

! Ktikar 

i 

148.  Dogs. 

Kutti  .... 

Kukur 

1 

! KukarS  . 

! 

149.  Bitches. 

Lakhotya,  bakhrO 

Boktya  . 

• 

• 

| 

UakhrO  . 

150.  Ahe-goat 

Bfikhri  .... 

Bokhri 

• 

Bakhri 

i 

151.  A female  goat. 

{ Baklira  . 

i 

Bokhra  . 

• 

Biikbra  . 

• 

152.  Goats. 

i 

Mirg  .... 

Mirg 

• 

• 

Jadau 

• 

153.  A male  deer 

Mirg  .... 

Mirg 

• * 

• 

Jedgn 

• 

; 154.  A female  dcei. 

Mirg  .... 

: Mirg 

• 

Jo.dau 

• 

, ; 155.  Deer. 

i 

Mai  clihaS 

Mi  chh3,  chhau 

• 

MaT  chhau 

, 156.  I am. 

Tq  chhal 

Tu  chbai . 

• 

• 

Tti  chhal  . 

1 

1 157.  Thou  art. 

Wo  chha 

Wo  clia  (ttc), 

ebba 

• 

Wo  ebba  . 

• 

« 

, = 158.  He  is. 

Ham  ohhaw&n 

Ham  chhawS 

- 

• 

Ham  cbhaya 

• 

' 159.  We  are. 

Turn  chhaya'  . . 

Tam  ebb  aw  a 

* • 

• 

Turn  chliayai 

• 

160.  You  are. 

Cenlral  Pabaf 1—305 


English. 


Kumannl  (Standard). 


Kunmuni  (Kliasparjiya). 


KumaunI  (80riy£ll). 


i 


161.  They  at *0  • 

1 

• 

& chban  . . . • j 

1 

ft  clihana,  chlian  • • 

Un  ohhan 

• 

! 

! 

162.  I was 

m • 

Mai  ehhiyH,  chhyu  . 

Mi  chhiy 

Mai  thy3 

• 

* 

163.  Thou  wast 

• 

Tu  chhiy  e,  ( fern .)  chhl 

Tu  chhiy  6 

TaT  tliyft  . 

• 

164.  He  was 

• • 

U ehhiyo,  ( Jem .)  chhi 

U clihiy  • . • 

U tliyo  . 

• 

* 

165.  We  were  . 

• • 

Ham  thhiya,  chhya  . 

Haul  chhiy  . . • 

Hum  tbyS 

• 

i 

• 

166.  You  were  . 

f-  • 

Turn  elihiya 

Turn  chhiy 

Turn  thy  a 

0 

• 

167.  They  were  . 

ij  elihiya,  (i fern. ) chhiti 

U elihiya,  chhiy 

Un  thy  a . 

• 

• 

168.  Be 

‘l 

Ho  . . • • • 

i 

Haw  .... 

lfau  . # 

% 

1 

169.  To  be 

! 

* * ! 

Huno  . . . • j 

i 

Hun  .... 

Hu  uau 

• 

. ' 

i 

170.  Being 

1 

i 

i 

Huno  • 

Jlunrt,  him 

Hunfl 

• 

1 

.1 

1 

171.  Having  been 

Hai-ber  . 

Hai-ber 

Hwai-b^r 

• 

1 

• ! 

172.  1 may  be  . 

Mat  hS  . 

MI  lirtH  .... 

i 

t 

'i 

\ 

173.  I shall  be  . 

Mai  hulo 

Ml  liul  .... 

Mai  hulfl 

• 

! 

1 

• l 

174.  I should  be 

i 

175.  Beat. 

i 

Mar  . . . . j 

i 

Mar;  (pi)  marau 

Mar 

1 

176.  To  beat  . 

Mara  no  . . • J 

1 

Maran  .... 

Mamau  • 

• 

1 

177.  Beating 

i 

| Mara  no  . . . . : 

Maran  .... 

Marnfi 

• 

178,  Having  beaten 

i 

M&ri-ber  • • • . | 

Mari-ber 

Mari-b8r 

• 

• 

179.  I beat 

i Mai  maribchhu  * . 1 

» 

Mi  maraclili,  mai  cbh 

MaT  inar-chh3 

• 

■ 

180.  Thou  beatost 

J Tu  mari-chhai,  (Jem.)  -chlig 

1 

1 Til  rniiraehhai,  marchhai  . 

I 

Tai  mar-chhai 

f 

i 

181.  Tie  beats  . 

1 

U mara-clib,  ifemJ)  -clihya 

i 

. r inaraohh.  rnarchh 

i 7 

i 

tJ  mar-chh 

• i 

1 

182.  We  beat 

I Tam  rnaranu  * . c 

i 

i 

Ham  in  a run 

Ham  roamfl.  * 

t 

• 

183.  Y on  beat  . 

• 

L 

j Turn  niara-chhii, 

1 

i 

' Turn  inura-chhii,  wur-chha . 

I 

! 

Turn  mai-chha  . 

« 

• 

184.  They  beat  . 

j ft  rnarani,  (fern.)  n.aranip  . 

(J  to  ami 

i 

Un  Tnarnun 

• 

t 

185.  I beat  ( Past  T 

ense ) 

' MaT-Je  maro  . , , 

i 

1 

1 

Mi-1  mar 

Mai-lG  maryO  • 

• 

• 

186.  Thou  beatest 
1 mcv). 

( Past 

j 

Twi-lc  maro 

TwM  mar  . . 

Tai-lS  maryO  , 

1 

• 

187.  He  beat  (Past  Tense ) • 

Wl-le  inuro 

Wi-1  mar  . . . 

i 

WI7IS  maryO  • 

« 

• 

366 — Central  Pahayl. 


Garhw&li  (Standard). 


Garhw&H  (Ra*hl). 


Gafhwall  (Tehri). 


English. 


Wo  ohhan 
Mai  ohhayo 
TO  chhayo 
Wo  chhayo 
Ham  chhaya 
Turn  chhaya 
Wo  chbaya 
Ho 

Ho  cO  • 

i 

: Hondo 

Hwai-k  . 

I 

I 

Mai  bo3 

i 

I 

1 Ma?  bola 


1 Mar  • i 

i 

iMarnO 

| MiirdO,  marnO 

j 

' Mari-k 

I 

Mai  mardO 

TO  mardl 

Wo  murd 
I 

■ Ham  mardawa  , 


Wo  cbbi  . 

Ml  chhoyfl,  cbbayfl 
Tii  cbhoyo,  chhayo  . 
Wo  cbhoyo,  chhayo  . 
11am  chbaya,  chbaya 
Turn  chbaya,  chbaya  • 


Mari-ka  • 

Mi  mfinO 

TO  marai 

Wo  mam  • 

Ham  mfimO  . 


• j Wo  chhana  . . . i 161.  They  arc. 

. ! Mai  chhayo,  chho,  thayo  . ' 16*2.  I was. 

i i 

i 

i • 

. • Tu  cl ih ay 0,  chho,  thayO  . [ 166.  Thou  wast. 

i 

i 

. 1 Wo  chhayo,  chho,  thayO  . • 164  He  was. 

i 

} 

. i Ham  chbaya,  chhii,  thaya  . 165.  We  were. 

I 

. j Turn  chhaya,  ch ha,  thaya  . ; 166.  You  were. 


Wo  chbaya,  chbaya  . . | 

W o chbaya. 

chhii,  thaya 

. j 167.  They  were. 

Ho 1 

llo 

• 

. | 168.  Be. 

i 

HOnO  «... 

HOnO 

• 

. • 169.  To  be. 

! 

HOnnO  • 

j Hondo 

• 

. ‘ 170.  Being. 

Hwe-ka  . 

i 

!,  Hoi-ka 

• 

. 171.  Having  been, 

Mi  hn  . 

* Mai  hoK 
» 

• 

.172.  I may  be. 

Ml  hunn 

Mai  holo 

i 

* 

• 

. : 1 73.  I shall* be. 

174.  I should  be. 

i 

j Mar  • 

1 

Mar 

• 

. . 175.  Beat. 

1 

t 

) 

j Mfino  . 

! Marnu 

• 

. 176.  To  beat. 

Manu  • . . . 

} 

j MiirdO 

•»  • 

. i 177.  Beating. 

. . j Mari-ka  . « 

. j Mardau  . 
t . Mavdi 

i 

. . | Mfirda 

I 

. . I Mfirda 


Tfim  mardawa 

• • 

1 

Turn  marni 

Mardfii  . 

! 

Womardin 

9 

WO  mam 

i M fml  an  a 

! 

Main  mare 

• • 

i 

Mi-la  (or  mai-la)  mfira  . | 

| MaT-na  mat'5 

Tin  tnarO 

• 

Tl-la  (or  tai-la)  mfira 

Ti-na  mare 

Wain  marO 

• 

Wa-la  (or  wai-la)  mfira 

Wtti-na  imirS 

i 178.  Having  beaten. 

170.  1 boat. 

180.  Thou  beaiest. 

181.  He  bouts. 

, 1.8*2.  We  beat. 

, 186.  You  beat. 

184.  They  beat. 

, 185.  I beat  l l'\tst  Tens- ). 

186.  Thou  heatest  ( Vast 

Tr  ns-). 

, 187.  ITo  beat  (7'iist  Tense). 
Central  Puhari — 367 


English. 

Kumaunl  (Standard). 

Kumauul  (Kha^parji}  a). 

Kumaunl  (Sdriy&H). 

188.  We  beat  (Past  Tense)  . 

Hama-le  m&ro  . 

Haino-1  mar 

Ham-le  mSryfl  . 

189.  Yon  beat  ( Past  Tense ) . 

Tuma-le  maro  . 

I 

Tunirt-1  mar 

Turn- IQ  maryfl  . 

190.  They  beat  (Past  Tense) 

1 

Un-lo  m&ro  . . . 

U nd-1  mar 

Unan-ld  maryo 

191.  I am  beating 

MaT  mArauer-chhii 

Mi  miirau  lagi-rayil 

MaT  maran  pai-rayU  . 

192.  I was  beating 

MaT  m andr-c  hbiy  D , maru- 
chhiyil. 

Ml  maran  lagi-rau-chhiy 

MaT  maran  pai-rai-thyS 

193.  I had  beaten 

MaT-le  mara-chhiyfl  . 

Mi-1  mar-chhiy 

MaT-ld  mari-tbyO 

194.  I may  beat 

Mai  mar 3 

All  mi'irS 



i 

195.  I shall  beat  . . 1 

Mai  m&riilo 

i 

Mi  mar 51 

MaT  murid 

190.  Thou  wilt  beat  . . ! 

j 

Tu  ni&ralai,  (fcm.)  -Id 

Til  rnailai 

TaT  marlai  . . | 

197.  He  will  beat  . . 

XJ  maralo,  ( fem .)  -li  • 

U maiauLi 

j 

U mar  Id  . . . . j 

i 

198.  We  shall  beat 

Ham  marulil 

Ham  maral 

i 

Ham  maria,  . . . j 

199.  You  will  beat 

Turn  marala 

Turn  maria 

i 

Trim  maria 

200.  They  will  beat  . . ! 

tl  m&rala,  (fem.)  -lin  . 

i 

U maria  . .j 

| 

17 n maria  . . . j 

i 

1 

201.  I should  beat 

! 

i 

1 

| 

! 

202.  I am  beaten  . . ! 

Mai  mari-chhu  . . \ 

Mi  mail  gayu  . . ‘ 

MaT  mari  ja-chhn  . . | 

i 

203.  I was  beaten 

MaT  mariyd  . . . ; 

i 

Ml  marl  gO-elihiy 

1 

MaT  niuri  gayQ 

204.  I shall  be  beaten 

j 

MaT  marilo  . . . j 

Mi  man  jiil 

MaT  mari  jarJft  . . ! 

1 1 

i 

205.  I go 

1 

MaT  jS-chhu  . . 1 

i 

Mi  jachh,  jachh 

i 1 

I MaT  ia -chill  . . • ! 

; i 

206.  Thou  goest 

i 

Tu  jS-chhai,  (/era.)  -ebhe  . 1 

| 

To  jSchhai,  jachhui 

, TaT  ja-chhai  . . • j 

207.  He  goes 

i 

U ;i&-chh,  (fem.)  -chhya 

17  jiTchli,  jachh 

| TJ  ju-chh  . 

j 

208.  We  go 

Ham  jand 

Ham  jaml 

! 11  fun  janu. 

209.  You  go 

Turn  ja-chlia  . . . 1 

1 Turn  jachhil,  j-khhT 

, Tum  ja-chha 

i 

210.  They  go 

0 jam",  (fem.)  jin  in 

j tJ  jani  .... 

1 

| 

j 

i Un  jani,  janfm  . 

211.  I went 

MaT  gayii 

MnT  gayii 

212.  Thou  wentest 

Tu  gayai,  (Jem.)  gayi 

j Tn  gay 6 

1 

TaT  gayd 

213.  He  went  . 

U gavo,  (fem.)  gai  or  gd  . 

! . 

i T-T  Sty  sr> 

U gyd  . 

214.  We  went  . 

Ham  gays 

i 

Ham  gay  . . 

Ham  gay® 

« 

308 — Central  PaharC 

G»rhw&li  (Standard). 


Gitfhw&ll  (BA *hl). 


Garhwall  (Tshrl). 


English. 


, 

Ham-na  mar  5 . • . ! 

188.  Wo  beat  (JPa$t  Tens*). 

Tum-na  m&rd  . • . 

189.  Ton  beat  (Pat*  Ten$$)m 

U-na  m&r&  . . . 

190.  They  beat  (Part  Ten$* ). 

Mat  mar  do  ohhaS  • » 

191 . I am  beating. 

Mai  mardo  thayO 

192.  I was  beating. 

MaT-na  m&r&  • • 

193.  I had  beaten. 

Mai  marau  • • 

194.  I may  beat. 

Mat  marlo  . • • 

195.  I shall  beat. 

TEC  maralyO,  m2LrilO  . 

196.  Thou  wilt  beat. 

Wo  marlo  . • 

197.  He  will  beat. 

Ham  maria  . • 

198.  We  shall  beat. 

Turn  maralya,  m&rl&  . 

199.  You  will  beat. 

Wo  marilya,  maria  • . 

200.  They  will  beat. 

201.  I should  beat. 

, Mai  mariyO  gayO  . 

202.  I am  beaten. 

. j Mai  mariyO  gayO  tbayO 

203.  I was  beaten. 

. Mai  mariyO  jaulo 

204.  I shall  be  beaten. 

. MaT  jaudn.  . . 

205.  I go. 

, T&  jandl . . • • 

206.  Thou  goest. 

. Wo  janda  • • 

207.  He  goes. 

. liam  janda. 

208.  We  go. 

. Turn  jfindal 

209.  You  go. 

. Wo  jfmdana 

210.  They  go. 

. MaT  gayed 

211.  1 went. 

| 

. TO  gayO  . 

212.  Tbou  wentest. 

# Wo  gayO  . • 

213.  He  went. 

. Ham  gayO  • • 

214.  Wo  went. 

?ftT.  IT  ltVT  Tv. 


Central  Pahaf!- 369 
3 B 


English. 


Kumaunl  (Standard). 


Kumaunl  (Khatparjiya). 


Kumaunl  (S5riy&lf). 


215.  You  went  . 


Turn  gay  a . . • Turn  g&y 


Turn  gaya 


216.  They  went 


217.  Go  . 


• j U gaya,  (fen t.)  gayin  or  U gaya,  gay,  gaya  . 
! g“in- 

• Ja  • • • • • «J  a • • • 


. Un  gaya . 


. Ja  . . . 


218.  Going 


• Jano 


• Jan 


JanA 


219.  Gone 


Gfly,  go  . . . . Gyo 


220.  What  is  your  name  ? Tumaro  ke  nau  chh  ? . Tumar  k6  nau  chh  ? . TumarA  kya  nail  chh  ? 

221.  How  olil  is  this  horse  ? Yo  ghoro  katnk  buro  ehh  ? Ya  ghvvar  katuk  bur  chh  ? Ye  ghApa-ki  bais  kya  clih  ? 


How  far  is  it  from  hero 
to  Kashmir  ? 

How  many  sons  are 
there  in  your  father’s 
house  ? 

I have  walked  a l°ug 
way  to-day. 

The  son  of  my  uncle  is 
married  to  liis  sister. 

In  the  house  is  the  sad- 
dle of  the  whito  horse. 

Put  the  saddle  upon 
his  back. 

I have  beaten  his  son 
with  many  stripes. 

He  is  grazing  cattle  on 
the  top  of  the  hill. 

He  is  sitting  on  a horse 
under  that  tree. 

His  brother  is  taller 
than  his  sifter. 

The  price  of  that  is  two 
rupees  and  a half. 

My  father  liveB  in  that 
small  house. 


.Ya-bati  Kasrnir  katuk  diir 
chh  ? 

Tamara  baba- k a ghar-me 
katuk  ehytila  ehhan  ? 

Mai  ai  bhaut  diir  janik 
gayS/ 

Myara  kak:\-ka  chyala-ko 
bya  wi-ki  baini  dagari 
hhau-chh. 

( 1 liar-mo  syata  ghwara-ki 
jin  chh. 


Ya-bati  Kasmlr  katuk  dur 
clih  ? 

Tumar  baba-k  ghar-me 
katuk  chyfil  ehhan  ? 

Ml  iij  bhaut  diir  janik 
gayu. 

Myfir  kakii-k  chyfil-k  bya 
wi-ki  baini  dagafi  blmu- 
chh. 

Ghar-me  syat  ghwapft-ki  , 
jin  chh.  i 


Yix-hwai  Kasmlr-  ko  des 

katnk  tara  chh  ? 

Tumara  babu-kii  ghar-rne 
katnk  chela  ehhan  ? 

Mai  aj  bhaut  tara-lan  kityu. 


Mora  kaka-ka  chftla-ko  bya 
wi-ki  baini-sit  hhai-chh. 

Wi  ghar-inG  seta  ghAra-ki 
jin  chh. 


Jin  wl-ka  putha-ine  dharau  Jin  wi-ki  pufh-me  dharau  . ■ Jinas  )vi-ki  pithi-rae  rakh  . 


Mai-le  wl-k\  chyala-kani  j Mi-1  wi-k  chyai-kani  bhaut 
bhaut  bet  mara-chh.  I b£t  mfiri-chh. 

f«.  i - 

U wi  dhura-me  chaupaun  TJ  wi  dana-k  inunviiw 
charunai  lfigi  rau-chh.  chanpainA-kaui  charaun 

J «lagi  rau-chh. 

U wi  bAt-muni  ek  ghwiira-me  fj  wi  bftt  nmni  ek  gliwar- 
baithi  rau-chh.  mau  baithi  rau-chh. 

Wi-ko  bhai  apani  baini-hai  Wide  bhai  apani  baini-ha7 
lamo  clih.  baki  lamb  chh.  i 

Wi-ko  mAl  dhai  rupai  chh  . Wi-k  mAl  dluii  rupaT  clih  • 


Mero  hub  wi  nsmDr  ghar-me  j Myar  bab  wi  nan  ghar-ini  j 
ru-ehh.  ; riicbh. 


M.iT-le  wi-ka  chelas  bhaut 
ciipak  marichh. 

II  wi  dana-kii  t^ka-mli 
chaupau  charaun  pai-rai- 
chh. 

lT  wi  rukh-ka  tali-bafi  6k 
ghora-me  cliari  rai-chh. 

Wi-kA  bhaya  jhik  apani 
baiui-liwai  algA  chh. 

Wi-kA  mAi  dhfii  rupaiya 
chh. 

M6rA  bfibu  wi  nana  ghar-me 
ran -chh. 


Give  this  rupee  to  him  Yo  rupai  wi-kani  di-diyau  . Ya  rupai  wi-kani  di-diyau  . ' Ye  rnpaiyas  wis  di-diy 


Take  t ho  so  rupees  frotn 
him. 

Boat  him  well  and  bind 
him  with  ropes. 

Draw  water  from  the 
well. 

Walk  before  mo  • 


Un  rapairi-kani  wi-hai  li-  | UnA  rupaiuO-karii  wl-tliai  I 
liyau.  li-liyau.  j 

Wi-kani  kliub  marau,  aur  Wi-kani  khftb  marau,  anr 
jyau  ra-le  badau . jyn n rai  -1  biidau . 

Kuwa-hai  pani  garau  . Kuw-hai  pani  garau 


Un  rupaiyan  wi-thaT-hwai 

li-liy. 

Wis  bhali-kai  mar,  aur 
jyaurati-lS  badi-diy. 

Kuwa-liwai  pani  gap  • 


M}&ra  aghin  hi* 


Myar  agbil  hit 


. Mera  agatirhit 


Whose  boy  comes  be- 
hind you  ? 

Prom  whom  did  you 
buy  that  ? 

From  a shopkeeper  of 
the  village. 


'I  nmaz^pacL bin-bat i kai-ko  Tumar  jmchhil-bati  kai-k  Tnmar&  paohbil  kai-kd  chdlo 
chelo  S-chh  ? chyal  U-chh  ? aun  pai  rai-chh  ? 

Tuma-le  u kai-bati  inAl  le-  T umA-1  ft  kai-thai  mftl  U-  Tum-lp  wis  kai-thal-hwfti 
I chh  ? chh  ? mOl  li-chh  P 

Gau-k&  6k  dftkandar-bati  . Gau-k  6k  dftkandar-tha?  • Wi  gpu-ka  6k  dukanwalft- 

thal-hwai. 


370 — Central  Pahapl. 


Gar h wall  (Standard). 


Gayhwali  (Rat hi). 


Garhwall  (Tehrl). 


English. 


Tam  gayai 


Wo  gay  a 


. . Tam  gawa 
. . Wo  gin  rm 


Tam  gaya 

Wo  gaina,  gaycna 


215.  Yon  went. 


21G.  They  went. 


JandO  • • • • Janti,  janO  • 


Jando 


Gaye 


, i 218.  Going. 


210.  Gone. 


T(5rO  nam  kya  cliha  ? . Tyflro  uau  kya  cha  ? . . Tero  nan  kya  chha  ? . 220.  Wln«t  is  your  name  Y 

YO  ghOra  katna  budya  Yo  ghwaya  katug  budya  YO  gliOrO  kanO  budya  chha  ? 221.  How  old  is  this  horse  ? 

chha  Y i cka  ? 

Yakh-td  Kasmir  katna  Yakha-batx  KaSmir  katug  Yaklia-bitina  Kasmir  katna  222.  How  far  is  it  from 

chha  ? cha  ? diir  chha  ? here  to  Kashmir  ? 

Tumara  baba-ka  gbar-ma  Tuinara  babfi-gliar  katug  Tamara  buba-kii  kufa-par  223.  How  many  sons  are 

katffa  naunfi  chban  ? lauya  chbl  ? kati  beta  chhana  ? thm:  in  your  father’s 

° house  ? 

MaT  ai  bahut  chalyS  . Mi  aj  bbindi  hilS  . . Aj  maT  bar!  dfir-taT  ghfunyo  221.1  have  walked  a long 

way  to-day. 

Wc-Vi  bnin  meii  chaclia-ku  j We-kl  bain  mgiu  kaka-ka  Mein  chacha-ka  nnuna-kn  225.  The  son  of  my  uncle  is 
nautm-kft  byahi  chha.  \ laura-kil  byiiT  cha.  wai-kl  bain  dfigrG  byau  married  to  his  sister. 

bflye. 

Sanlied  ghOrii-ki  katlii  Syiita  gliwfira-ki  kathi  dyiil-  Wasnphed  prh.ira-ki  jin  22G.  In  the  houseis  the  sad- 
den chha.  ' ; gain  cha.  wai  kurfi  par  chha.  die  of  the  white  horse. 

W6-ki  pith-mu  kathi  dhar  . 1 We-ku.  putha-ma  kathi  dhar  Jin  wui-ki  pith-par  dhaia  . 227.  Put,  the  saddle  iipor. 

* * his  back. 

Main  we-kn  nnunO  bliinde  Mi-la  we-ku  laurf.  hhii.di  MaNna  wai-ka  nauna-sane  228.  T have  beaten  his  son 
betan  niare.  setga-la  mnrn.  bahut  betfi-na  pile.  with  many  stripes. 

Wf(  dhar-ma  gniii  charaunn  Wn  klinl-gani  gnr  charannda  Wa  wai  (ladti-ki  dhar-ma  229.  He  is  grazing  cattle  on 
chha  cha.  dlian  chain  charuunu  chha.  the  tup  of  the  hill. 

^mb0cbhhLW6'kl  j ?h“  W^ki  Wt*  "jhiS*' chha.  “ than  his  sister. 

W8-k5  mol  dhai  rupy  a chha  ! We-kfl  mftl  dhai  vupya  cha  . *«£}***  Rm'  ^ '"upeetand 

Mgr  a baba  w6  chhota  ghar-  ! MSrO  baba  wo  nana  kuTa-  Me^  bflba  wai  chhMa  kupi  *88.  * ** 

par  r&hadin.  j Rani  ran.  lahacio. 

Ya  rupya  w8-sani  dl-d6  . j Yfl  rupya  wS-thS  de-dya  . Yo  rnpaya  wai-kfl  di-dya  . 231.  Give  tlds  rupee  to  him. 

I 

W6-t8  wfl  rupya  li-le  . j WS-maknl  wo  rupya  18-18  . Tau  rupynu  \vai-s8  li-lya  G|ko  those  lupees  from 

W«  khnb  mar  aur  rasei-ma  * We  bhi0dl  xnfirya  aur  jyura-j  Wai-sa.n  khfib  phatk^a  236.  Heat  Mm  ivellimd  bind 
badh.  : labndhya.  I aur  juran-sc  badhi-dewa.  mm  with  r i 

Kuwg-td  papi  nikala  . j Kuwfi-undd  piini  gap1  • Kflwa-s6  pam  mkala  . -37. 

Merit  agari  chal  . . j Myara  aghin  hit  ...  M8ra  ap4|8  chaht  . . | 236.  Walk  before  me. 

Ta^h?biD  kai*k0  hin,^°u? 

Tin  wfl  kai-te  mol  l8yfl  f . Tw8-la  wfl  kai-gapi  mol  Tnm  na  wfl  kai-majS  mal-  2t0-  J 

3 liyap  hn0? 

n ~ L at  itnlc5.nda.r-s8  . 2tl.  From  a shopkeeper  of 
GaS-ka  8k  bapiya-te  . Gau-ka  8k  banya-gapi  . Gau-ka  ek  dukand  the  village. 

■ ^ Central  Pahayi — 371 

3 b 2 


VOL.  IX,  PAST  IV. 


373 


Western  PaharT. 


The  Speakers. 


Western  Pahari  is  the  Aryan,  language  spoken  in  that  part  of  the  Sub-Himalayas 
...  , extending  from  the  Jaunsar-Bawar  tract  of  the  District  of 

Where  spoken.  ° 

Dehra  Dun  to  Bliadrawah  in  tin;  Northern  Panjab.  To  its 
East  lies  Garhwal,  in  which  the  language  is  the  Garliwall  form  of  Central  Pahari.  To 
its  North  lies  the  inhospitable  Mid-Himalaya,  the  few  inhabitants  of  which  speak  Tibeto- 
Burman  languages.  To  its  South  it  has  on  the  eastern  side  the  Hindustani  of  Dehra 
Dun  and  Ambala,  and,  further  West,  Paftjabi.  To  its  West,  in  order  from  south  to 
north,  it  has  Standard  Pafljabi,  the  Kangra  and  Dogri  dialects  of  that  language,  and  in 
the  extreme  north-west  Kashmiri.  The  tract  thus  bounded  includes  Jaunsar-Bawar, 
most  of  the  Simla  Hill  States  with  a small  portion  of  the  adjoining  district  of  Ambala, 
Kulu,  the  States  of  Suket,  Mandi,  and  Chainba,  and  the  Eastern  end  of  Kashmir. 

As  in  the  case  of  Garliwall  and  KumaunI,  the  speakers  of  Western  Pahari  are  of 

mixed  origin.  The  earliest  Aryan-speaking  inhabitants  of 
whom  we  have  any  record  were  the  Klia&as  and  (at  a later 
stage)  also  the  Guj.ars,  who  are  described  at  some  length  in  the  General  Introduction  to 
the  Pahari  languages.  Eor  our  present  purposes  it  will  be  convenient  to  look  upon 
these  Kha&i-Gujars  as  the  original  inhabitants  of  this  tract,  conquered  and  assimilated 
by  Rajput  immigrants  from  the  south,  Avho  very  probably  were  their  distant  blood- 
relations.  Throughout  these  hills,  the  ruling  classes  claim  to  be  ltajputs.  Among  the 
Simla  Hill  States  the  earliest  Raja  of  Sirmur  was  a Sdryavamsi  Rajput  who  lived  in 
the  latter  part  of  the  11th  century,  and  was  succeeded  by  Subhans  Parkash  of  Jaisalmer 
in  1095  A.D.  from  whom  is  descended  the  present  Raja.  The  Ranas  of  Jubbal,  Baisan 
and  the  Thakur  of  Taroch  belong  to  the  same  family.  Similarly  the  families  of  the  rulers 
of  Baghal  and  Bija  came  from  TTjjain,  of  Darkoti  from  Marwar,  of  Baghat  from  the 
Deccan,  and  of  Bashahr  from  Benares. 

In  Kulu  the  dynasty  of  Kulu  Rajas  claims  descent  from  a Suryavarhsi  Rajput 
named  ‘ Behangamani,’  who  was  succeeded  by  descendants  for  87  generations,  the  last 
reigning  prince  being  Ajit  Singh  who  was  deposed  by  the  Sikhs  in  1840. 

The  ruling  families  of  Mandi  and  Suket  as  well  as  that  of  Keonthal  arc  Chandra- 
variigi  Rajputs  who  came  from  Bengal  in  the  13th  century.  The  Rajas  of  Chamba  are 
Sdryavamgi  Rajputs,  and  claim  descent  from  Rama  Chandra  himself.  They  originally 
came  from  Oudh,  and  the  present  dynasty  was  probably  founded  in  the  middle  of  the 
6th  century  A.D. 

These  Rajput  leaders  naturally  brought  followers  with  them.  Their  numbers  were 
added  to  in  later  centuries  by  others  fleeing  from  the  plains  before  Mughul  oppression. 
These  intermarried  with  their  KhaSa-Gujar  kin,  and  gradually  their  own  language 
became  mixed  with  that  of  the  Khavas — or  rather  obtained  general  currency  with  Klia&i 
corruptions.  The  probable  course  of  linguistic  history  has  been  discussed  in  the  General 
Introduction  to  the  Pahari  languages,  and  need  not  be  repeated  here. 

Suffice  it  to  say  that  Western  Pahari  may  be  looked  upon  as  a form  of  Rajasthani 
much  mixed  Avith  the  already  mixed  language  of  the  Khasa-Gujars.  11  e have  no 


374 


WESTERN  PA1IA1U. 


literary  records  of  the  Khaias,  and  hence  cannot  tell  how  much  of  the  present  "Western 
Pahari  should  rightly  be  credited  to  them.  But  by  inference  it  is  probable  that  the 
Kha&i-Gujar  language,  in  Grammar  at  least,  was  closely  akin  to  Rajasthani,  and  that 
the  two  easily  amalgamated. 

As  regards  Vocabulary,  the  difference  was  probably  greater.  Widely  separated 
tribes  originally  speaking  a common  language  cling  to  their  original  grammar  while 
altered  circumstances  may  determine  the  development  of  vocabularies  very  different  in 
their  copia  verborum.  For  this  reason,  in  the  following  accounts  of  the  different  Pahari 
languages,  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  give  lists  of  typical  words  which,  may  aid  the 
inquiry  into  the  nature  of  the  old  Klia&i  language. 

In  dealing  with  Eastern  Pahari  or  Khas-Kura  and  with  Central  Pahari  we  have 
seen  that  the  traces  of  the  old  Kliala  language  became  stronger  as  we  went  westwards. 
In  Western  Pahari  they  are  stronger  still,  and  it  is  these  traces  that  mainly  authorize 
the  separation  of  it  from  Central  Pahari  as  a distinct  group  of  dialects.  Both  in 
Phonoloirv  and  in  Vocabulary  we  come  across  numerous  instances  of  agreement  with 
those  languages  of  the  North-Western  Language,  called  “ Pi&'tclia  ” languages  in  this 
Survey,  of  which  Kashmiri  is  the  best  known  example.  Attention  will  be  drawn 
to  these  instances  as  they  occur.  Here  it  will  be  sufficient  to  draw  attention  to  the 
general  fact. 

Western  Pahari  consists  of  a great  number  of  dialects,  varying  almost  from  hill  to 


Groups  of  Dialects. 


hill.  An  attempt  to  class  them  under  various  groups  is  made 
in  the  following  table,  but  it  may  at  once  be  stated  that  in 


some  cases  the  differences  between  group  and  group  arc  very  slight : 


Name  of  Lftngruage  or  Group. 

JauDbari 
Sirmaurl 
Baghati 
KiiSthall 
Satlaj  Group  . 

Kului 

Idandeali 

Cham&all 

Bhadrawah  Group 


Total  number  of  speakers 


Number  of  Speaker?. 

47,487 

124,502 

22,195 

151,470 

88,893 

84,031 

212,184 

109,28(5 

25,517 

816,181 


Most  of  these  languages  contain  several  sub-dialects,  details  regarding  which  will  be 
found  in  the  introductory  accounts  of  each  group. 

Jaunsarl  is  the  language  spoken  in  the  Jaunsar-Btiwar  divisiou  of  Delira  Dun. 
. Sirmaurl  is  mainly  spoken  in  the  States  of  Sirmaur  and 

JaunsSrT  and  SirmaurT.  T . . 

Jubbal.  Jr  is  closely  connected  with  Jaunsarl,  but  north- 
east  of  the  River  Giri  and  in  Jubbal  it  begins  to  approximate  to  Kiuthall. 

Baghati  and  Kiuthall  are  also  closely  connected.  Baghati  is  the  dialect  of  the 


BaghStfand  KiuthalT. 


State  of  Baghat  and  the  neighbourhood,  in  the  South-West 
of  the  Simla  Hill  States,  while  KiOthall,  in  several  varying 


dialects,  is  spoken  in  the  central  portion  c f these  States,  especially  round  Simla  itself  and 


in  the  State  of  Keontbat 


INTRODUCTION. 


375 


KujGT  and  Satlaj  Group. 


Kulul  is  spoken  in  Kulu,  and  the  Satlaj  Group  is  a small  set  of  dialects  on  each 

side  of  the  river  Satlaj  between  the  Simla  district  and 
Kuli*.  It  is  a kind  of  linguistic  bridge  between  Kiuthali 

and  Kulul. 

Mand&Ui  is  the  language  of  the  States  of  Mandi  and  Suket,  and  represents  Southern 
Man^ssjT.  Kulul  merging  into  the  Pafijabi  of  Kangra. 

Cliameali  (with  four  dialects)  is  mainly  spoken  in  the  Chamba  State,  and  repre- 
sents Kulul  merging  into  the  Dogri  of  Jammu  and  into 
Bhadrawahi. 


Cham&XjT. 


Tlie  Bhadrawah  Group  consists  of  three  dialects,  spoken  by  few  people,  but  of 

considerable  philological  importance,  which  illustrate  the 
final  stage  of  Ohameali  merging,  through  Bhadrawahi, 


BhadrawSh  Group. 

into  Kashmiri. 


From  the  above  it  will  be  gathered  that  we  may  take  KiStliall-Baghatl  and  KuLui 
as  the  typical  Western  Pahari  dialects,  and  the  following  brief  account  of  the  main 
features  of  Western  Pahari  will  be  based  on  these  two.  Sirmauri  and  Jaunsari  are 
affected  by  the  Hindustani  and  Panjabi  of  the  plains,  and  Jaunsari  also  by  the 
neighbouring  Garhwali  to  its  Past,  while  Mandeali  and  Ohameali  are  corrupted  by  the 
dialects  of  Paiijabi  lying  to  their  West. 

Written  character.-  -All  over  the  Western  Pahari  area  the  written  character  is 
some  form  or  other  of  the  Takri  alphabet,  but  the  Nagari  and  Persian  characters  are 
also  ns<*d  by  the  educated.  Specimens  written  in  each  of  these  characters  will  lie  found 
in  the  following  pages.  The  name  of  the  Takri  alphabet  is  most  probably  derived  from 
Takka,  the  name  of  a powerful  tribe  which  once  ruled  this  part  of  the  country,  and 
whoso  capital  was  the  famous  Sakala,  lately  identified  by  Dr.  Fleet  with  the  modern 
Sialkot. 


The  Takri  or  Takkari  alphabet  is  closely  connected  with  the  Sarada  .alphabet  of 
Kashmir,  and  with  the  Landii,  or  ‘ clipped,’  alphabet  current  in  the  Pan  jab  and  Sind. 
Tt  is  built  on  the  same  lines  as  Nagari,  but  the  representation  of  the  vowels  is,  as  will 
be  seen  from  the  following  pages,  most  imperfect.  Medial  short  vowels  are  frequently 
omitted,  and  medial  long  vowels  are  often  employed  in  their  initial  form,  as  if,  in 
Nagari,  we  were  to  write  cT^  for  tit.  In  the  Jammu  territory  the  alphabet  has  been 
adopted  for  official  purpose,  and  to  fit  it  for  this  it  lias  been  altered  and  improved.  It 
is  then  called  ‘J)6gri.’  Another  reformed  variety  of  Takri,  with  a complete  series  of 
vowels,  is  in  use  in  the  State  of  Chamba,  and  is  there  known  as  ‘ Cliameali.'  Types  have 
been  east  in  Cliameali,  and  portions  of  the  Scriptures  have  been  printed  in  it.  Speci- 
mens of  this  type-printed  Cliameali  will  also  be  found  in  the  following  pages. 


A full  account  of  the  Dogri  character,  and  of  its  connexion  with  Takri,  will  be 
found  in  the  section  dealing  with  the  Dogri  dialect  of  Panjabi,  in  Part  ill  of  this 
volume.  The  reader  is  also  referred  to  a paper  on  the  modern  Indo-Aryan  alphabets  of 
North-Western  India  on  pp.  67  ff.  of  the  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  for 
1904,  and  to  a note  on  the  Takri  alphabet  on  p.  802  of  the  same  Journal  for  191.1, 
both  by  the  present  writer. 


376 


WESTEKN  PAHAUl. 


Pronunciation. — In  'Western  Pahari  the  letter  a is  generally  sounded  like  the  6 in 
‘ hot'  There  is  a sliort  c sounded  like  the  e in  ‘ met ' which  is  most  often  represented  in 
writing  by  the  letter  i.  Generally  speaking,  the  pronunciation  of  the  vowels  is  careless, 
little  or  no  distinction  being  made  between  e and  i,  e and  i and  o and  u.  In  some  dialects 
(e.g.  in  the  Simla  Siraji  form  of  Kinthali)  a final  i has  almost  disappeared,  e being  sub- 
stituted for  it.  It  may  be  noted  that  all  these  peculiarities  also  occur  in  Kashmiri.  In 
Kiuthali,  and  probably  elsewhere,  the  diphthong  at  is  pronounced  like  a prolonged 
German  u (being  then  transliterated  ft)  when  originally  followed  by  i.  When  not 
followed  by  i it  sometimes  becomes  an.  A good  example  of  this  is  the  base  baihn,  a 
sister.  In  KiOthall  its  nominative  is  bfihu  (for  bailuft)  while  its  agent  ease  is  bauhne. 
Strikingly  parallel  is  the  use  of  the  same  diphthong  in  Kashmiri.  In  that  language  ai 
has  the  sound  of  a broad  6.  On  the  pother  hand,  when  followed  by  the  very  short  it  be- 
comes ft.  Thus  the  base  kait-,  how  many,  has  its  nominative  plural  kfit\ 

In  the  latter  instance  we  have  an  example  of  the  epenthesis  which  plays  so  impor- 
tant a part  in  the  Pisaclia  languages  of  the  North-West  frontier,  including  Kashmiri. 
By  * epenthesis  ’ is  meant  the  change  of  the  sound  of  a vowel  owing  to  the  influence  of 
another  vowel  following  it.  It  occurs  in  such  cases  as  the  English  words  ‘man’  and 
‘ men  \ The  latter  word  is  derived  from  the  old  Anglo-saxon  *manni,  in  which  the  a 
has  become  e under  the  influence  of  the  following  i.  Very  similarly,  though  in  this 
case  not  an  instance  of  Epenthesis,  the  a in  the  English  word  mat  has  one  sound,  but  if 
we  add  an  e after  the  t so  as  to  get  ‘ mate  ,'  the  sound  of  the  a is  altogether  changed  by 
the  influence  of  the  following  e.  In  native  writing  it  is  not  usual  to  indicate  this  change 
of  sound,  any  more  than  the  change  of  the  sound  of  the  a in  mat  and  mate  is  indicated 
in  English  writing.  This  Survey  being  mainly  based  on  written  materials,  it  does  not 
record  all  the  occurrences  of  epenthesis  in  the  Pahari  languages.  In  the  case  of  the 
Kumauni  dialect  of  Central  Pahari  materials  were  available,  and  the  extent  to  which  it 
there  occurred  is  noted.  Probably  similar  changes  occur  in  GarhwaU  but  no  materials  on 
the  point  are  available.  In  Kinthali  and  the  other  dialects  of  the  Simla  Hills  and  Kulu 
we  have  more  materials,  lor  the  excellent  notes  compiled  by  Mr.  Grahame  Bailey  in  the 
work  quoted  under  the  head  of  Authorities,  were  collected  on  the  spot.  Hero  we  come 
across  only  sporadic  instances  of  epenthesis,  as  in  bfihu,  above  mentioned. 

It  is  not  till  we  get  to  Chamba  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Kashmiri  that  epenthesis 
assumes  prominence  in  writing,  and  we  meet  several  instances  of  its  occurrence  in  some 
of  the  dialects  of  Chameali.1 

In  connexion  with  vowel  sounds  we  may  make  one  other  remark,  which  properly 
falls  under  the  head  of  declension.  In  standard  Hindustani  and  Pafijabi,  there  is  an 
important  class  of  masculine  nouns  which  end  in  o,  like  ghdrd,  a horse.  In  Rajasthani 
such  nouns  end  in  o,  as  in  ghodd  or  ghdrd.  Eastern  and  Central  Pahari  follow  Raja- 
sthani in  this.  "Western  Pahari  does  the  same,  but  not  so  decisively.  Even  in  KiOthali 
both  ghofo  and  ghdrd  may  bo  employed,  and  in  the  border  dialects,  such  as  JaunsarT, 
Sirmauri  and  Chameali,  the  a-  termination  is  the  more  common.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
termination  o is  often  pronounced  u,  so  that  we  may  have  ghord  and  ghofo  or  ghoru,  all 
used  in  the  same  dialect  ard  by  the  same  person,  although,  varying  from  dialect  to  dialect, 
one  form  is  generally  more  common  than  the  two  others.  Thus  in  Jaunsari,  the  commonest 

1 Sue,  e.g,,  p.  825  post. 


INTRODUCTION. 


377 


form  would  lie  ghord,  in  Kiflthall  it  would  be  ghbrb,  while  forms  corresponding  to  ghoru , 
though  by  no  means  excluding  the  other  two,  appear  most  frequently  in  Kului. 

As  regards  consonants,  wo  must  first  notice  the  tendency  exhibited  by  Western 
Pahari  towards  disaspi  ration:  Thus  the  Hindi  ltd  tut,  to  be,  is  generally  represented  by 
bnu  or  some  such  form.  There  is  a similar  tendency  to  drop  an  initial  It  in  Kashmiri, 
where  we  have,  for  instance,  atha,  a hand,  corresponding  to  the  Hindustani  hath.  In 
this  particular  word  the  initial  h is  preserved  in  Western  Pahari,  but  it  may  be  noticed 
that  in  Kashmiri  the  long  d of  hath  is  shortened  in  atha,  and  the  same  takes  place  in 
certain  Western  Pahari  dialects,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  Kului  both. 

While  the  surd  aspirates  kb,  chh,  th,  th,  and  pit  as  a rule  preserve  their  aspiration  in 
Western  Pahari,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  sonant  aspirates  gh,jh,  dh,  dh  and  bit,  all  show 
a tendency  to  drop  it.  Here  again  we  see  the  same  in  the,  Pisacha  languages,  which  in- 
variably disaspi  rate  these  sonant  aspirates.  In  Western  Pahari  they  are  sometimes 
disaspi  rated  altogether,  as  in  Pisacha,  as  in  bl,  for  bhi,  also  •fhCil  for  bit  at,  a brother ; 
batlnd  for  badhnd,  to  bind;  dl  or  dh%,  a daughter;  but  more  usually  the  aspiration  is 
projected,  so  to  speak,  to  a later  stage  of  the  syllable.  Tims,  ghord,  a horse,  is  pro- 
nounced gohrd,  and  ghor,  a house,  is  pronounced  gb/tr.  Very  similarly,  It  bud.  is  repre- 
sented not  only  by  dim,  but  also  by  blind. 

In  the  Pisacha  languages  we  occasionally,  especially  in  the  case  of  borrowed  words, 
come  across  instances  of  the  hardening  of  sonant  letters,  i.e.  of  g becoming  k ; of  j be- 
coming c/t  ; of  d becoming  t ; and  of  b becoming  p.  Thus  in  Kashmiri  we  have  led  has 
for  kdgdz,  paper ; bddarapet  for  bhadrapada,  the  name  of  a month ; bdpat  for  bdbat , 
concerning.  Similarly,  in  Rajasthani  and  Central  Pahari,  we  have  stray  instances  of 
the  same  changes,  as  in  Malvi  jtucap  for  jaictip,  a reply;  K.umauni  jltanft  for  jhandl,  a 
flag.  Instances  of  this  kind  of  hardening  are  not  uncommon  in  Western  Pahari. 
Attention  will  be  drawn  to  many  of  them  as  they  occur  in  the  various  dialects.  As  ex- 
amples, we  may  here  quote  cases  such  as  sukrb  or  sugrb,  swine,  in  Kiutliali  (Kirni)1 2 ; 
lekhd-chbkha,  for  lekhd-jbkfid,  a computation  (Kiutliali)  ; bkhatl,  for  ankhad\h),  medicine 
(Jaunsari)  ; parchl , for  barchl , a spear  (Kiflthall)  ; jin/a.  for  ziuda,  alive  (Pangwali). 

Another  consonantal  change  typical  of  Western  Pahari  is  the  development  of  two 
new  consonants, — tn  developed  from  eft  (with  its  aspirate  lj<Ji  Irom  chh)  and  z or  dz  de- 
veloped from  j.  Thus,  in  Kiutliali  the  word  chajaro  is  pronounced  tftbzarb  or  tsbzzarb  ; 
and  japnu,  to  speak,  is  pronounced  dsdpnu. 

Further,  a t when  representing  an  older  t r,  frequently  becomes  rh . Thus  the  word 
for  three,  is  tin  in  Hindustani,  representing  the  Sanskrit  trhii,  but  in  Kiutliali,  it  is 
chaun,  and  in  Kului  chin1.  This  c/t  is,  further,  again  changed  to  ts.  So.  again,  the 
Sanskrit  kshetra,  a field,  is  in  Hindi  kbet,  but  in  Western  Pahari  it  is  khech  or 
khet$. 

There  is  similar  interchange  between  d,  j and  tig,  as  in  Jaunsari  kite;  lor  kited, 
grief  ; Sirmaurl  (Giripari)  ddlij,  for  ddridra,  poor,  hut  examples  are  not  so  numerous. 
We  may,  however,  compare  the  Kashmiri  dapnn,  to  say,  with  tLgdpnd  given  above. 


1 The  original  Sanskrit  wont  is  iiikara,  and  it  might  bo  argued  that  the  k in  sukrit  is  simply  a retention  ot  the  orig'tutl 

Sanskrit  lottor.  Rut  tho  nasal  over  the  il  shoivs  that  this  cannot  bo  the  o use.  All  analogy  shows  that  the  Sanskrit  wool 
must  have  passed  through  tho  forms  .nikkarti,  to  tUt/rS.  and  it  is  this  *(?</«•  which  lias  heeorae  miro. 

2 An  interesting  oasc  is  that  of  the  Kiutliali  ehiimhl,  copper,  as  compared  with  the  Kashmiri  ts.Tm,  and  Sanskrit^ .iw? a. 

VOU  IX,  PART  IV.  *’  i: 


378 


WESTERN  PAHAJU. 


Finally,  as  an  example  of  the  change  of  an  aspirated  th,  we  may  quote  the  word 
Sthd,  here,  which  in  Kochi  Kitithali  becomes  iclihd. 

All  these  changes  of  ch,  j,  t,  and  d are  extremely  common  in  the  languages  of  the 
North-West.  A t frequently  becomes  ch,  a d becomes  y,  a t becomes  ts  and  a d becomes 
z,  and,  before  i or  y,  these  changes  are  the  regular  rule  in  Kashmiri.  Moreover  a tr  tends 
to  become  so  that  we  have  here  a view  of  the  way  in  which  tr  becomes  t§.  It  first 
becomes  t and  then  ch,  and  finally  t§. 

In  Central  Pahari  we  met  several  instances  of  l being  dropped  when  it  was  final,  or 
between  two  vowels.  Similarly,  we  have  in  Jaunsari  gdatid,  the  equivalent  of  the 
Hindostani  galana,  to  melt,  and  had,  for  hdl,  hair.  Again,  in  Sirmauri  (Giripari)  we 
have  pi  tula  or  pltua,  I shall  strike. 

Closely  allied  in  their  phonetic  changes  to  l are  the  letters  r and  r.  In  the  Piiacha 
languages,  the  changes  which  the  letter  r undergoes  are  very  peculiar.  One  of  these 
peculiarities  is  that  it  is  frequently  elided.  Thus  in  Pashai,  ‘ I do  * is  karam  or  ham. 
The  same  elision  of  r is  a prominent  feature  of  Western  Pahari.  In  Cliamgaji 
(Pangwali)  it  is  quite  common.  Thus,  kata,  not  karta,  * doing’;  maud,  not  'mama,  to 
strike.  So  in  Sirmauri  (Giripari)  rachi  god,  he  was  lost,  becomes  a chi  god  ; and  in  the 
Outer  Siraji  dialect  of  the  Satlaj  Group,  ‘ of  a horse  ’ is  ghorc-aw,  for  ghore-rau.  The 
letter  r is  also  occasionally  elided  in  the  same  way,  as  in  the  Sirmauri  (Giripari)  dona 
for  daurna,  to  run,  and  Chameali  (Pangwali)  kuri  or  kin,  a daughter. 

In  most  Indian  languages  the  letter  r is  always  derived  from  the  letter  d.  In  other 
words  when  d falls  between  two  vowels,  and  only  then,  it  becomes  r.  It  hence  follows 
that  r can  never  be  the  first  letter  of  a word.  In  Kinthali,  however,  there  are  two  instances 
noted  of  words  commencing  with  r,  viz.  rambt,  a weeding  instrument,  and  rbkiin,  to  stop. 
The  letter  r does  not  occur  as  an  initial  in  the  Pi&Icha  Languages,  but  in  the  Gipsy  lan- 
guage of  Europe,  which  most  scholars  look  upon  as  an  offshoot  of  the  Pisacha  languages, 
we  have  roi,  a spoon,  corresponding  to  the  Hindi  dbi. 

The  letters  y and  to  when  initial  are  often  elided,  especially  in  borrowed  words,  as  in 
ad,  for  yad,  memory,  and  date,  for  waste,  for  the;  sake  (of). 

In  Hindi  there  is  only  one  sibilant,  the  dental  letter  s.  This  represents,  hot  only  a 
Sanskrit  s,  but  also  a Sanskrit  palatal  6,  and,  generally,  a Sanskrit  cerebral  sh.  In 
Western  Pahari,  as  in  Rajasthani,  the  Sanskrit  £ is  preserved,  so  that  we  have  words 
like  des,  as  against  the  Hindi  des.  The  Sanskrit  sh  is  also  represented  by  & or  even  by 
ahh,  as  in  mdtiaS  or  manachh,  the  equivalent  of  the  Sanskrit  nuinmha,  a man. 

In  the  PiJAcha  languages  a sibilant,  especially  often  becomes  h.  As  an  example 
we  may  take  the  Sanskrit  dam,  ten ; Kashmiri  dah.  So  in  Kului  we  have  a final  s be- 
coming h in  the  word  bras  or  brdh,  rhododendron. 

In  the  Eastern  dialect  of  the  PiSacha  Pashai  every  6 becomes  M,  sounded  like  the 
ch  in  * loch  \ The  same  is  the  case  in  the  Gaddi  dialect  of  Cham&ali,  in  which  every  6 
is  sounded  as  Jch,  e.g.  in  dafeh,  ten. 

Declension. — The  declension  of  Western  Pahari  follows  the  general  lines  of  most 
Indo-Aryan  languages.  There  is  in  the  singular,  a nominative  and  an  oblique  form,  and 
so  also  in  the  plural. 


1 F <7.  Sanskrit  j>utra,  a sun,  G&rw!  or  puc/i. 


INTRODUCTION. 


379 


Tadbhava1  masculine  nouns  (excluding  the  few  ending  in  i and  u)  fall  into  two 
classes — strong  and  weak.  Strong  Tadbhava  nouns  end  in  a,  o or  u,  as,  for  example,  gohrd 
{gohro,  gbhfu),  a horse,  while  weak  Tadbhava  nouns  end  in  a consonant,  as,  for  example, 
ghar  or  gohr,  a house. 

Excepting  in  the  case  of  border  languages,  such  as  Chameali,  Sirmauri  and  Jaun- 
sarj,  the  oblique  form  of  all  Western  Pahari  nouns  is  the  same  in  the  singular  and  the 
pluml.  In  Hindi  the  singular  oblique  form  of  glidrd  is  ghore,  while  the  plural  oblique 
form  is  ghord,  but  in  Western  Pahari  gohre  is  the  oblique  form  both  for  the  singular  and 
the  plural.  The  same  is  the  case  for  all  other  Western  Pahari  nouns.  This  state  of 
affairs  is  typical  of  the  language. 

With  this  exception  strong  Tadbhava  nouns  follow  the  usual  Hindi  practice.  Thus, 
gohro;  nom.  plur.  gohre  ; obi.  sing,  and  plur.  gohre. 

Western  Pah&ri  exhibits  another  typical  peculiarity  in  the  declension  of  weak 
Tadbhava  masculine  nouns.  In  most  Indo-Aryan  languages,  these  do  not  change  in 
declension,  except  in  the  oblique  plural.  Thus,  Hindi  ghar,  a house;  nom.  plur.  ghar ; 
obi.  sing,  ghar;  obi.  plur.  gliaro.  The  principal  exception  is  Marathi,  where  we  have 
nom.  sing,  and  plur.  ghar  ; obi.  sing,  gliard  ; obi.  plur.  ghara.  Western  Pahari  follows 
Marathi  in  having  separate  forms  for  such  weak  Tadbhavas,  except  that,  as  explained 
above,  the  oblique  forms  of  the . jdural  are  the  same  as  those  for  the  singular.  As  in 
Marathi  the  oblique  form  is  made  by  adding  a vowel,  but  the  particular  vowel  employed 
varies  from  dialect  to  dialect,  and  forms  a convenient  test  for  distinguishing  between  the 


more  important. 

Thus : — 

Nom.  sing. 

OM.  *in£. 

Jaunsari. 

ghor,  a house. 

ghord. 

Sirmauri. 

ghor. 

ghord  or  g It  ore. 

Bagliatl. 

got'- 

gov  a . 

Kinthali. 

gohr. 

gohro. 

Kuiui. 

ghor. 

gliore  or  ghord. 

Similarly  weak  feminine  Taclhhava  nouns  have  oblique 

forms  made  by  the  addition 

of  a vowel.  A few  examples  will  suffice : — 

Sing.  nom. 

Obi. 

Baghatl. 

baihn,  a sister. 

baih  nd. 

Kinthali. 

bUhn. 

ban  line. 

Kuh'ii. 

belin. 

behnl. 

Chameali. 

baih  ii. 

baih  nl. 

In  the  case  of  these  feminines,  the  border  languages  Sirmauri  and  Jaunsari  appear 

to  follow  the  Hindi  rule. 

and  there  is  no  change. 

Besides  tho  oblique  form,  all  Western  Pahari  have  an 

organic  locative  and  agent 

(singular  and  plural)  formed  by  adding  e,  as  in  babbe , by  the  father ; gohre,  in  the  house. 

These  cases  occur  in  other  Pahari  languages,  and,  indeed,  in 

many  Aryan  languages  all 

over  India.  They  therefore  call  for  no  particular  remark  here. 

1 A Tadbhava  word  is  one  which  has  descended  to  Western  Puliap  from  Sanskrit,  through  Prakrit.  It  is  to  be  distin- 
guished from  • tatsama  word,  which,  like  hilak,  a child,  has  been  borrowed  directly  from  Sanskrit. 

VOI»  IX,  P&RT  IV. 


3 c 2 


3S0 


western  paharI 


Other  case-relations  are  formed  with  the  aid  of  postpositions.  These  vary  from 
dialect  to  dialect.  A few  of  the  more  important  may  he  mentioned  here. 


To 

From 

Of 

In 

Jau  11  sari 

kh 

7,  te,  dun 

kd 

in Uj h , pUdd  (in  or 

Simian  1*1 

Mir, 

ye , kh 

.Id 

1 rd 

/id,  mo,  pddr  (in 

Baghilti 

kb* 

dr 

i 

rd 

man]  he,  me 

Kinf  hall 

It  hr, 

ha,]?,  ,7  ,/<■,  (je 

do,  ha  yd,  phd 

rD 

do,  (on)  pdndr 

Kill  ill 

hr 

nu 

rd  ! 

vinfijhr 

Mandeali 

jo , 

knur 

1 

ye,  the  j 

rd 

mafijhd 

CharaeaH  (Standard) 

jo 

i 

1 

kaehhd 

rd 

In  ch  eh 

C h auieall  ( (_!  ad  dl ) 

jo, 

bo,  .jo 

than 

rd 

manjli 

Particulars  regarding  these,  and  other  postpositions,  are  given  in  the  articles  on  each 
dialect.  Here,  a few  general  remarks  will  suffice.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  postpositions 
vary  pretty  widely  from  dialect  to  dialect.  In  fact,  those  of  tlx*  dative  offer  convenient 
tvpes  for  classification.  The  Dative  forms  containing  a kh  (/chi:  and  kh)  are  confined  to 
the  southern  and  south- pastern  dialects.  In  Kinthali  we  have  huge,  which  is  quite  typi- 
cal of  the  dialect.  The  Kuliil  be  is  also  typical,  and  we  meet,  it  again  in  the  form  of  bo 
in  the  neighbouring  Gaddi,  and  in  the  Pisaeha  Wai-Ala  ablative  postposition  be.  The 
dative  postposition  jo  is  peculiar  to  the  North-Western  dialects  (Ohameall  and  Xland&ill) 
and,  as  is  elsewhere  pointed  out,  is  related  to  the  Sindh!  genitive  postposition 70. 

't  he  genitive  postposition  is  throughout  the  Rajasthani  rd  or  rb,  except  in  Jaunsarl 
which  has  the  neighbouring  Central  Pahiiri  kb.  Both  kb  and  ro  are,  as  usual,  adjectives. 

'flic  ablative  postpositions  call  for  no  remarks.  With  a few  exceptions  they  are 
derived  either  from  those  of  the  dative  or  locative.  The  locative  postpositions  have  this 
peculiarity,  that  most  of  those  ending  in  d or  b (c.g.  pudd)  are  adjectival  like  those  of 
the  genitive,  agreeing  with  the  tiling  which  is  contained. 

Adjectives  call  for  few  remarks.  They  follow  the  custom  of  other  Indo- Aryan 
languages.  We  have  seen  in  Khas-kura  that  the  termination  of  the  genitive  is  often 
added  to  an  adjective  or  a participle  almost  pleonastieally.  The  same  idiom  is  common 
in  the  Pisaclia  languages  (see  the  remarks  on  adjectives  under  the  head  of  Baghati  on 
p.  498).  The  central  dialects  of  Western  Paharl  do  the  same.  Thus,  the  word  for 
* good*  is  j txdzzd-ro.  In  the  North-Western  dialects  (Mandeali  and Chameall)  there  is  a 
similar  form,  in  which  rd  is  added  to  a participle  to  indicate  a slate  or  condition.  Thus, 
maro-rd,  in  a state  of  being  beaten,  equivalent  to  the  Hindi  mdrd-hud.  It  is  not  quite 
certain  whether  here  the  rd  is  the  genitive  postposition  :>r  is  a contraction  of  the  word 
rahd,  remained. 

Pronouns. — The  pronouns  of  t tie  fir  A and  second  persons  have  a number  of  vari- 
ant forms  in  the  singular,  which,  are  mo  .tly  matters  of  spelling.  Tin*  first  person  nomi- 
native fluctuates  bet, wen  forme  such  as  a,  au,  and  liau,  with  minor  variations.  The 
oblique  form  singular  of  this  pronoun  is  md,  mi?,  or  mb,  with  minor  variations,  and  it  has 


INTRODUCTION. 


381 


•a  tendency  to  become  man  or  min  before  a postposition  commencing  with  a consonant,  as 
in  Baghati  man-de,  from  me  ; Cham&ali  minjo,  to  me.  The  genitive  singulars  are  merd 
and  tero  or  similar  forms.  Quite  irregular  is  the  use  of  cerebral  letters  in  Churahi 
(Chamfifili)  mindd , my  ; tvndd,  thy  ; and  the  Pangwali  (Cham&ali)  man,  my  ; tan,  thy. 
Tn  the  plural,  the  southern  dialects  have  forms  based  on  ham,  turn;  but  the  northern 
dialects  follow  the  Pisacha  dialects  and  Panjabi  in  having  forms  like  the  Kujui  dsse, 
tusne. 

The  Demonstrative  Pronouns,  also  used  as  pronouns  of  the  third  person,  fall  into 
the  usual  groups.  We  may  take  the  Kiiithali  set,  eh,  this  ; o,  that ; He,  that,  as  typical. 
When  used  as  substantives,  these  have,  in  the  oblique  cases  of  the  singular,  three  genders : 
a masculine  animate  (e.g.  ten)  ; a feminine  animate  {e.g.  tesnau)  ; and  an  inanimate  (eom. 
gen.)  as  in  tetth.  When  used  as  adjectives,  only  the  masculine  forms  are  used.  The 
inanimate  forms  have  been  noted  only  in  the  Simla  Hill  dialects.  These  three  genders 
.-ire  employed  exactly  as  in  the  Pisacha  languages.  For  instance,  the  neuter  tetth  is 
almost  letter  for  letter  the  same  as  the  Kashmiri  tath. 

The  other  pronouns  eall  for  no  special  remarks.  They  follow  the  lines  of  the 
Demonstratives. 

The  only  peculiarity  woi-th  noting  is  that  in  Jaunsari  and  in  some  of  the  minor 
neighbouring  dialects  the  relative  pronoun  jo  is  often  added  pleonastically  to  a demon- 
strative. Tims,  so  or  sd-jd,  he.  It  will  be  remembered  that  in  Rajasthani  the  relative  is 
often  used  in  the  sense  of  a demonstrative. 

Conjugation.  -The  Verb  Substantive  has  many  forms  for  the  present.  Practically 
all  the  dialects  use  some  form  of  the  root  ho,  as  in  Jaunsari  d,  ltd  ; Kintliali,  d ; Kului, 
he;  Mandeali,  ltd  ; Chameali,  hat;  all  meaning  ‘he  is'.  Some  of  these,  such  as  the 
Mandeali  hit,  are  participial  in  formation  not  changing  for  person,  but  changing  for 
gender  and  number,  as  in  hi,  she  is  ; he,  they  are. 

Another  group  is  confined  to  the  Southern  dialects  and  Kului.  Its  basis  is  the  root 
08.  In  some  dialects  {e.g.  Kiiithali),  it  is  regularly  conjugated  for  number  and  person. 
Tn  others  {e.g.  Kujui),  it  only  changes  for  gender.  In  others  again  {e.g.  Jaunsari),  it  is 
immutable  for  all  persons  of  both  numbers  and  both  genders.  We  may  quote  the  follow- 
ing examples  of  the  word  for  ‘lie  is’: — 

_ 'V'  w ^ 

Jaunsari  . . . dsd,  oho. 

Siriiianri  . . - dsd,  so,  oh. 

Baghati  and  Kintliali  . (mu. 

Kului  ....  sd  (dialectic  dssd). 


A third  form  of  the  present  tense  is  a th i list'd  (witli  some  minor  variations  of  form) 
in  the  southern  dialects  and  Kului.  Tt  is  immutable,  and  is  only  used  with  the  negative. 
In  the  Churahi  dialect  of  Chameali,  however,  it  reappears  under  tin*  form  of  ate  as  an 
ordinary  verb  substantive.  Wre  may  compare  with  this  form  tin.'  Kuinauui  nhafi,  la*  is 
not,  in  which  the  negative  has  combined  with  the  verb  substantive,  so  as  to  form  ..me 
word. 

The  an  group  of  the  verb  substantive  reappears  in  nearly  all  the  Pisacha  languages, 
e.g.  in  Veron  ho,  eso,  he  is.  With  at  hi,  we  may  compare  the  Pisacha  Garwi  and  Maiya 

thu,  he  is. 


382 


WESTERN  PAHiRi. 


For  the  past  tense  of  the  verb  substantive  the  usual  form  is  thiyo,  thyu  or  tho,  treated 
like  the  Hindi  tha.  A variant  form  is  the  Kulul  17,  which  does  not  change  for  gender, 
number,  or  person. 

The  active  verb  calls  for  few  remarks.  It  follows  the  lines  of  Rajasthani  and  of  the 
other  Pailful  dialects. 

Except  in  the  ease  of  one  or  two  border  dialects  the  future  is  formed  by  adding  Id, 
as  in  Kintliali  mar  bid,  he  will  strike  ; we  have  already  drawn  attention  to  the  fact  that 
l between  two  vowels  is  often  dropped,  and  this  accounts  for  the  existence  in  some  dialects 
of  forms  corresponding  to  the  KiUtliali  mania  for  mdruld,  I shall  strike.  The  nasal  of 
the  first  person  is  sometimes  strengthened  to  in,  as  inSodhOchl  ( Satin j Group)  mdrmU  (for 
mb  r Rid),  I shall  strike,  but  indrd  (for  mdr(el)d),  thou  wilt  strike,  with  no  m because  there 
is  no  nasal  in  nut rehl.  It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  presence  of  the  in  in  the  future  is 
purely  .accidental  and  is  not  typical  of  any  particular  dialect.1 

Attention  has  already  been  drawn,  under  tin*  head  of  Adjectives,  to  the  static 
participle. 

Some  of  the  verbal  roots  with  the  most  common  meanings  have  forms  strange  to  other 
Indo- Aryan  vernaculars.  Such,  for  instance,  is  the  very  common  den  nil,  to  go,  which  lias 
almost  superseded  the  Hindi  jdnd.  "With  it  we  may  compare  the  Pisaeha  Gawarbati  root 
di,  go;  and  the  KliGwar  de,  run.  Another  verb  used  both  in  the  meaning  of  ‘to  go’ 
and  in  that  of  ‘to  run  ’ is  nosh n a (past  participle  not  t ho),  with  which  we  may  perhaps 
compare  the  Kashmiri  nashnn  (past  part,  niith"),  to  disappear.  Such  verbs  are  especially 
common  in  Kuliii,  where  we  have  (hhanrnu,  to  fall  ; end,  to  come  (cf.  Kashmiri  yin*,  to 
conn',  and  the  Sliina  root  e,  come)  ; neon,  to  take  (Kashmiri  nin"),  and  many  others. 

In  Sanskrit  a certain  number  of  verbs  insert  rhchh  in  the  present  tense.  Thus,  from 
the  root  gain,  go,  we  have  gachchhdmi,  I go.  We  have  many  traces  of  the  same  in  the 
Pi&icha  dialects,  as  an  example  of  which  we  may  quote  the  Kashmiri  gatshun,  to  go. 
So  also  in  the  Gaddi  dialect  of  Cliameali  we  have  from  bhbnd,  to  become,  bhnchhw,  I may 
become;  from  gdhiid,  to  go,  gafihhu,  I may  go;  and  from  ?nd,  to  come,  ichh€,  I may 
come.  It  may  be  noted  that  similar  forms  occur  in  other  sub-Himalayan  dialects  further 
west,  e.g.  in  Punchlii,  where  we  have,  for  instance,  achhnd,  to  come,  and  gachhnd,  to  go. 

The  authorities  for  particular  dialects  are  given  in  their  appropriate  places.  Here 

it  is  only  necessary  to  mention  the  admirable  series  of  mono- 
graphs by  the  Rev.  T.  Grahame  Bailey  describing  nearly  all 
the  Western  Pahari  dialects,  and  scattered,  as  Appendixes,  through  the  various  Pan  jab 
Gazetteers.  These  have  been  reprinted  and  issued  together  in  one  convenient  book  by 
the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  in  the  year  1908.  The  title  of  the  book  is  The  Languages  of 
the  Northern  Himalayas,  being  Studies  in  the  Grammar  of  twenty-six  Himalayan  Dia- 
lects. In  the  following  pages  I have  made  the  freest  use  of  the  materials  thus  supplied 
by  Mr.  G raliame  Bailey,  and  I gladly  take  this  opportunity  of  recording  my  gratitude  for 
the  valuable  assistance  T have  derived  from  that  gentleman’s  labours.  Another  work 
which  may  lie  consulted  is  Pandit  Tika  Ram  Jos  Ill’s  Dictionary  of  the  Pahari  Dialects 
as  spoken  in  the  Punjab  Himalayas,  edited  by  Mr.  H.  A.  Rose,  I.C.S.,  and  published  in 
the  Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  Yol.  VII,  N.  S.  (1911),  pp.  120  ff. 


Authorities. 


1 See,  on  the  other  baud,  Mr.  (irnhnvne  Bailey’s  remarks  on  page  ii  of  the  Introduction  to  his  account  of  the  Chamba 
Dialect*. 


383 


JAUNSARI. 

Jaunsari  is  the  name  of  the  form  of  Western  Pahari  spoken  in  the  Jaunsur- 
Bawar  Pargana  of  the  Dehra  Dun  District.  This  consists  of  a Hill  Tract  with  an 
area  of  something  under  350  square  miles.  As  estimated  for  this  survey  the  number  of 
speakers  of  Jaunsari  was  47,137,  all  of  whom  inhabited  Jaunsar-Batvar,  and  the  correct- 
ness of  this  estimate  is  borne  out  by  the  fact  that  in  the  Census  of  1901  the  number  of 
speakers  recorded  in  that  tract  was  48,037. 

According  to  Mr.  Atkinson1  Jaunsar  is  a representative  Khasiya  tract,  and  forms  a 
very  important  link  between  the  almost  completely  Ilinduized  Khasiyas  of  Kumaon  and 
their  brethren  converts  to  Islam  on  the  ethnical  frontier  in  the  mountains  of  the  Hindu 
Kush.  It  apparently  gives  in  full  force  at  (be  present  day  customs  and  practices  of  the 
Khasiya  race  which  distinguished  it  a thousand  years  ago.  Jaunsar  is  a kind  of  ‘sleepy 
hollow  within  the  hills.’  The  principal  peculiarities  recorded  concerning  these  people 
arc  the  practice  of  polyandry  and  their  extreme  un cleanness,  all  the  more  conspicuous 
on  account  of  the  comparative  paleness  of  their  complexion  and  the  scantiness  of  their 
clothing.2 

Jaunsar-Bhwar  is  situated  in  the  north  of  the  Dehra  Dun  District,  being  a lonirisk 
irregular  parallelogram  wedged  in  between  Garhw.il  and  the  Punjab  Stale  of  Sirmaur. 

The  Jaunsari  language  is  accordingly  a mixed  one.  It  mostly  agrees  with  Sirmaurt 
but  is  much  affected  by  the  Hindi  spoken  to  its  south  in  the  rest  of  Debra  Dun.  Jt  also 
shows  points  of  contact  with  the  Garhwali  lying  immediately  to  its  east.  We  must 
therefore  class  it  as  a mixed,  transition,  dialect.  In  many  points  it  agrees  so  closely 
with  Western  Hindi  that  it  might  almost  be*  classed  as  a very  irregular  dialect  of  that 
language,  instead  of  being  classed  as  a form  of  Western  Pahari. 

There  is  no  standard  form  of  the  dialect,  and  the  method  of  spelling  the  words  in 
the  native  character  varies  according  to  the  caprice  of  the  writer,  who  will  not  hesitate 
to  spell  the  same  word  in  two  different  ways  in  two  adjoining  lines. 

The  language  may  be  written  in  the  Xagari  character,  but  the  usual  script  is  that 
known  as  the  ‘ Sirmaur!,’  or  script  employed  in  Sirmaur.  It  is  allied  to  the  Takri 
character  of  the  Pan  jab  Hills,  but  in  some  respects  it  agrees  better  with  Xagari,  while 
in  others  it  has  struck  out  on  independent  lines.  The  following  table  gives  the  forms  of 
the  letters,  and  further  examples  of  the  script  will  be  found  in  the  specimens  of  the 
dialect. 


1 Gazetteer  of  the  Himalayan  Districts  <4  the  X.-W  1’.,  V<1.  X II.  p. 

2 Op.  cit.f  p.  364. 


384 


JAUNSARI  (SIBMAURl)  alphabet. 


3 

3>,  3^ 


G 

<r 


x 

x> 

Xl 

X* 

J* 


i 

i 

a 

X) 

kau 

& 

tha 

a 

• 

X 

ka 

da 

. 

1 

X 

ka 

K 

dim 

i 

/X 

kha 

<0 

* 

na 

u 

i 

<*a 

pa 

! 

i 

u 

i?ha 

plia 

! 

i 8,  e 

1 

ha 

<z> 

ba 

ai 

elm 

e. 

l)ha 

! 5,  6 

cliha 

ma 

au 

*J) 

ja 

x 

ya 

at 

jh*  i 

j 

1 ra 

ka 

— 

« a ! 

V \ 

la 

ka 

✓ 

ta  ; 

V 

1 

\va 

ki 

if  6 

1 

tlia 

* 

I 4a 

ki 

Ji  6 

da 

! 

sha 

ku 

9 __ 

i 

Vft  i 

sa 

ku 

6t 

dim 

f 

1 

| 

i ha 

1 

ke,  ke 

6 

• I 

i 

rlia 

| 

kai  i 

i 

j 

na 

i 

1 

k5,  ko 

i 

>; 

i 

ta 

1 

X; 


When  used  before  consonants  of  their  own  class,  nosais  are,  as  usual,  represented  by 
Anusvara  ( — ).  As  n and  n occur  only  in  this  position,  they  have  no  special  clnyacter 


JAUNSAUT. 


385 


Tho  only  printed  book  with  whicl}  I am  acquainted  in  this  language,  is  a tentative 
version  of  the  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew  published  by  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible 
Society  in  1895.  The  language  of  this  version  is,  on  the  whole,  the  same  as  that  of  the 
specimens  received  from  Debra  Dun,  but  the  spelling  greatly  differs.  The  following 
grammatical  sketch  is  based  mainly  on  the  version  of  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son 
prepared  for  tho  purposes  of  this  survey,  but  the  version  of  St.  Matthew  has  also  been 
freely  utilized.  In  order  to  avoid  confusion,  in  quoting  from  the  latter,  I have  had  to 
alter  the  spelling  so  as  to  make  it  agr§e  with  that  of  the  Parable.  The  grammatical 
sketch  being  based  on  very  insufficient  materials  is  offered  with  every  reserve.  More 
valuable  is  the  Vocabulary  that  is  added  at  the  end  of  the  section.  I owe  ihis  vocabulary 
to  the  kindness  of  Mr.  K.  Burn,  I.C.S.  It  was  originally  collected  by  Major  (now 
Colonel)  Thornhill  when  Cantonment  Magistrate  at  Chakrata  in  Jaunsfir-Bawar.  The 
entries  have  since  been  again  checked  by  Jaiuisarls  on  the  spot.  The  reverse  Jaunsarl- 
English  vocabulary  has  been  prepared  under  my  supervision  from  the  original  English- 
Jaunsari  one. 

Pronunciation. — As  in  Hindi,  a final  a is  usually  silent,  as  in  ditan,  not  dhana , 
wealth ; but  in  Jaunsarl,  when  there  is  a long  vowel  in  tho  preceding  syllable,  a final 
a is  often  pronounced.  Thus,  dhavkuwa,  the  afternoon  ; duija,  another  ; khUga,  a cold 
in  the  head  ; pitlbm , a bath  : sitha,  wax. 

The  vowel  a is  pronounced  something  like  the  o in  ‘ hot  ’ and  is  just  as  often  written 
as  %(.  When  written  in  the  specimens,  ofc.  if  will  be  transliterated  as  d,  to 

distinguish  it  from  o.  In  the  Jaunsarl  St.  Matthew,  a is  throughout  written  6.  It 
must  he  borne  in  mind  that  a and  d are  (in  writing)  absolutely  interchangeable,  and 
all  represent  the  same  sound, — that  of  the  o in  ‘hot.’  In  this  ease,  difference  of 
spelling  does  not  indicate  difference  of  pronunciation.  Natho  and  nothb  both  represent 
the  same  sound,  and  mean  the  same  thing,  viz.  “he  went.”  The  spelling  with  a and 
o in  the  specimens  is  quite  haphazard,  and  I have  not  ventured  to  introduce  uniformity. 

The  letters  a and  o are  interchangeable  when  final.  This  is  specially  common  in 
the  case  of  nouns,  adjectives,  and  participles  which,  in  Hindi,  end  in  a,  hut  in  Garhwfdl 
and  Kumaum  in  o.  Jaunsarl  here  takes  a middle  course,  using  both  terminations 
indifferently.  The  only  rule  which  seems  to  he  followed  is  a sort  of  law  of  harmonic 
sequence.  If  there  is  a majority  of  o-sounds  in  the  neighbourhood,  then  the  termination 
o is  preferred,  hut  if  there  is  a majority  of  d-sounds,  then  the  termination  ft  is  preferred. 
Thus  we  have  tho  in  jb-kichh  tho,  ad  tihukh  bati-dinb,  hut  l ha  in  jojCt  kdnchhd  beta  thd, 
he  who  was  the  younger  son. 

As  in  Central  Faharl  a short  <>,  sounded  like  the  e in  ‘ met,’  often  occurs  as  a sub- 
stitute for  i,  as  in  tes-kb,  of  him,  equivalent  to  the  Hindi  tis-kd. 

The  consonant  chh  is  interchangeable  with  s,  as  in  chhnsa  or  setsa,  a hare  j 
chhatydndH  for  8atydnd& , destruction. 

We  sometimes  find  aspiration  omitted,  as  in  hi  or  bh  t,  also ; bddtiU,  nof  bddhtjd  oi 
badhnd,  to  bind ; glior  or  gor,  a house  ; sab  or  sabh,  all. 

In  tho  translation  of  St.  Matthew’s  Gospel,  this  disaspiration  is  carried  much  further 
than  in  the  specimens.  For  instance,  dthi  appeal’s  as  dti,  and  thd  as  td.  In  makin0 
quotations  from  this  Gospel,  I have,  for  the  sake  of  uniformity,  restored  the  aspiration 

3 D 


386 


WESTERN  PAHArI. 


in  such  cases,  but  this  is  not  to  be  understood  as  the  correction  of  mistakes.  There  can 
be  no  doubt  that  both  forms  (the  aspirated  and  the  disaspiratod)  are  in  use. 

The  letter  l where  medial  or  final  is  very  often  dropped.  To  fill  up  the  hiatus  thus 
caused,  a to  is  sometimes  inserted  in  place  of  the  l.  Thus 

bddal  or  bado,  a cloud.  jdn  (for  jdl),  a net. 

bdl  or  bad,  hair.  kdlo  or  kdwo,  black. 

bad  (for  bald),  sand.  mondti,  a “ mortal  ” pheasant. 

bhdtchdl  or  bhuicho,  an  earthquake.  paid  or  pdtod,  frost. 

gddn§  (Hindi  galdnd),  to  melt.  Said  or  ibiod,  a locust. 

hal  or  han,  a plough.  sydl  or  iydo,  a jackal. 

The  letter  d sometimes  becomes./,  as  in  khej,  for  Med,  grief. 

The  letters  y and  to  arc  sometimes  dropped,  when  initial,  as  in  did  for  ydd,  memory, 
■dste  or  waste,  for  the  sake  (of). 

Number. — There  are  two  numbers,  singular  and  plural. 

Tadbhava1  nouns  which  in  Hindi  end  in  d,  and  in  Garhwali  and  Kumauni  end  in  d, 
in  Jaunsari  end  optionally  in  d or  o,  as  explained  under  the  head  of  pronunciation. 
Thus,  Hindi  ghora , Garhwali  ghord,  Jaunsati  ghord  or  ghord.  These  nouns  form  the 
nominative  plural  by  changing  d or  b to  e.  Thus,  ghore,  horses  ; mdchhd,  a fish,  plur. 
■mdchhe;  ghudd,  the  knee,  plur.  ghtide ; banrb,  the  shoulder,  plur.  banre. 

In  the  case  of  other  masculine  nouns,  the  nominative  plural  is  the  same  as  the 
nominative  singular.  Thus,  ghor,  a house,  plur.  ghor ; ddml,  a man,  plur,  ddml. 

Feminine  nouns  ending  in  l form  the  nominative  plural  by  changing  i to  ia  or  iya, 
the  nasal  being  frequently  dropped,  so  that  wo  also  have  id  or  iya.  Examples  are  belt, 
a daughter,  plur.  belia  or  beliya  ; khdri,  a razor,  plur.  klidria  or  khdnya. 

Feminine  nouns  ending  in  d change  the  d to  ua.  Thus,  did,  a tear,  plur.  dittd ; 
4a, rid,  a bug,  plur.  iariua.  Similarly,  bhau,  an  eyebrow,  makes  its  plural  bhaua. 

Most  feminine  nouns  ending  in  consonants  seem  to  form  their  plurals  by  adding  ?. 
Thus,  bdl,  a creeper,  plur.  bait;  gdio,  a cow,  plur.  gaioi ; glier,  the  belly,  plur.  gheri  ; pSd, 
the  belly,  plur.  pbdi.  I have,  however,  also  noted  both  baha  and  baht,  as  the  plural  of 
bah,  an  arm  ; kilS,  as  the  plural  of  ktl,  a pimple.  Tlio,  the  buttock,  makes  its  plural 
thoai. 

Case. — As  in  other  Indo- Aryan  languages,  cases  are  generally  indicated  by  post- 
positions. Certain  nouns  are  put  into  an  oblique  form  before  these  are  added. 

Most  masculine  nouns  ending  in  d or  o form  the  oblique  singular  in  i.  Thus : 
from  ghord , a horse,  obi.  sing,  ghore;  kuro,  a house,  obi.  sing.  kure. 

All  masculine  nouns  ending  in  consonants  form  the  oblique  singular  in  d.  Thus, 
bdl,  a share,  obi.  sing,  bato  ; bher,  vicinity,  obi.  sing,  bhero  ; ek,  one,  obi.  sing,  eko  ; ghor, 
a house,  ghord  ; hath,  a hand,  hdtho.  In  the  Parable,  the  word  bat,  a share,  has  both  bate 
and  bato  for  its  oblique  form.  Similarly,  in  Sirmauri,  the  oblique  form  of  such  nouns 
is  made  by  adding  e or  o (see  p.  461). 

Masculine  nouns  which  end  in  vowels  other  than  a or  o,  as  well  as  a few  masculine 
nouns  in  d,  such  as  baba,  a father,  and  kdkd,  an  uncle,  and  infinitives  in  6 or  8,  and  also 
all  feminine  nouns,  make  tbe  oblique  singular  the  same  as  the  nominative  singular. 
Thus,  bdba,  a father,  obi.  sing,  bdl  d ; laid,  the  neck,  obi.  sing,  laid  ; ndchnd,  to  dance, 

1 See  p.  379,  note  1. 


JATJNSAJtl. 


387 


obi.  sing,  ndchnd ; bohrii , a sister,  obi.  sing,  bo /ml.  Feminine  nouns  in  * can  optionally 
have  the  oblique  singular  in  id  or  iyd.  Thus,  beti,  a daughter,  has  beti,  betid , or  betiyd. 

The  oblique  form  plural  ends  in  f or  E.  The  termination  ? appears  to  be  preferred 
when  the  nominative  plural  ends  in  e or  l,  as  in  dokhrb,  a field,  nom.  plur.  dokhre,  obi. 
plur.  dokhri;  godo,  a foot,  nom.  plur.  gode,  obi.  plur.  godt;  ddml,  a man,  nom.  plur. 
admit  obi.  plur.  ddmi. 

In  other  cases  E is  preferred,  as  in  bori,  a year,  obi.  plur.  boriE  ; mukar,  a servant^ 
obi.  plur.  naukar^t ; rad,  a harlot  (fern.)  obi.  plur.  radii. 

As  in  Hindi  and  Garhwall,  the  oblique  form,  singular  or  plural,  can  be  employed 
alone  to  indicate  any  case,  as  in  ghoro  adid,  while  coming  to  the  house ; but  it  is  usual 
to  define  the  case  by  adding  to  it  one  of  the  following  postpositions : — 

Agent,  c. 

Accusative,  , or  else  kh. 

Instrumental,  e,  lei. 

Dative,  kh. 

Ablative,  * (from),  te  or  ti  (from),  burl  (from),  mEjhi  (from  among),  bheri 
(from  near). 

Genitive,  kd  or  kd. 

Locative,  mEjh  (in),  pEdd  (in),  da  (on),  chh  (on,  upon),  bher  (near),  dhbtiyd 
(near). 


In  the  translation  of  St.  Matthew’s  Gospel,  kh  is  spelt  k,  bher  is  spelt  ter  (i.e.  ver),. 
bheri  is  spelt  vert,  and  pEdd  is  written  phundd. 

The  Accusative  is  either  the  same  as  the  Nominative,  or,  when  definiteness  has  to 
be  indicated,  the  postposition  of  the  Dative  is  added,  following  the  same  rules  as  Hindi. 
We  may  thus  decline  the  noun  ghoro  or  ghord,  a horse. 

Sinjj.  Plur. 


Nom. 

ghord,  ghoro 

ghore 

Agent. 

ghore-S,  ghorS 

ghdri-i 

Acc. 

ghoro,  ghord,  ghore-kh 

ghore,  ghort-kh 

Instr. 

ghori-S,  ghore,  ghor  e-lei 

ghori-d,  ghori-lci 

Dat. 

ghofe-kh 

ghori-kh 

Abl. 

ghofe-t,  ghore-te,  etc. 

ghori-i,  ghori-te,  etc. 

Gen. 

ghore-kd,  ghbre-ko 

ghori-kd,  ghori-kb 

Loc. 

ghore-mftjh,  etc. 

ghbri-mEjh,  etc. 

Voc. 

ghord  I 

ghore  ! 

"When  two  e’s  come  together,  as  in  the  Agent  singular,  they  are  usually  contracted 
into  one,  as  in  ghor 

For  other  nouns  we  may  quote 


Singular. 

Plubal. 

Nom. 

Obi. 

Nom. 

Obi. 

baba,  a father 

baba 

bdbd 

babbit 

ddmi , a man 

ddmi 

admi 

ddmi 

„ .“V 

ghdr,  a house 

ghoro 

ghdr 

ghorE 

befiyE 
_ a 

beti,  a daughter 

beti,  betiyd 

betiyd 

gave,  a cow 

VOL.  IX,  *ART  IV. 

goto 

gawi 

gaici 

3 d 2 

388 


WESTERN  PAHARl. 


As  examples  of  the  Agent,  which  is  used  before  the  past  tenses  of  transitive  verbs 
as  in  Hindi,  we  may  quote  the  following : — 

tes-ke  babd-e  dekhd , his  father  saw  him. 

bete-i  bold,  the  son  said  (‘  father,  I have  sinned  ’) . 

mere  kdkd-ke  bete  bid  kiya , my  uncle’s  son  married. 

Note  that  the  verb  bolnd,  to  say,  as  in  Garhwali,  and  unlike  the  Hindi  bolnd,  is 
transitive. 

For  the  Accusative  we  have : — 

kdchlie-i  pet  bhord,  how  many  fill  the  belly. 
ejd  rupaiyd  tC*se-kh  de,  give  this  rupee  to  him. 
tdtu-di  bdha  plieddi,  throwing  (his)  arms  on  (his)  neck. 
tes-bheri  soje  rupaiye  sambhdl,  take  those  rupees  from  him. 
so  bokutU-kh  khdne  sftchd-tha,  he  was  wishing  to  eat  the  husks. 

For  the  Instrumental  we  have 

mi  bete-kh  cJidbuko-lSi  pi/d,  I struck  the  son  with  a whip. 

In  pdgoi-e-lei  badh,  bind  with  a rope,  both  terminations,  & and  lei,  are  used 
together. 

For  the  Dative  we  have  : — 

tine  dpne  bdbd-kh  bold,  he  said  to  his  father. 
pardeio-kh  nothd,  he  went  to  a far  country. 
sugaru  charnd-kh,  for  grazing  swine. 
dpne  baba  bhero-kh  nothd,  be  went  to  near  his  father. 
babd-e  dpne  naukaru-kh  bold,  the  father  said  to  bis  servants. 
dpne  naukarU-mUjht  eko-kh  baudi-kdri,  having  called  to  one  of  his  servants. 
jine  sabh  mdl-matah  radtt-kh  uddo,  who  squandered  all  the  property  for  (i.e. 
upon)  harlots. 

It  will  here  be  observed  that  verbs  of  saying  govern  the  dative  case  of  the  person 
addressed,  not  the  ablative  as  in  Hindi. 

For  the  Ablative  we  have : — 

tes-pdchh  bhori  jdtur  hadd-the,  Odlil-i  or  Dekapdlis-t  or  Yerusalem-t  or 
Yehudiya-i  dr  Yordan-noi  pdtori-t,  there  followed  Him  great  multitudes  of 
people,  from  Galilee,  and  from  Decapolis  and  from  Jerusalem,  and  from 
beyond  Jordan  (Matt.  iv.  25). 

echhe  boriu-auri  teri  idhal  kdrE,  I am  serving  you  for  so  many  years. 
dpne  nankaru-mujht  ekd-kh  dpu-dhdid  baudi-kdri , having  summoned  one  from 
among  his  servants. 

bad  dpne  betet-bhert,  bau  ord-bhert,  is  it  from  their  own  children  or  from  strangers 
(Matt,  xvii,  25)  ? Here  be  let  is  used  instead  of  belt,  the  oblique  plural  of  beta. 
tumS  so  kos-bheri  mole  gado  ? eko  gawo-ke  bdniiye-bhert,  from  whom  did  you  buy 
that  ? from  a shopkeeper  of  the  village. 

* 

The  following  are  examples  of  the  Ablative  of  comparison  : — 

tes-kd  bhai  dpni  bohni-ie  bege  labd  o,  his  brother  is  taller  than  his  sister. 
jd  sabu-ti  dch/w  leopard  d,  so  gado,  bring  that  which  is  the  best  robe  of  all. 


JAUNSARI. 


389 


The  Genitive  postposition  is  kb  or  kd,  the  two  forms  being,  in  the  masculine,  inter- 
changeable as  explained  under  the  head  of  pronunciation.  It  is  an  adjective,  and  is  treated 
exactly  like  the  Hindi  kd.  Its  masculine  singular  oblique  form  and  its  masculine  plural 

(direot  and  oblique)  is  he.  Its  feminine  for  all  oases  and  both  numbers  is  ki.  Thus : 

sabh  dpne  bato-ko  mdl-mdtdh,  all  the  property  of  his  share. 

tine  bajnB-  aur  ndchnB-kd  Sad  Sund,  he  heard  the  sound  of  music  and  dancing. 

surugo-ke  sdmne,  before  heaven. 

bohni-ke  sath  bid,  a marriage  with  the  sister. 

Sukle  ghore-ki  zin , the  saddle  of  the  white  horse. 

As  examples  of  the  Locative  we  have  : — 

thore  dwfit-mMjh,  in  a few  days  (the  younger  son  collected  his  property). 
jdrid-mfijh,  in  debauchery. 

jethd  beta  dbkhre-pitdd  thd,  the  elder  son  was  in  the  field. 
jine  tese-kh  dokhri-pUdd  bhejd,  who  sent  him  into  the  fields. 
tethu  nadre  kure-pUdd  rohS,  lie  dwells  in  that  small  bouse. 
so  apni  goru  detile-ke  niu/liyare-chh  le  chard,  lie  is  grazing  his  cows  on  the  top 
of  the  hill. 

so  ghore-chli  rohd  bethi,  he  is  seated  on  a horse. 

hdu  dpt.ie  bdbd-bher  jama , I Avill  go  to  my  father. 

jabi  dpne  hare  dhdiyd  pahuchd,  when  he  arrived  near  his  house. 

Note  that  dd  and  pudd  (also,  as  usual,  written  pUdo)  are  adjectives,  and  agree,  like 
an  adjective,  with  the  noun  governing  the  locative.  The  feminine  of  da  is  dt.  Thus - 
tdtu-di  bdha  (fern,  plur.)  phedai,  having  thrown  (his)  arms  on  (his)  neck. 
hdtho-dt  chhdp  (fem.),  or  godi-da  jutd  (masc.),  on  (his)  hand  a ring,  and  on 
(his)  feet  a pair  of  shoes. 

dokhre-pUde  sosan-phul-bher  suchyd,  consider  ye  concerning  (note  this  use  of 
bher)  the  lily-flower  in  the  field  (Matt,  vi,  28). 

Here  sbsan-phul  is  in  the  masculine  singular  oblique,  and  hence  we  have  pude, 
not  pttdd  or  pudo. 

ADJECTIVES. 

Except  tadbhaoa  adjectives  in  a or  o,  all  adjectives  are  immutable.  Tadbhava 
adjectives  in  d or  o change  the  termination  to  i when  agreeing  with  a feminine 
noun.  When  agreeing  with  a masculine  noun  in  the  plural  or  in  any  case  of  the 
singnlav  except  the  nominative  (or  the  accusative,  when  in  the  form  of  the  nominative) 
the  d or  5 is  changed  to  e.  Thus : — 
bholo  admi,  a good  man. 
bhole  admi,  good  men. 
bhole  admi-ko,  of  a good  mau. 
bholi  beti-mdnukh,  a good  woman. 
bholi  beti-manuklia. , good  women. 

Comparison  is  made,  as  usual,  by  putting  the  thing  with  which  comparison  is  made 
in  the  ablative  case.  Examples  arc  given  above  under  the  head  of  the  Ablative. 

The  numeral  ek,  one,  has  an  oblique  singular  ekb. 


390 


■WESTERN  FAHA9I. 


PRONOUNS. 

(a)  Personal  Pronouns. 

The  first  two  personal  pronouns  are  declined  as  follows : — 


SlNGULAB. 


Nominative 

had,  au,  mi,  I 

tu,  thou 

Agent 

mi,  mehB 

ti 

Genitive 

mero  (met'd) 

terb  ( terd ) 

Oblique  form 

muhft,  mu,  mu 

Plcbal. 

tad,  tad,  ta 

Nominative 

dm,  ami,  ham 

turn,  tdi 

Agent 

dme 

tumi,  tdi 

Genitive 

amdro  (-a),  umdro  (-d) 

tumaro  (-a),  tdhdrb  (-a) 
tudro  (-a) 

Oblique  form 

amU 

tumi,  tuft 

* Even  inc  * is  mft-t.  In  the  above,  the  plural  is  commonly  employed  honorifically 
for  the  singular. 

Examples  of  the  use  of  these  two  pronouns  are  the  following 

had  bhukhd  moru.  Had  apne  baba-bher  jama,  I hungry  am  dying.  I will  go 
to  my  father. 

hau  eld  dure  lag  nbthd-tha,  I walked  a long  way  to-day. 

au  to  tdu-kh  pam-mijh  postane-ke  nlte  naicai-deB,  I indeed  baptize  you  with 
water  unto  repentance  (Matt,  iii,  11). 

au  Ihoar-ke  mhol-khand-kh  daisoku,  I can  destroy  the  temple  of  God  (Matt, 
xxvi,  61). 

mS  pdp  kiyd-o,  I have  done  sin. 

mi  tes-ke  be/e-kh  pita,  I struck  his  son. 

jd-kichh  vnero  ho,  whatever  is  mine. 

so  mu-kh  de,  give  that  to  me. 

mu-kh  rdkh,  keep  me  (as  one  of  thy  servants). 

dji  tu  usnd  pori-kot'i  mU-kh  dhal  koi'dd,  if  thou  wilt  fall  down  and  worship  me 
(Matt,  iv,  9). 

tu  to  sada-nit  mu-t-dhdiya,  thou  (art)  ever  with  me-even. 
ham  khdme,  we  shall  eat,  let  us  eat. 

dmB-i  tdare-bher  basurl  bojdl,  we  played  the  flute  near  you  (Matt,  xi,  17). 
he  umdre  Baba,  jo  gainl-bher  08§,  our  Father  which  art  in  heaven  (Matt, 
vi,  9). 

tu  etl  dyd  amU-kh  pi  fa  denS-kb  nlte,  art  thou  come  hither  to  torment  us  (Matt, 
viii,  29)  ? 

tu  amft-kh  bol,  say  thou  to  us  (Matt,  xxvi,  63). 

jojo  tit  boli,  so  tun  ft,  what  thou  sayest,  that  I hear. 

ti  mu-kh  ek  chhel-kuyo-bi  nft  dlno,  thou  didst  not  give  to  me  a single  kid. 

jd-kichh  mero  hb,  8b  tero-%  ho,  whatever  is  mine  is  verily  thine. 

koa-kd  Idrkdttd  d8  tau-pachh,  whose  hoy  comes  behind  thee  V 


jatjnsArL 


391 


tird  Baba  taQ-kh  indm  de-dendd,  thy  Father  will  reward  thee  (Matt,  vi,  6). 

Su  tS-chh  kodl  na  undd,  this  shall  not  he  upon  thee  (Matt,  xvi,  22). 
turn?  so  kos-bhert  mole  gado,  from  whom  did  you  buy  that  ? 
i&hare  baba-lee  koti  befS  d,  how  many  sons  are  there  in  your  father's  (house)  f 
jSki  tudro  dhan  osd,  teki  tudro  mon  bl  Idgi-jando,  where  your  treasure  is,  there 
will  your  heart  be  also  (Matt,  vi,  21). 
aC  bold,  1 say  unto  you  (Matt,  iii,  9). 

off  to  tuH-kh  pani-mUjh  postdye-ke  nlte  naioai-ded,  I indeed  baptize  you  with 
water  (Matt,  iii,  11). 

(3)  The  Demonstrative  Pronouns  are  also  employed  as  pronouns  of  the  third 
person.  In  the  singular  they  have  different  forms  for  the  masculine  and  the  feminine  ; 
And  the  oblique  forms,  singular  and  plural,  have  each  a neuter  form  used  only  when 
referring  to  inanimate  nouns.  They  are  declined  as  follows : — 

This,  he,  she,  it.  That,  he,  she,  it. 

Sinoulab. 

Masc.  Fem.  Masc.  Fern. 

Nom.  eu,  ejo  (-d)  eu,  eji  so,  so  jo  {-&)  so,  sojl 

Ag.  Ine,  in$  iyd-$,  iya-%  tine , tin%  tyd-i,  tyd-i 

Dat.  ese-kh  iya-kh  tese-kh  tya-kh 

Obi.  <?s,  (neut.)  ethu  iya  tes , (neut.)  tethu  tya 

Plubal. 

Nom.  eU,  eje  so,  soje 

Ag.  Hoe  tiled 

Obi.  eu,  ihu,  (neut.)  ethu  teu,  tebxt,  (neut.)  tethu 

In  the  translation  of  St.  Matthew’s  Gospel  ethu  and  tethu  are  spelt  ettii  and  tettu, 
and  Hod  and  tlwe  are  spelt  Hoi  and  tivoi,  respectively.  In  the  same  translation  we  often 
meet  tes-ke  instead  of  tese-kh.  We  often  find  aijo,  instead  of  ejo. 


Examples  of  these  pronouns  are 

eu  jo  mft-pdchhe  ad,  he  who  cometli  after  me  (Matt,  iii,  11). 

ale  eu  badoi-kd  beta  athl-na,  is  not  this  the  carpenter's  son  (Matt,  xiii,  55)  ? 

ejo  kd  ho,  what  is  this  ? 

ejd  merd  beta,  this  my  son. 

dje  eji  bdta  sydyd-ke  kdnU-pUdl  devndi-boli,  if  this  affair  (fem.)  comes  to  the 
governor’s  ears  (Matt,  xxviii,  14). 
ese-kh  pdhardi-deo,  clothe  this  person. 
es  ghore-ki  led  umar  6,  what  is  the  age  of  this  horse  ? 

C8-kd  hathd-di  chhdp , a ring  on  his  finger. 
ethu-dstd,  on  this  account  (he  has  given  a feast). 
tu$  ethu-kh  jdno,  know  ye  this  (Matt,  xxiv,  43). 
die  tu  konye,  eu  kd  bol$,  hearest  thou  what  these  say  (Matt,  xxi,  16)  ? 
ejd  duskiya-ke  dSd-m&jh  ndthi-jdnde,  thgse  shall  go  away  into  everlasting 
punishment  (Matt,  xxv,  46). 

sobha*  ddtni  eji  bdta  mdnB  na,  balkan  eje  jeu-kh  del- ditto,  all  men  cannot 
receive  this  saying  save  they  to  whom  it  is  given  (Matt,  xix,  11). 


392 


WESTERN  PAHARl. 


jd  e&-ti  jddd  o,  80  tes  kdohaU-bherl , what  is  more  than  these,  eometh  from 
that  evil  one  (Matt,  v,  37). 

e&  difiai  hukm/ftdei,  on  these  two  commandments  (Matt,  xxii,  40). 

8d  ruH  word,  he  became  angry.  * 

8d  betmdnns  tethi-i  vookto  bdchi-goi,  that  woman  was  made  whole  from  that 
very  hour  (Matt,  ix,  22). 

eja  kdm  satnd  utauro,  dr  sojd  kdm  nft  chhddnd,  this  work  ought  ye  to  have  done, 
and  not  to  leave  that  work  undone  (Matt,  xxiii,  23). 
thje  dp ne  babd-kh  bold , he  said  to  his  father. 
tab/  title  bati-dino,  then  he  divided  out  (the  property). 

jdji  kdm  tyai  thi-kord,  eu  bdU-deindo  tya-ki  dd-ke  nite,  the  work  which  she 
had  done  will  be  told  for  a memorial  of  her  (Matt,  xxvi,  13). 
tese-kh  soje  bi  koe  ntt  thd-dei,  even  those  no  one  was  giving  to  him. 
tes-i-kh  cbdtd,  kissed  even  him. 
tes-kd  jefhd  beta,  his  elder  son. 
tya-kh  heri,  looking  at  her  (Matt,  ix,  22). 
tya-ki  beti,  her  daughter  (Matt,  xv,  28). 

tya  godhiyd-kh  or  tes  godhttaile-kh  leai,  having  brought  that  slie-ass  and  that 
male  ass’s  colt  (Matt,  xxi,  7). 

so  ghore-chh  rdhd  betJd  tethu  bulb  tbi,  he  is  sitting  on  a horse  under  that 
tree. 

so  maji-tnftjh  rolie,  they  remained  in  joy. 

tes-bheri  soje  rnpaiye  sambhdl,  take  those  rupees  from  him. 

titui  tese-kh  teU-chh  betlidi  dine,  they  set  him  on  them  (Matt,  xxi,  7). 

titci  ihe-bdld,  they  said  (Matt,  xxvii,  4). 

teE-mUjhi  ek,  one  of  them  (Matt,  vi,  29). 

tine  teU-kh  bold,  he  said  to  them  (Matt,  xii,  3). 

tihU-m&jht  jdjd  kdnchhd  thd,  tin;  one  from  amongst  them  who  was  the  younger. 
tine  tihu-kh  bdti-dino,  he  divided  (the  property)  out  to  them. 
tethu  dusU-mUjh,  in  those  days  (Matt,  iii,  1). 

(o)  The  Reflexive  Pronoun  is  dpu,  self,  which  is  used,  as  in  Hindi,  only  with 
reference  to  the  subject  of  the  sentence.  Its  genitive  is  dpnb{-d).  The  singular 
oblique  form  is  dpne.  Its  plural_  is  dpu.  The  locative  plural  is  dpbs-mujh  or  dpu-mUjh . 

Thus  : — 

ting  dpu  umdri  nijoriyt  nei-ydli , He  Himself  took  our  infirmities  (Matt, 
viii,  17). 

dpu- 1 tau-kh  porgotui  majuri  de-dendd,  He,  even  Himself,  will  reward  thee 
openly  (Matt,  vi,  4). 

hdu  dpne  bdbd-bher  jdtna.,  I will  go  to  my  father. 
apne-kh  sokg  na  bSc/ii , He  cannot  save  himself  (Matt,  xxvii,  42). 
so  dpne-m&j h jariyd  rdkhd,  he  has  no  root  in  himself  (Matt,  xiii,  21). 

tint  apoa-mujh  bat  a lot  de  Idge,  they  began  to  say  amongst  themselves  (Matt, 
xvi,  7). 

so  apu-rrMjh  sttchd-lhe,  they  were  thinking  among  themselves  (Matt,  xxi,  25). 


JATJNSARt. 


998 


X hftv6  not  com©  across  any  instances  of  tlic  use  of  dpu  or  dp  to  mean  4 Y our 

Honour.’ 

(d)  The  Eelative  Pronoun  is  jo  or  jojo  (•«),  who,  which,  that.  It  is  declined 

like  s5,  he.  In  two  of  the  following  examples  the  neuter  oblique  form  jethu  is  used 
with  reference  to  an  animate  object.  It  is  doubtful  if  this  is  correct.  Thus  : 

jojo  tu  boll:,  so  iurfft,  what  thou  sayest,  that  I hear. 
tihU-m&jhi  jdjd  kdnohhd  thd,  the  one  among  them  who  was  the  younger. 
jlife  teae-kh  dokhri-pEdd  bhejd,  who  sent  him  into  the  fields. 
jethu-lei  au  boro  rdji  8,  regarding  whom  I am  well  pleased  (Matt,  iii,  17). 
sd-i  osd  jethu- ki  khdtir  likhi-gdle,  this  is  he  of  whom  it  is  written  (Matt, 
xi,  10). 

jo  taiiko-ke  the , (the  people)  who  were  of  there  (to  one  of  them  he  went). 
jihW-kh  sftgur  khdd-the,  (the  husks)  which  the  swine  were  eating. 
ejejeU-kh  dei-dind,  these  to  vtliom  it  is  given  (Matt,  xix,  11). 

(e)  The  Interrogative  Pronouns  are  kuna,  who  ? and  (neuter)  kd,  what  ? The 
translation  of  St.  Matthew  has  hue  instead  of  kftna.  Its  agent  case  is  kond.  The 
oblique  singular  of  kUna  is  kos. 

Examples  are  : — 

tuft  kond  bethau,  who  hath  warned  you  (Matt,  iii,  7)  ? 
kos-kd  larkottd,  whose  boy  ? 

tumd  so  kd8-bheri  mdle-gddd,  from  whom  did  you  buy  that  ? 

The  oblique  form  of  kd  is  kai,  kdhi,  or  kothii,  which  usually  appears  in  kdi-kh, 
kahi-kh  or  kdthu-kh,  for  what  ? why  ? Kalii-kh  also  means  ‘ because.’  In  Matt,  xi,  8, 
we  have  kothu  (spelt  kottu)  dekhnd-ki  khdtir,  for  seeing  what  ? So  (Matt,  v,  13) 
kothu-let,  wherewith  (shall  it  bo  salted). 

K.uM  or  koe  is  anyone,  someone,  and  kichh,  anything,  something ; jo-kichh  is  what- 
ever. I have  not  come  across  the  oblique  forms  of  these. 

(y)  Other  pronominal  forms  noted  are  eSo,  like  this ; taio,  like  that ; jaso , like 
which  ; echho,  tliis  many ; kdcliho  dure,  how  far  ? kochhe-i  is  ‘ how  many  (men)  indeed  r 
kotl  bete  o,  how  many  sons  are  there  ? 

CONJUGATION. 

A- — Auxiliary  Verbs,  and  Verbs  Substantive. 

There  are  three  forms  of  the  present  tense  of  this  verb.  The  first  is  conjugated  as 
follows : — 


Singular. 

Plural. 

1.  u,8 

8,  a 

2.  au,  o,  $ 

au,  o 

3.  o,  8 

au,  o 

These  are  sometimes  written  with  an  h prefixed.  Thus,  hu,  I am,  ho,  19- 
The  second  form  is  dad  or  asd,  and  is  used  without  change  for  all  poisons  an 
numbers.  The  same  form  is  employed  in  the  Simla  Hill  States  ad  join  in.,, 
west, — -but  there  it  is  conjugated  throughout,  cluiugmg  according  to  poison.  ^ ^ 

▼01.  IX,  VAST  IT. 


394 


WESTERN  PAHAKl. 


probably  be  spelt  dssdt  as  in  other  Western  Paliari  dialects,  but  the  native  character 
never  indicates  when  a letter  is  doubled. 

The  third  form  is  dthi  or  at  hi,  which  in  the  translation  of  St.  Matthew  is  spelt  dtl. 
This  form  occurs  in  most  Western  Paliari  dialects,  and  is  only  used  with  a negative,  not 
changing  for  number  or  person.  Thus,  dthi-na,  I am  not,  thou  art  not,  and  so  on. 
Sometimes  the  two  are  combined  as  in  udthl.  Compare  the  Kumauni  nhdti,  lie  is  not. 

The  past  tense  is  tlid  ( thd ),  fern,  till ; plur.  masc.  the,  fern.  thl.  It  is  used  exactly 
like  the  Hindi  thd,  was.  In  the  translation  of  St.  Matthew  it  is  spelt  to,  ti,  te,  ti.  It 
may  be  noted  that  most  of  the  Simla  Hill  dialects  have  forms  corresponding  to  thd, 
while  a few,  such  as  the  dialect  of  K 61  guru,  have  forms  corresponding  to  to. 

Corresponding  to  the  Hindi  h ltd  is  do  (dd)  fern,  dl,  ])lur.  masc.  oe,  fern.  oi.  It  is 
also  used  to  mean  ‘was.’ 

Examples  of  the  use  of  these  various  forms  are  the  following  : — 

ait  hi  Ok  dd  ml  oktgdrd-tdi  H,  T also  am  a man  under  authority  (Matt,  viii,  9). 

au  jo  Jldtius-kd  Pair  <5,  L who  am  the  Son  of  Man  (Matt,  xvi,  13). 

die  joio  aiimldrd  ft,  so  tu  P,  art  thou  He  that  should  come  (Matt,  xi,  3)  r 

Til  so- 1 Maslh  p,  Thou  art  that  very  Christ  (Matt,  xvi,  1C). 

jo  salM-ti  dchhd  kopard  d,  that  which  is  the  best  garment. 

jd-kichh  merd  ho,  so  terd-i  hi 5,  whatever  is  mine  is  thine. 

her,  dill  Maslh  6,  kittd,  tekl  6,  lo,  hen?  is  Christ,  or  He  is  there  (Matt,  xxiv, 
23). 

tnhdre  bdbd-ke  kdtl  beta  d,  how  many  sons  arc  in  your  father’s  (house)  ? 
tekl  an  teff-kh  majnuld  dsd,  there  am  I in  the  midst  of  them  (Matt,  xviii,  20). 
til  hi  riU-mUjht  ekd  oso,  thou  also  art  one  of  them  (Matt,  xxvi,  73). 

Otti  tinS  dmE-kh  dchhd  oso,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  (Hindi  hond—und)  here 
(Matt,  xvii,  4). 

tuP  mdniid-kd  nun  osd,  ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth  (Matt,  v,  13). 
esc  nude  (Hindi  hate)  jese  Tswar-ke  jdJyn  gahii-bher  oso,  they  become  such  as 
are  the  angels  of  God  in  heaven  (Matt,  xxii,  30). 
tere  bete  mdphak  dlht-nd , I am  not  like  (i.e.  worthy  to  be  called)  thy  sou. 
yih  iidd-ke  syd nai-ni^jhi  nd  ndri-tianilrl  muni  iidlhi,  thou  art  not  least  .among 
the  princes  of  Judah  iMatt.  ii,  0). 
so  ekl  dthi  no.  He  is  not  hen*  (Matt,  xxviii,  0). 

kd  tiiP.  tcU-kh-ti  bore  dthi  no,  are  ye  not  greater  than  they  (Matt,  vi,  26)  ? 
dr  chi' lb  grand  hnil  na,  Oth  it -lei  eft  dthi  na,  and  she  would  not  be  comlorted, 
because  they  are  not  (Matt,  ii,  IS). 
au  biikd  thd,  I was  an -hungered  i Matt.  xx\,  35). 
tit  hi  sdlo  thd,  thou  also  wast  with  (Him)  (Matt,  xxvi,  69). 
jojd  kd  a child  held-  thd,  (he)  who  was  the  younger  son. 

Pk  bct-mdtius  thl  dl,  a woman  was  come  (.Matt,  xxvi,  7). 
eko-ke  dui  held  the , of  a certain  man  there  were  two  sons. 
cd  Jswar-kd  Putr  da,  this  was  the  Son  of  God  (Matt,  xxvii,  54). 
tollOi  bord  dutch  undo,  i-sd  ki  cd  na  dhaim-tce  ago-lei  ebi-duri,  then  shall  be 
great  tribulation,  such  as  was  not  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  to  this 
time  (Matt,  xxiv,  21). 


JATJNSARi. 


395 


B.— Active  Verb. 

The  Infinitive  or  Verbal  Noun  is  formed  by  adding  nd  to  the  root.  Thus,  khd-nd, 
to  eat,  the  act  of  eating.  If  the  root  of  the  verb  ends  in  d,  dh,  »,  r,  r,  or  l,  then  no 
is  added  instead  of  nd,  but  the  distinction  is  very  carelessly  observed  in  writin". 
Examples  are  chliddno  (not  chliadno),  to  abandon  ; badhnd,  to  fill  ; gannd , to  count  • 
jornd,  to  add  ; karnd,  to  do,  to  make  ; and  milno,  to  be  found. 

So  far  as  I can  gather  from  the  specimens  or  from  the  translation  of  the  Gospel  of 
St..  Matthew,  the  infinitive,  when  used  as  a verbal  noun,  does  not  change  in  inflexion. 
Thus  we  have  jlne  tese-kh  apne  s&garft  chdrno-kh  bliejd , who  sent  him  to  feed  (lit.  lor 
feeding)  his  swine  : ti/ie  bdjnd  aur  ndcliud-kd  sa <1  sand,  he  heard  the  sound  of  music 
and  dancing  : kothu  dekhnd-ki  khdtir  tub  bdnde  gice,  what  went  ye  out  for  to  see  i-Matt. 
xi,  8)  ? 

In  the  Parable  there  is  one  instance  of  an  oblique  infinitive  in  e forming  a dcsider* 
ative  compound.  It  is  bbknlu-kh  kfid/ie  nitcho-thd,  lie  wished  to  eat  the  husks.  Put  the 
uninflected  dative  is  also  used,  as  in  tes-ke  bdlnb-k/i  herd- the,  they  desired  to  speak  with 
him  (Matt,  xii,  10).  A similar  oblique  form  in  e occurs  in  jes-ke  blnnte  fipne  nidphok  au 
dlhi-na,  the  latchet  of  whose  shoes  l am  not  worthy  to  unloose  (Matt,  iii,  11). 

Tl»e  Present  Participle  i«  formed  I iy  adding  do  (do)  to  the  root.  Thus,  kardb 
(kardd),  doing:  mar  do  ( mdrdd ),  striking.  When  the  root  ends  in  a vowel,  the  termina- 
tion is  ndd  ( ndd ).  Thus,  rondo  ( rbndd >,  remain  imj ; den  do  ( dendd ),  giving;  an  do 
( audit ),  coming.  From  the  root  b (Hindi  lib i,  become,  we  have  undo  ( nmld ).  Examples 
of  the  present  participle  will  he  found  under  the  head  of  the  future  tense.  The  Present 
Participle  is  commonly  used  in  inceptive  compounds,  as  in  : — 

tihU-mtijhi  eku-ke  e/hti  rbndd  land,  he  be^an  to  dwell  with  one  of  them. 

mono  n/ld  logo,  he  began  to  remonstrate. 

kbthd  snnbndd  l ago,  he  heiran  to  preach  (Matt,  iv,  17). 

Note  that,  as  in  tin*  last  example,  the  present  participles  of  causal  verbs  end  in 


unuu. 

A kind  of  adverbial  present  participle  appears  in  dud  id,  on  coming,  a-coming, 
while  coming.  Thus,  join,  ghbrb  undid,  apne  kit  re  dhdiyd  pahuchd,  when,  while  coming 
home,  he  arrived  near  his  house. 

The  Past  Participle  1S  formed  by  adding  b (or  a)  to  the  root.  Thus,  maro  (or 
mdrCi ),  struck.  Examples  will  he  found  under  the  past  tenses. 

There  are  the  usual  irregular  past  participles.  Thus, 
karnd,  to  do,  has  kiyb  ( kiyd ). 
dead,  to  give,  has  diub  (d/nd), 
lend,  to  take,  has  lino  {find), 
jaiid,  to  go,  has  gob  (god)  or  giro  (gird). 

In  the  translation  o£  theUospel  of  St.  Matthew,  the  final  6 of  the  part  part, e,,.te 
is  often  nasalized.  Thus,  kiyd,  di/io,  l/no,  etc.  ^ 

The  Future  Passive  Participle  ls  1,10  samo  1,1  |ol‘m  as  t1u  1 11 11,111 

hdu  lerc  befe  bdjnd  mdphak  rohCt  na,  1 am  not  a\ or t h s to  he  ca  '•<  t n 

The  Conjunctive  Participle  is  formed  by  addins  / to  the  root.  ^’22 
having  struck.  Examples  will  be  tonnd  under  the  head  ol  compouiu  in  • 

VOL,  IX,  P.VKT  IV. 


806 


WESTERN  TAHArI. 


Jcari  or  Jcori  is  usually  added  when  used  purely  in  the  sense  of  a conjunctive  participle. 
Thus — 

tese-kh  dekhi-kdri  ghlnd  Idgl  or  ...  danri-kori  tes-ke  t&fu-di  bdha 
plied  ai  pheddi  take  tesi-kh  chat  a,  having  seen  him  he  felt  compassion,  and 
. . . . having  run,  throwing  his  arms  round  his  neck,  then  he  kissed 

him. 

Note  that  in  pheddi  pheddi  the  conjunctive  participle  is  repeated  with  an  inten- 
sive force  to  signify  extreme  agitation.  It  does  not  here  (as  in  Hindi)  signify  repeated 
action. 

Other  examples  are  — 

held  mori-kori,  jiwand,  the  son  having  died,  lived. 

ekd-kh  dpii  dhdiyd  band! -kori,  having  called  one  (of  his  servants)  to  him. 

Another  form  of  the  Conjunctive  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  ie  to  the  root,  as  in 
mdrid,  having  died,  close  to  the  end  of  the  Parable.  In  the  corresponding  passage  at  the 
end  of  the  first  section,  we  have  mori-kori  used  in  the  same  meaning.  If  the  root  (aids 
in  i (as  in  the  case  of  passives),  then  only  e is  added,  as  in  hdrehie,  having  been  lost, 
from  lidrchhid,  to  he  lost,  the  passive  of  hdrclnid,  to  lose. 


The  Present  is  thus  conjugated  : — 

T strike,  I am  striking,  etc. 

Sinful  ir. 

1.  marft  or  rndro 

2.  mare , mdrd , marl 

3.  mdrd 


Plural. 

mirti  or  mdrd 
vidro  or  mdrd 
mdro 


It  will  be  observed  that  mdrd  can  be  used  for  any  person  of  cither  number.  When 
mdrd  is  followed  by  the  negative  it  becomes  mart-nit.  As  usual,  in  other  Indian 
languages,  this  tense  is  also  employed  as  a Subjunctive  or  as  an  Imperative,  but  in  that 
case  the  third  person  singular  lakes  the  form  mare  or  mart. 

Examples  of  this  tense,  both  as  present  and  as  subjunctive  or  imperative,  are  as 
follows 


him  bhulchd  mdrU,  I die  hungry,  J die  of  hunger. 

teri  fdhal  korU,  dr  jojb  td  hole  so  kmiU,  I do  thy  service,  and  what  thou  sayest, 
that  I hear. 

au  tud-bher  bold,  I say  unto  you  (Matt,  v,  22). 

oji  au  khdli  tes-ke  agii  eh  hud,  au  bSchdi,  if  l may  touch  the  hem  of  His  garment, 
I shall  he  made  whole  (.Matt,  ix,  21). 

jojd  tit  bold,  what  thou  sayest  (see  above). 

tii  such  d,  dr  1 near -kl  but  sdchd-lei  sikhdd,  dr  kothiii-kh  ddri-na  ; cthu-ki 
khdtir  Id  tii  ddmi-lo  muh  herina.  Tdlld  dmU-bher  bdlyd,  tu  kd  sUchd,  Thou 
ari  true,  and  leaohost  the  way  of  God  in  truth,  neither  carcst  Thou  for  any 
man  ; for  TJion  regardest-  not  the  face  of  men.  Tell  us,  therefore,  what 
thinkest  Thou  (Melt,  xxii,  Hi,  17)  ? 

or  id,  ji’lld.  tit  updsad  rod,  and  thou,  when  thou  remainest  fasting  (Matt, 

▼i,  37). 

nu  rd  baba  tethu  ndndre  kure  pSdd  rohd,  my  father  lives  in  that  small  house. 


JAUNSABl. 


397 


eft  dugurS-lei  Abraham-lee  nlte  Idrkotte  tipi  soled , he  is  able  out  of  these  stones 
to  raise  up  children  unto  Abraham  (Matt,  iii,  9). 
sojo  kure-chd  ae  na,  let  him  not  enter  into  the  house  (Matt,  xxiv,  17). 
nft  tedra-mftjh  ud  (Hindi  house),  let  it  not  be  on  the  feast-day  (Matt,  xxvi,  6). 
so  ruSi  mord,  or  bhitre  nft  jdt,  lie  was  angered,  and  would  not  go  inside. 
kai  dmS  or  Pharlsi  bhdri  upas  kdrd,  why  do  we  and  the  Pharisees  fast  often 
(Matt,  ix,  14)  ? 

jo- than  tue  herd  so  herde,  (they  have  desired  that)  they  will  see  the  things 
which  ye  see  (Matt,  xiii,  37). 

dje  tuft  teft-kh  pyare  chltd,  jo  tuft-kh  pyare  chitd,  if  ye  love  them  that  love 
you  (Matt,  v,  4t>). 

kdchhe-i  pel  bhord,  how  many  (of  my  father’s  servants)  fill  the  belly  r 
ki  umdri  akhe  ngari  jdu,  (I  desire)  that  my  eyes  may  be  opened  (Matt, 
x x,  tl>5). 

The  Imperative  second  person  singular  is  the  same  as  the  root.  Thus,  de,  give 
thou;  r it  kit,  keep ; sambhdl,  take  thou.  The  second  person  plural  adds  b.  Thus,  deb, 
give  ye  ; not  ho,  go  ye.  If  the  form  is  repeated  it  is  emphatic,  as  in  jo  sabft-ti  itch  ho 
leopard  o,  so  gddo  gddo,  living  ye  out  at  once  the  best  garment.  Ihspectful  forms  are 
such  as  bdlyd,  please  tell  (Matt,  xxii,  17),  nftiyft  (for  nft  ttiyb),  be  ye  not  (Matt,  vi,  5). 

The  Imperfect  tense  is  formed  by  adding  thb  ( thd ),  the  past  tense  of  the  Verb 
Substantive,  to  the  present  tense.  The  thd  (thd)  agrees  with  the  subject  of  the  verb  in 
gender  and  number.  Note  that  it  may  either  follow  or  (as  in  Kashmiri)  precede  the 
main  verb.  Thus,  sojo  mdro  thd  (or  thd),  or  sojo  thd  {ovt hit)  min'd . lie  was  striking ; sojl 
min'd  thi  or  sojl  till  min'd , she  was  striking.  In  the  translation  of  the  Gospel  of  St. 
Matthew,  this  tense  is  commonly  used  as  the  past  tense  of  narration,  as  ‘ he  struck.’  Ju 
the  same  translation  thd  is  written  to,  thd  is  written  td , and  so  on.  1 have  only  come 
across  instances  of  Ibis  tense  in  the  third  person.  The  following  are  examples: — 
so  tihu  bdkutft-kh  khdue  suc/id  thd , he  was  wishing  to  eat  those  husks. 
kde-uft  thd  di’j,  no  one  was  giving. 

Yuhannd  tis-ke  (for  tese-kh'S  t/n’kb  td,  ,lolin  forbade  him  (Matt,  iii,  lli. 
jihft-kh  sftynr  klidd  the , (the  husks)  which  the  swine  were  eating. 
dablr-mftjh  ek  jdu  te  ijerd,  they  were  casting  a net  into  the  sea  (Matt,  iv,  IS). 

The  Future  tense  is  thus  conjugated.  The  feminine  differs  from  the  mas- 


culine : — 


I shall  strike, 

etc. 

SlKOl’l  A K. 

MilSc. 

Fflf. 

1. 

mdrnui 

(-mo) 

miirdl 

marmr,  ; 

2. 

mdrdd 

(-do) 

min'd/ 

mttrde 

3. 

mdrdd 

(’dd) 

mdrd/ 

manic 

be  observed 

that,  except  the  1st  person  niascul-iu 

V\  l RAl  . 


l\.u. 
mard} 
mat'd} 
m drill 

‘oi'ins  an.1  simply 

the  present  participle  ; and  they  are  formed  exactly  like  that  participle  i,?  the  case 
of  roots  ending  in  vowels.  Tims,  denda,  lie  will  give.  Examples  ot  this  tense  are.  - 

hdu  dpne  bdbd-bhcr  jama  or  tesr-kh  bblmd>  l u ill  go  to  my  lather.  and  will 
say  to  him. 


398 


WESTERN  PASARI. 


oji  au  khali  tes-ke  agu  chhuB,  au  bdchdi,  if  I but  touch  the  hem  of  His  garment, 
I (fem.)  shall  be  made  whole  (Matt,  ix,  21). 
dji  tu  usud-pdri-kori  mE-kh  dluil  korda,  if,  having  fallen  down,  thou  wilt  wor- 
ship me  (Matt,  iv,  9). 

ter  a Baba,  tad-kh  porgdtu-i  inam  de-dendd,  thy  Father  will  reward  thee  openly 
(Matt,  vi,  0). 

ethu-lei  tdlld  boro  dnkh  undo,  esbki  ....  di-jdndd  na,  for  then  shall  be 

groat  tribulation,  such  as will  not  be  (Matt,  xxiv,  21). 

dji  eji  bat  a sydnd-ke  kdno-pEdi  deindi  bolt,  if  this  shall  be  said  in  the  Gover- 
nor’s ears  (Matt,  xxviii,  11). 
ham  khdme  or  chhdkme,  we  shall  eat,  we  shall  feast. 

kd  khdme,  kd  pime,  what  shall  we  eat,  wliat  shall  we  drink  (Matt,  vi,  25)  ? 
tes-ke  dme  rdji  dende-kori,  or  tuE-kh  be-phikar  horde,  we  will  persuade  him, 
and  secure  you  (Matt,  xxviii,  11). 

dme  etti  tin  chhan  bdnde,  we  shall  even  here  make  three  tabernacles  (Matt, 
xvii,  1). 

oje  tue  ddmiyi-kh  chodi  dende  teE-ki  onydri,  if  ye  forgive  men  their  trespasses 
(Matt,  vi,  11). 

tub  teE-ke  phulpoB-lei  teE-kh  ponchdnde , ye  shall  know  them  by  their  fruits 
(Matt,  vii,  16). 

tethu-i  dusd bhoritd  log  bolde,  in  that  day  many  people  will  say  (Matt,  vii,  22). 
diii  bet-mdnus  jdndre-pEdd  piddi,  two  women  shall  be  grinding  at  a mill  (Matt, 
xxiv,  41). 

We  occasionally  come  across  instances  of  the  Garhwali  future,  made  by  adding  an 
immutable  Id  to  the  root  for  all  persons  and  both  numbers.  Thus  : — 

tue  yaini-ki  sydnchdri-mEjh  muni  nE  jdld,  ye  shall  in  no  case  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  (Matt,  v,  20).  Similarly  phuli  jdole  phtdeiu,  the  flowers 
will  bloom,  and  others  in  Specimen  II. 

A Past  Conditional  is  also  formed  from  the  Present  Participle,  as  in  Hindi.  We 
have  it  i njo  had  bi  ek  dfts  dpne  sathi-sangdthi-ke  sat  he  majd  korda,  that  I might  have 
one  day  made  merry  with  my  friends  and  companions. 

The  Past  Tense  Indicative  is  formed  nearly  as  in  Hindi,  and  like  all  other  tenses 
formed  from  the  Past  Participle  is  construed  almost  exactly  as  in  that  language,  i.e.  in  the 
cose  of  Transitive  verbs,  the  subject  is  put  in  the  agent  ease,  and  the  verb  agrees  in 
gender  and  number  with  the  object.  The  construction  differs  from  Hindi  and  follows 
Bajasthani  and  Gujarati,  and  also  Garhwali  and  Kumaunl  in  this,  that  the  verb  agrees 
with  the  object,  even  when  the  latter  is  in  the  dative  case.  Intransitive  verbs  are,  on 
the  other  hand,  construed  actively. 

The  Past  tense  is  simply  the  Past  Participle,  which  agrees  with  the  subject  (or,  in  the 
case  of  Transitive  verbs,  with  the  object)  in  gender  and  number.  It  w'ill  be  remembered 
that  in  the  translation  of  the  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew'  the  final  o of  the  past  participle  is 
often  nasalized.  The  same  occurs  in  the  past  tense. 

Examples  of  this  tense  arc  numerous  in  the  Parable.  We  may  quote  : — 

A. — Transitive  Verbs : — 

tine  dpnd  bdbd-kh  bold,  lie  said  to  his  father. 


jfATJNSARl. 


399 


bnbdg  tesi-kh  chatd,  the  father  kissed  him. 

tS  tes-ke  date  dhdrn  dim,  thou  gayest  for  him  a feast. 

With  the  object  in  the  dative  we  have  : — 

Yissu-i  dul  cheli-kh  pothdi  dine,  Jesus  sent  two  disciples  (Matt,  xxi,  1). 
ori-i  butt-lei  saui-kh  kail  dine , dr  bdta-pUde  pogdri  dine,  others  cut  down 
branches  from  the  trees  and  strewed  them  on  the  way  (Matt,  xxi,  8). 

B. — Intransitive  Verbs  : — 

tud  suchya  nil,  ki  me  sdstar  lei  bojandbrb-kl  boi  khono-kl  klidtir  dyd , think  ye 
not  that  I came  to  destroy  the  law  or  the  prophets  (Matt,  v,  17). 
led  tu  etl  dyd  dmti-kh  plrd  denB-ke  nlte,  didst  thou  come  hither  to  torment  us 
(Matt,  viii,  29)  ? 

pardeio-kh  ndthd,  he  went  to  a far  country. 

tail  tese-lch  stick  at,  then  sense  (fern.)  came  to  him. 

Icolld  dmu-i  td-kli  dnkhiyd,  kiltd  jel-khdnd,  the  herd,  dr  taa-bher  goe,  when  saw 
we  Thee  sick  or  in  prison  and  went  to  Thee  (Matt,  xxv,  39)  ? 
kottu  dekhnd-ki  khdtir  tliB  bdude  give,  what  went  ye  out  for  to  see  (Matt, 
xi,  8)  ? 

tabl  so  majl-mtijh  rohe,  then  they  remained  in  joy. 

joji  tydr  till  di,  so  tes-ke  sdti  jajure-ke  dere  got,  (the  virgins)  who  were  ready 
went  in  with  him  into  the  wedding  house  (Matt,  xxv,  10). 

A past  participle  is  sometimes  repeated  in  this  tense,  without  apparently  affecting 
the  meaning.  Thus:  — 

tine  sabh  dpne  bdtd-kd  null- mb  tali  kdtlid  kord  lcbrb,  he  collected  all  his  property. 

The  Perfect  tense  is  formed  as  in  Hindi,  by  suffixing  the  present  tense  of  the  verb 
substantive  to  the  past  participle.  Thus  : — 

■me  surugd-ke  a nr  tere  sdmne  pdp  kiyd-d,  I have  done  sin  before  heaven  and 
thee. 

tere  babd-e  dhdm  dlnl-d,  thy  father  hath  given  a feast. 

The  Pluperfect  is  often  used  in  the  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew,  where  we  should  use  the 


Perfect. 

The  Pluperfect  tense  is  similarly  formed,  with  the  past  tense  of  the  verb  substan- 
tive. The  latter  precedes  the  participle  quite  as  often  as  it  follows  it.  It  is  often  used 
in  the  sense  of  the  past,  or  of  the  perfect.  Thus  : — 

hdit  eld  dure  lag  ndthd-thd,  I have  walked  a long  way  to-day. 


so  nerd  bl  pahuchd-nti-thd , he  had  not  even  arrived  near. 

dmti-t  sbbbai  than  clihodi  dlnd-the,  dr  tau-pachli  hadB-the,  we  have  left  all  and 
followed  Thee  (Matt,  xix,  27). 

tuB-i  SunB-thu  (Matt,  v,  27),  or  tuc.-i  tlid-kmiB  (Matt,  v,  43),  ye  have  heard. 


tuS  tlie-ndche  na,  ye  did  not  dance  (Matt,  xi,  17). 

Passive  Voice.— As  in  Kumauni  and  Rajasthani,  a passive  is  formed  by  adding?  to 
the  root  of  the  verb.  Thus,  lidrclinB,  to  lose,  lut refund,  to  he  lost ; bolt  (lend,  to  say,  boli 
delnd,  to  be  said.  Thus: — 

dje  eji  bdta  sydnd-ke  kdnB-ptidl  delndl  boli,  if  this  thing  will  be  said  in  the  eais 


of  the  Governor  (Matt,  xxviii,  14). 


400 


WESTERN  PA.HARI. 


eii  bolt  deindo  tya-ki  ad-he  nite,  this  will  be  said  for  a remembrance  of  her 
(Matt,  xxvi,  13). 

Causal  Verbs  arc  formed,  as  in  Hindi,  by  adding  d to  the  root,  as  in  pakdytd,  to 
cook.  Sometimes,  as  usual,  d is  substituted  for  a,  as  in  (pres,  part.)  Sunondd  Idgd,  he 
began  to  cause  to  hear  (Matt,  iv,  17). 

There  are  numerous  irregular  causal  verbs.  Most  of  these  also  follow  Hindi,  e.g. 
marnd,  to  die ; mdrnS,  to  kill. 

Compound  Verbs. — There  are  the  usual  compound  verbs. 

Intensive  Compounds  are  made,  as  ill  Hindi,  with  the  conjunctive  participle  of 
the  main  verb,  but,  unlike  Hindi,  this  is  very  often  put  after  the  supplementary  verb. 
As  examples  of  each  order  we  may  quote  : — 
bati  dlno,  he  divided. 
dim  nddi  (not  nddi  dim),  he  squandered. 

Numerous  other  examples  will  be  found  in  the  Parable. 

As  an  example  of  Potentials  we  may  quote  : — - 

larkole  tipi  sdk§,  lie  is  able  to  raise  up  children  (Matt,  iii,  9). 

As  a Desiderative  we  have  *. — 

bdkutu-kh  khdne  sUchd-thd,  he  was  wishing  to  eat  the  husks.  (See  Infinitive.) 

Inceptives  are  formed  with  the  present  participle,  as  in — 

Yissu  kotthS  sunonda  Idgd,  Jesus  began  to  preach  (Matt,  iv,  17). 

As  a Permissive  we  have  : — 

tu  murda  logT-kh  dpne-i  mnrdt-kh  dabbed  de,  let  the  dead  bury  their  dead 
(Matt,  viii,  22). 

The  ordinary  Negative  is  nit  or  na  as  in  koe  nit  thd  dei,  no  one  was  giving ; had 
tere  bite  mdphak  athi-na,  l am  not  as  thy  son.  So  also  in  the  imperative  mood,  tug 
teiT-ke  kdmd-ki  bati  satyd  nil,  do  not  ye  after  their  works  (Matt,  xxiii,  3). 

With  niyg,  be  ye,  the  2nd  plural  polite  imperative  of  onS  (hand)  to  be,  we  have  a 
compound,  nuiyg,  be  ye  not  (Matt,  vi,  5). 

Two  specimens  of  Jaunsari  are  here  given,  and  these  are  followed  by  the  Jaunsari 
Vocabulary  alluded  to  in  the  Introduction  to  the  dialect.  Each  specimen  is  given  in  the 
Sirmauri  character  and  in  transliteration.  The  first  is  a version  of  the  Parable  of  the 
Prodigal  Son,  and  the  second  is  ar  favourite  folk-song.  The  latter  was  received  too  late 
to  be  utilized  for  the  grammatical  sketch.  Both  versions  in  the  Sirmauri  character  are, 
as  usual  in  such  documents,  very  carelessly  written  ; dots  are  as  frequently  omitted,  as  in 
writing  English.  Hashes  over  a letter  are  often  added  when  not  required,  so  that,  e.g. 
tdkd  is  written  tokd,  and  me  is  written  mat.  A gain  an  initial  e or  e is  invariably  written 
ye  or  ye,  the  y being  used  as  a kind  of  scaffold  on  which  to  write  a non-initial  e or  e. 
Sueli  irregularities  do  not  affect  the  pronunciation,  and  have  been  silently  corrected  in 
the  transliteration. 


401 


[ No.  I.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


Northern  Group. 


WESTERN  PAHArI  (.TAUNSARt). 

Standard  Dialkct.  District  1)ki«a  Dt;n. 

Specimen  I. 

) WJ  <xTXj  r<0)  J$ 

1 \AC)(T^  o£^ 

*7)  ft *V3 » 3>i U ^ V)  >J j ** 65 ^ ^ ^ 

^ w>»  ^e  * *t  y-i  C^iip*yy  »jX*)  w *i  t^si)  3i) 

>oK>(tT)  jiTn v>L£j  ^£C^j^"i<<5p""^>£J/*9)'9))i7>J 

i Ti ■Jrtj'-fij  ocTj  n Atj > o»djuj^ 

~*>t)  xoii -tf  3))<<Svtf^>  to) ce/?J  3)1  /o  t(5c *jj 

. tv-  — n — \ <■  —n“'  , -5>  <X-'~5  -V 

Vj ij)  20  jj)U)j^to>t4)  £rtjO)yi)  3))/Dofrj>5  tO)<~3V)jl^  <4'iv>)')ntp/p)) 

tsii'iityviu  *l2jV)Si 

*oi55^>  >T)  c-3)<£^))»3 /> toiioj (3W  jj^j 

V)'3 3i) *-1)$'^;  t*f))0)  $ j ^ i, ■Vi e) ro/Jjj >5 

”h  C-V?-  toJtoT^  I'MTioin&l  £,<»^tJA'(j^^))J_)  6?^  fe)J(Oj 

£l$  iiS%  ~Ui  cj^'e^ 

^i^ol  touoj^'yS1'^  6oi  iro^V)  jj^w;  w y-\^_j  3jj^ 


.j  1 


VOt.  IX,  PAST  IV. 


402 


WESTERN  PAHiBl. 


yi)Vi  + fexw'jiTh io^ 

'll  ww uiiipi M)35i (ayh\Z JiV)^ M & J3>J<nJ on { J 3^ ^"^*>3 

l* V$  3J) 'V^  £ v>  ^T^sTirt  /3krt| 

~~^>ir>7‘-Tf> ^7?j  jM  CQ\J> '^J  3>i£^3  JJ  >J  i2i&> 

MkiJihi4\  h]ji(yi  )r>  ul}  ^ *J  641  >JA.'  4 

1gV)** s? ^ /) « s>>y  4 ) tL+hy  VM>X jw*j5Ut^ 

"rjiAsixi'S^)  g)X>  3»XHt) ^ *»l>53  e \h^f/^ii 

t-})M)  <4)  VJIWJ 

3 >/* 5fc  42pw  jj » ^ 

" 4r'^v  ""  . ""S . . ^ m.  ^ i / .'  M I l)  «_j  >i. 


6?  jj^h  14  iu)i%+)  iiy  #*  X ^ b'BjJix^. 

~^ju e»J -^ ^ >» 1 ^ *)&fiy*b  ■}»■*>>> >^3J) <*>>4V*Q 
'SSypii  ^3>£x*3J  €\^il^>l)fciw>^1«1:t,w'i^ 


[ No.  I.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


403 


Northern  Group. 


WESTERN  PAHARl  (JAUNSARl). 


Standard  Dialect.  District  Dera  Dun. 

Specimen  I. 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 

Eko-kS  dui  bete  thB.  Tihu-mujhi  j6ja  kanchha  tha 

A-certain-one-of  two  sons  were.  Them-f rom-among  who  the-younger  was 

tine  apne-baba-kh  bolu  je,  * baba,  jo-kicbh  dhan-taka  6, 

by-hint  his-own-f ather-to  it-was-spoken  that , 'father,  whatever  wealth-money  is, 
tBthu-mujhf  jo-kichh  m6re-b5tg-ko,  so  mu-kh  de.’  Tab!  tine 

that-from-in  whatever  my-share-of(is) , that  me- to  give*  Then  by-him 

jo-kichh  tho,  so  tihO-kh  bati-dino.  Thore-dusO-mGjh  jftja  kanchha 
Whatever  was , that  them-to  w as- divide  d-out.  Few-days-in  who  the -younger 

beta  tha,  tine  sabh-apne-bato-ko  mal-mdtali  kdtho-kdro  k6ro 

son  was,  by-him  all-his-own-share-of  property  together-made  was-made 

(aur)  pardeSo-kh  ntttha,  aur  taiike  jaria-mSjh  apni  mal-matah 

(and)  a/nother-country-to  he-went,  and  there  debauchery-in  his-oum  property 

sab  dini-udai.  Jab  (for  jabi)  tSs-bher  kichh-nu  rfiho  aur 

all  was-squandered-away.  When  hint-near  anything-not  remained  and 

taiikS  kar  pflra,  so  munika  garib  goa.  Tabi  so  jo  taiiko-ke 

there  a-famine  fell,  he  entirely  poor  went.  Then  he  who  there-of 

the,  tihS-mftjhi  gko-ke  Bthu  rBnda  laga,  jin§ 

were,  them-from-among  a-certain-one-of  there  to-remain  began,  by-whom 

tasft-kh  apijB-sSgaru  charnS-kh  dokhrl-pSda  bliefja,  aur  so  tikS- 

h%t-as-for  his-own-swine  feeding-for  Jields-in  he-was-sent,  and  he  those - 

bokutS-kh  khane  sSchS-tha  jiliG-kh  sugur  khao-tlie ; tSs6-kli  s6je 
Wtsks  (acc.)  to-eat  wishing-was  which  (acc.)  the-sioine  eating-were ; him-to  those 
bi  koB  nS  tha  del  Tabi  tSs6-kh  sGcli  ai  je,  ' mere-baba-ke 

also  anyone  not  was  giving.  Then  him-to  senses  came  tliitt,  * my-fatlier-of 

Bthu  t6  k5chhS-f  pBt  bhfirg,  or  kau  bliukha  mbrft.  Haft  apne- 

near  verily  how-many  belly  Jill,  and  I hungry  die.  I my-own- 

baba-bhBr  jama,  or  tBsB-kh  bolma  je,  “ baba,  ml  surugo-k& 

father-near  will-go,  and  him-to  I-will-say  that,  “ father , by-me  heaven-of 

aur  t$r6  samp.8  pap  kiya-o.  Haft  t8re-bete-maphak  athf-na.  Mu-kh  bi 
and  mk W before  sin  done-is.  I thy-son-like  am-not.  Me-to  also 

v 3p2 

VOL.  DC,  PART  IV.  • 


404 


WESTERN  PAHAKI. 

jai£o  (for  ja6e)  tire  or  harl-parl  0 tOSai  rakh.”  * • Tabiio  ujliuna 

as  thy  other  servants  are  so-even  keep.”  * * Then  , he * arose  * * 

ujhuna,  or  upne-baba-bherO-kh  nOtha.  So  n§ra  bhi  pabfe^ha-  nSf-  tha 

arose,  and  his-on-f ather-near-to  went.  He  near  even  arrivedmno t *tcas 

tOtirfe  tgs-ke-babaS  dSkha.  Tgsg-kh  dekhi-kOri  ghuja  * 

immediately  hy-his-fatlier  he-xoas-seen.  Him  ( aoo .)  seen-having  compassion 

lagl,  or  tes-ko  babag  dauyi-kOri  t6s-ke  tatu-d¥  babS 

was-attached,  and  him-of  by-the-father  run-having  him-of  neok-on  arms 

pbedai-phedai  tabe  tgs¥-kh  cbata.  Betgg 

having -thrown-having-thrown  then  hinv-even-to  it-was-kissed.  JBy-the-son 

bolo  je,  * baba,  mg  tere  samne  or  sumgO-kg  samnS  pap 

it-xoas-spoken  that ,'  * father , hy-me  of-tliee  befot'e  and  heaven-of  before  sin 

kiya,  aur  bau  tcre-bete  bajnS  mapbak  rbba-na  jo  tera  beta, 

* 

t cos-done,  and  I thy -son  to-be-called  like  remained-not  that  thy  son 

baju.’  P6r  t&s-ke-babai  apnc-naukarS-kli  bolo,  * jo 

I-may-be-called .*  Hut  by-his-f other  his-own-servants-to  it-xoas-spoken,  * what 

sabn-tl  achho  kOpara  0,  so  gjido  gado  or  gsg-kh 

all-than  good  garment  is,  that  take-ye-oxit  take-ye-oxxt  and  this-one-to 

pdbarai-de  ( for  -deO)  ; Or  6s-ke  batlio-dT  cbhap,  or  gOdl-da  juta  deo-p6harai ; 

clothe ; and  him-of  hand-on  a-ring,  and  feet-on  shoe  pxit-ye-on ; 

Or  jo,  ham  kliamg  Or  chhakmS.  $ ja  mera  beta  mdri-k6ri, 

and  so,  toe  shall-eat  and  xoe-shall-feast.  This  my  son  died-having , 

jiwana ; harchig,  phaba.*  Or  tab!  sO  maji-m3jh  rOhe. 

lived;  having -been-lost,  fonnd(-is ).’  And  then  they  joy-in  retnained. 

Tgs-ka  jetlia  beta  dOkhre-pOda  tha.  Jabi  ghdrO  andia 

Him-of  the-elder  son  the-field-in  was.  When  to-the-house  on-coming 

apne-kure-dhaiya  pahucha,  tabi  tine  bajnO-  aur  naclmo-ka  £ad 

his-own-house-near  he-arrived,  then  by -him  music-  and  dancing-of  noise 

Suna.  Or  ting  * apne-naukar§-m§jh?  SkO-kh 

was-heard.  And  by-him  his-own-servants-from-among  a-certam-one-to 

apu-dhaiya  baudi-kOri  pucliha  je,  ' 6j0  ka  bo  ? ’ Ting 
himself -near  called- having  it-was-asked  that , * this  what  is  ? * By-him 

bolO  je,  ‘ tera  bbaya,  aya,  (aur  ter§-babals  dham 

it-was-spoken  that,  1 thy  younger -brother  came,  ( and  by-thy-father  a-feast 

dlnl-o,  gthu-aste  jo  so  khim-kuSar  aya).*  SO  ru6i-m6ra,  Or 

given-is,  this-for  that  he  in-good-health  came).*  He  became -angry,  and 


bhitre 

/v 

nu 

jaf. 

Tabi 

tgs-ka.  baba 

bida 

aya, 

Or 

within 

not 

would-go. 

Then 

him-of  the-father 

outside 

came. 

and 

mOnanda 

laga. 

Tine 

apng-baba-kh 

bold 

je,  \ 

*hafi 

to-remonstrate 

began. 

By-him 

hi8-own-father-to  it-was-spoken 

ihat, 

*J 

JAVNSAbI.- 


405 


to v %q|jh6-b6r§n-S,tiyi  1 i&ri  tfthal  kftrft,  or  3636  tu  bole  so 

‘ verity  ^o-matty-yearsgfrom  thy  service  do,  and  what  thou  speakest  that 


gunfi.  **^Tabl 

bl 

• ^ 
te 

kadi 

rnu-kli 

ek  chel-kur6-bi 

rs* 

nu 

1-hedKf  * Then 

also 

by-thee 

ever 

me-to 

one  goat-young-one-even 

not 

* ditto,.  36 

had 

bi  ek 

dus 

ap^ie-satln-sangathl-ke-sathe 

was-given,  that 

I 

also  one 

day 

my-own-friends-companions- of -in-company 

maja  ktirda.  Or  jabi  tera  beta  eja,  jine  sabh  mal-matak 

joy  might-have-made.  And  when  thy  son  this,  by -whom  all  property 

r^du-kh  udao,  aya,'  tabi  tl  t6s-ke-aste  dham  dim.’ 

harlots- to  was- squandered,  came,  then  by-thee  him-of-for  a-feast  was-given 


Tine  bolo  je,  ‘beta,  *tu  t6  sada-nit  mS-i-dhaiya, 

By-him  it-was-spoken  that,  ‘son,  thou  verily  always  me-ever-near{art), 


or  jo-kichh 

mero 

ho, 

so 

tero*i 

. ho ; or  e£o  bhi 

(for  bl) 

and  whatever 

mine 

is, 

that 

thine-even 

is ; and  thus 

also 

chahiyl-tho. 

kahi-kh 

je 

tera 

bhaya 

marii,  jiwana 

; or 

proper-it-was, 

because 

that 

thy 

young  er-broiher  having-died,  lived 

; and 

liarcliil,  phaba.’ 

having -been-lost,  found  {-is).' 


406 


[No.  2.J 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


Northern  Group. 


SUKOilD  DlAJJCOT. 


WESTERN  PAHARl  (JATTNSAbI). 


Specimen  II. 


Distbict  D«ea  Dun. 


5. 


/O. 


'5. 


^ 5>  (f^ 

taj ~7>j  xvlpi  / 1 

^ ~i*p  ^ 

a;  a 

^c” * ‘<v^  V5> « 

~*i  e^~M  m > /»*  ^^5; 

*»§>/S£J5  fe  s-l^a^P 

P ^ ^ u)' 

'■wa# ^bo *4) ‘jyyfrtj^ T&  >mu 


JA-UNSAbL 


407 


to 


y i &)F>  ^ 

J)i)  s>~>  /i'l'*-)  ^ 3>> 

m3  tCui\X  w>  ^vs>  M : VJ^A)  * 

'w3‘-  >vu]x^  > ^ X. 


c 


30. 


3s. 


40. 


zZi  p?y> 

T^ii"***  ^ 'oo  ^ ^ ^ 

y,  r^>\_  ^\Jy)  3 ) ^ ^ ^ 

e *> e £1*)  ^ _ 

f*0)'?')  ) A-£)  /*s/2  ^ ^ ^) 

~t  tx>i^^\x'>  j^>^x ;i*>  > 

"$3  ^5)  6^£-"3>>^34J£l^>  '^Tv5  /5) 

t>tix*  +>C*>10  «^5  <1  ixi"^a>  rt'>£.>_y>>vi/j  J 

g > t.Tx<r>?^  -t* >> 

y-~^  5?  J.  g ) ) >uCb  r?)  ^ 

*w^>’?>  y»  >*->>>  4^ 

3 > d.?/5D  ^ 

£>£)tr>  ve?7  a^;  ^ <*l  a5  1;  w/tT}  /i}J^ 

~i*W<>Z0  5>>)~/-»)  «ov7)  triT5j3»  v>^t  i 


408 


[NO.  2.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Northern  Group. 

WESTERN  PAH A? I (JAUNSARt). 


Standard  Dialect. 


District  Dera  Dtjn. 


Specimen  II. 

THE  SONG  OP  SERIA. 


TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 


Ijiye-ll,  maiye,  liiye 
‘ Mother-0,  mother,  prepare 

M 6ile  mere  k5pire 
Dirty  my  clothes 

Choiye  binu 

With-lye  without 
SajO  ladi 

Fresh  by-preparing 
Okheru 
‘ Walnut-tree 


karnl-cliOi. 

lye-drippings. 


re,  dene 
O,  give 

dliOidi 
by -leashing 
re  sabinO 
0 soap 
sawatiye  sftri-jawalfi 
branch  clothed-will-go 


choiye  dliOi. 

wit  h(-lye) -dripping  washing. 

re,  jale  kOpire  khOi. 
will-go  clothes  spoilt. 
jale  pilule  tu  hoi. 

will-go  flower-like  having-become 
bada.  (5) 

mistletoe. 


O, 

re, 

O, 


KOpire  dlioi,  SOriva  batha,  koi  gaive  jada  ? 

Clothes  having- washed,  Seriyd  beautiful,  which  village  going  ? ' 
Baji-jale  bajine,  baji-jafilO  banO. 

* Played-will-be  musical-instruments,  played-will-be  tlie-gong, 

Gaivl  binu  ye  bOliya  re,  mere  jaterS  janO. 

Of-a-village  without  O speaking  O,  my  to-fair  going ' 

TliekO  goto,  re  Beriya  batha,  terl  budhorl  nial. 

* I- prohibit  I-stop,  O Seriyd  beautiful,  thy  old  mother. 

Jateru  jo  pJSraye  re,  na  bill  mera  til  jaiye.  (10) 

Fair  which  of -strangers  0,  not  also  my  thou  go.’ 

TliekO  goto,  bOla,  Sgriva  bStha,  terl  p86orl  nariye. 

* I-prohibit  I-stop , says,  Seriyd  beautiful,  thy  bed-fellow  wife. 

JaterS  jo  pOraye  re,  1)8ni-ja6li  maro  ye. 

Fair  that  of -strangers  O,  will-happcn  fight  O. 

Dade  baso  kainOrti  re,  dum  ba^Oda  mOrO  yS. 
Qn-the-hill  sings  cuckoo  0,  on-the-plain  sings  peacock  O. 


KliOsani  Baliinawati  re,  teri  bimu  kliajerl  clioroye* 

The-Khas-woman  of  Bahmu  O,  thy  castanets  tamboui'xne  stolen  * 


JAUNSARL 


B8gan5-kS  bola  bhitare  36  pan!  pinS  ] 

* Ilanganu- (in-the-house-) of  said  within  that  water  drinking  c 

kundl  ye. 
pot  O. 

Bimu  khajerl  rbhno  de-di,  de-di  btsuri  undi  ye. 

Castanet  tambourine  to-remain  allow,  give  Jlute  here  O' 


409 

(15) 


Kate  na  re  kuchariye,  bani-loilo  kapo. 

‘Cut  please  O Kachariyd,  make  pieces' 

Thekd  gotS  bola,  Beriya,  batha,  tero  budharo  bapo. 

' I-prohibit , I stop,  sags,  Seriyd  beautif  ul,  thy  old  father. 


Guru-satlie  bijuretiyc,  doi-satlie  gtfndye. 

Thunder-with  lightning,  bees-with  honey-bee. 

JatcrU  nS  jaya,  §6riya,  glidre  gadi-leo  mBnoye.  (20) 

The-fair  not  go,  Seriyd,  at-home  prepared-is  a-fish-poisoning-fair.' 


KlibSaniye  Babmawatiye  band  mithoro  khano  ye. 

‘ O-Khas-woman  of-JBahnm  prepare  sweet  food  O. 


Bobua-ke-satho-ke  rd,  mere  janiye  jano  ye. 

Daughter-in-law-of  with,  my  will-be-gone  going  O' 


Phuli-jaold  phuletu  re,  phuli-jaoll  aru. 

Will-bloom  flowers  O , will-bloom  peaches. 

Thori  chakiya,  Sdriya,  bStha,  Roganu-ki  daru. 

Little  taste,  Seriyd,  beautiful,  Ranganu-of  wine.' 


Phiili-jaftle  pkuletii  re,  phuli-jaoll  dhai.  (25) 

‘ Will-bloom  flowers  O,  will-bloom  Woodfordia-foribnmla. 

Tail  to  lago,  Anupa  rSde,  jaterS-ko  bai. 

To-thee  also  is-felt , Anupa  woman,  fair-of  desire.' 

Bhawanu  re  ISliara,  de-di  dagarl-di  pano. 

‘ Bhawanu  O blacksmith,  give  chopper-on  keen-edge.' 

JaterQ  jad,  Anupa  rado,  goi  na  rado-ki  bano. 

' Fair  going,  Anupa  woman,  goes  not  woman-of  custom.' 

Atliii  laga  bole  bolda,  jo  liliawanu  loliaro. 

Thus  began  to-speak  speaking,  that  Bhawanu  tlie-blacksmith. 

Dekhi  koriya,  Anupa  dliiyani,  mulikd-ka  b5baro.  (30) 

‘ Seeing  do,  Anupa  daughter-of -a- Rajput,  country -of  custom.' 

BhdanU  30  ldliaratea,  jdrd  digua  tera. 

‘ Bhawanu  that  blacksmith,  garment  cap  thine. 

Dadiya-ka.  kliawad,  Sgriya  sora  bbauja  mera. 

Elder-sis  ter-of  husband,  Seriyd  real  brother-in-law  my.' 

Phuli-jaSle  pbuletu,  phuli-jaoll  dhai. 

« Will-bloom  the-flowers,  will-bloom  Woodf ordia-foribnnda. 

VOL.  IX.  PAttT  IV.  ® 11 


410 


WESTERN  PAHARI. 


B6dek6te  bole  thato-pundi  lagi  jatlra  jal. 

Tn-Barkot  called  opens  pace -in  held  the-fair  is -being.' 

Dadiy6  Nagautiye,  tu  bhi  d-idi  ye  dadi.  (35) 

‘ O -elder-sister  of-Ndgau , thou  also  sister  O sister. 

Jare-k5guri  {read  jhalekall)  kalegi  dadiye  (bsdhiyfe), 

Shining  head-ornament  tie , 

dei-na  kalegi  badhi  ( for  bEdhi). 

pnt-please  head-ornament  having-tied .' 

J6i-jala,  Anupa,  tera  kaudiyara  jura. 

c ( I-)toill-be-bnrnt,  Anupa,  (by-)  thy  embroidered  dress. 

Pdr6-k6  jo  bhangjiro  rakho,  a£fl-kil  raura. 

Last-year-of  this  cumine  kept,  this-year-qf  parched-grains' 

A $6  kdri  boldla  re,  Kolhe-ka  badl. 

Thus  doing  speaks  O,  Kblhd-of  the-carpenter. 

ft  ml  poseto  apu  khaye,  todo 

* Parched-grain  poppy-seed  you  eat,  poppy-heads 

laye-chhadl.  (40) 

art-throwing -away  (-at-me).' 

Mahmud  dade-punda  bate  bdhla  hiiru. 

Bahmu  hill-on  air  blows  softly. 

Juda  nach5  bole,  Sfiriya  b5ka,  juda  pago-ra  pliiiru. 

Apart  dances  says,  Seriyd  beautiful,  apart  turban-of  turban-tail. 


AiSe  kori  bold  la  re  Duintura  Jinda. 

So  doing  says  O J)bm  Jinda. 

‘ Bawe  pi)£e  bole  dftgrS-lai,  dahna  p64o  g5a  timid.’ 

‘ Left  side  he-says  chopper-stroke,  right  side  went  wet' 

[Anilore-samloriya-kii,  bani-leita  dhuna.  (45) 

[ Amlord-etcelera-of ',  make-do  a(-poultice)-lump. 

/\J 

.laleru-ke  that-punda  bate,  Anupa,  bhaiigjlro-ka  klusa.J 

Fair-of  open-space-in  __  distribute,  Anupa,  cumine-of  pocket .j 


FREE  TRANSLATION  OF  THE  FOREGOING. 

The  legend  runs  that  Seriyd,  a very  beautiful  youth,  was  married  to  a Rajput  girl 
of  the  village  of  Bahmu,  and  fell  in  love  with  his  wife's  younger  sister,  Anupa,  who  was 
married  to  one  JIansd  of  Bang  and  Khds  Dwdr.  The  lovers  agreed  to  meet  at  Bar  hot 
fair.  There  they  were  surprised  by  JIansd,  who  cut  off  Seriyd' s head  with  a dahgrii 
(the  kind  of  chopper,  or  axe,  used  for  killing  goats). 

Beriya  speaks. — O Mother,  Mother,  prepare  lye.1  My  clothes  are  dirty.  Wash 
them  with  lye.  Or  better,  wash  not  with  lye,  for  my  clothes  would  be  spoilt  by  it. 
Prepare  fresh  soap,  and  they  rill  be  gay  as  flowers. 

1 Lit.,  ‘Ash-drippings/ 


JAUNSAIU. 


411 


The  Mother. — Thou  wilt  be  gay  as  a walnut-branch  bung  with  mistletoe.  To  what 
village  is  my  handsome  Beriya  going  in  his  washed  garments  r 

6eriya.~  Let  musical  instruments  be  played.  Let  the  gong  be  sounded.  Speak  not 
of  a village.  It  is  to  tbe  fair  I go. 

'lhe  Mother. — I,  thy  old  mother,  stop  tliec,  prohibit  thee,  my  handsome  Beriya.  The 
fair  is  one  for  strangers.  Go  not  to  it. 

Beriya’s  Wife.— Thy  wife,  thy  bed-fellow,  stoppeth  thee,  prohibiteth  thee,  my  hand- 
some Beriya.  The  fair  is  one  for  strangers.  Haply  there  may  be  a tight.  The  cuckoo 
singeth  on  the  hill,  and  the  peacock  singetli  (*.<?.  danceth)  in  the  plain.  The  Khasani  of 
Balimu  hath  stolen  thy  castanets  and  tambourine.1 

Seriya.— There  is  a waterpot  for  drinking  in  the  house  of  the  Rariganus.  Keep  my 
castanets  and  tambourine,  and  give  me  my  flute.2  Cut  thou  kachdriyd  into  pieces  for  me.3 

Beriya’s  Father. — Thy  old  father  stoppeth  thee,  prohibiteth  thee,  my  handsome 
Seriya.  Where  there  is  tliundor,  there  is  lightning  ; where  there  are  bees,  there  is  the 
queen-bee;  [where  there  is  a fair,  there  there  will  be  trouble].  Go  not  to  the  fair.  At 
home  do  they  prepare  a fair  for  poisoning  fish.4 

Beriya.-  Khasani  of  Balunu  (his  wife),  prepare  thou  sweet  food,  for  Seriya  will  go  to 
the  fair  with  his  daughter-in-law.5 

The  Wife  (acquiescing  reluctantly,  and  warning  him  to  keep  sober). — The  flowers 
w'ill  bloom,  'l’lie  peaches  w ill  bloom.  My  handsome  Seriya,  taste  but  little  of  the  wine 
of  the  RangiimVs  family. 


Ilansa  addresses  Anupa,  his  wife,  with  whom  Seriya  has  the  intrigue. — The  flowers 
will  bloom,  and  the  dhdt  will  bloom. 

Thou  art  eager  to  go  to  the  fair,  Anupa.7 

no  addresses  a blacksmith. — O Bhawanu,  the  blacksmith,  put  thou  a sharp  edge 
upon  my  chopper. 

lie  again  addresses  his  Avife. — Thou  art  going  to  the  fair,  Anupa.  A true  woman 
art  thou,  not  dost  thou  give  up  thy  Avoman’s  nature. 

BliaAvanu  addresses  Anupa. — O Anupa,  thou  llajput’s  daughter,  this  (thy  husband’s 
talk)  is  but  the  custom  of  the  country. 

Anupa,  noAv  at.  flu*  fair,  addresses  Bhawanu. — O Bhawanu,  the  blacksmith,  thou 
art  here  in  thy  coat  and  cap.  Where  is  Seriya,  my  elder  sister’s  husband,  my  real 
brotlier-in-laAV  r 


1 The  wife  is  a Klias  RAjpfit  woman  of  BahmQ,  ami  she  is  referring  to  herself.  She  knows  that  lie  always  goes  out 
with  these  musical  instruments, — as  a proper  young  dandy  should, — and  so,  to  keep  him  at  home,  she  tells  him  that  the  ha* 
stolen  them,  and  hidden  them  away.  The  translation  of  hxmu  by  ‘castanets'  is  very  doubtful. 

2 SeriyA's  son  was  married  into  the  family  named  Rniiganu,  who  lived  at  Haricot,  wlure  the  fair  would  be  held.  The 
kuntfi  is  a brass  or  copper  vessel,  and  indicates  that  tho  family  is  wealthy.  Seriya  means  that  he  can  tasily  find  a set  of 
castanets  and  a tambourine  in  their  house.  Note  the  use  of  rd  (ra,  rt)  as  the  postiositiun  of  the  genitive.  It  is  the  regular 
form  in  most.  Western  l'lihupi  dialects. 

3 Kachai'iyd  is  the  name  of  an  edible  root,  lie  is  telling  her  to  prepare  food  for  his  expedition. 

4 Preparations  are  being  made  for  a joint  expedition  for  lish -poisoning.  In  these  Hills,  it  is  a common  practice  to  pois.m 
pools  with  various  vegetable  drugs.  See  Atkinson,  Gazetteer  of  the  Himalayan  J)i  ettiefe,  II,  82. 

6 As  already  said,  his  son  was  married  into  a RAjpfit  family  of  Barkot,  where  the  fair  was  to  be  held.  The  daughter-in- 
law  is  now  in  fieriyA's  house,  and  Seriya  states  his  intention  of  taking  her  with  him.  Girls  are  usually  allowed  to  go  to  tlieii 
parents*  houses  on  such  occasions. 

• The  Woodford ia-Jlorihunda,  which  has  brilliant  red  flowers. 

7 In  Jaunsftri,  the  word  ra(fi  means  simply  * woman/  not  * widow.' 

VOL.  IX,  PAHT  IV.  ° " 


412 


'WESTERN  PAhARI. 


Beriya  (hurrying  to  the  fair). — The  flowers  will  bloom,  tho  dhai  will  bloom.  Lo, 
there  is  the  fair  on  the  Barkot  plain.  (He  meets  his  sister,  who  is  married  in  Nagau), — 
O,  Elder  Sister  of  Nagau,  thou  art  my  sister  of  sisters  (i.e.  very  dear)  ; tie  thou  up  this 
shining  ornament  upon  my  headdress. 

Beriya  meets  Anupa.  She  gives  him  spices  to  eat.  Beriya. — Anupa,  I am  con- 
sumed1 * by  the  beauty  of  thy  ombroidered  dress.  Thou  hast  kept  last  year’s  cumine,  and 
this  year’s  parched  grain  for  me. 

Tho  Carpenter*  of  Kolha  (overhearing  them)  says  (in  raillery),  * Ye  eat  parched 
grain,  and  ye  eat  poppy-seeds,  and  yo  throw  the  poppy-heads  at  me  in  sport.* 


(Hama  surprises  them,  and  strikes  off  Seriyas  head  with  the  chopper.) 

(After  the  murder,  the  poet  addresses  Anupa,  who  is  standing  to  one  side,  and 
weeping.) — The  air  blows  softly  on  tho  heights  of  Baliinu  (her  father’s  home). 
On  one  side  dances  the  handsome  Beriya’s  (body),  and  on  the  other  side  dances  the  hang- 
ing tail  of  his  turban  (i.e.  his  head  has  been  cut  off).  Jinda,  tho  Pom,  thus  began 
to  say,  * The  stroke  of  the  chopper  was  on  the  left  side,  but  oven  to  the  right  side  was  it 
damp  (with  blood).’ 

The  concluding  two  lines  are  not  in  the  copy  in  the  vernacular  character , and  are 
taken  from  another  version  of  the  poem. 

Anupa,  make  thou  a salve  (for  thine  heart),  and  distribute  thy  pocketfuls  of 
cumine  on  the  plain  of  the  fair.3 


1 Note  the  elision  of  r in  jot  iorjorf, 

* Note  the  form  bd<fi  for  batjhi*  a carpenter.  Sue  * disaipiration  of  sonant  aspirates  is  typical  of  dialects  further  west. 

• Amlbfd  is  a plant,  the  leaves  of  wliioh  made  into  a poultico  are  said  to  reduce  the  pain  of  a boil,  or  the  like.  Tho  poet 
sarcastically  advises  her  (o*clap  a jioultice  on  her  heart,  in  tho  shapo  of  a new  lover,  and  as  her  pocketful  of  cumine  is  now  no 
longer  required  for  Seriyft,  she  had  better  distribute  her  favours  to!  the  fair  in  general. 


413 


jaunsArT-english  vocabulary. 


Jauns&rl. 

English.  | 

• ! 

JauiiKarl. 

Englisb. 

AhSrS, 

A 

(adv,'),  late. 

AU, 

unripe,  raw. 

Abur, 

(womh),  boil,  abscess. 

Am, 

we. 

Achhd,  dchhfi, 

nice,  good,  better. 

Amdro, 

oar. 

AchdythG , 

unsafe. 

Amid, 

sour. 

Achhdl, 

blackberry. 

Amu-kh, 

(acr.),  us. 

Ad, 

memory. 

An-bydl, 

virgin. 

Ada4$i 

bat. 

A rig  do , 

hornet. 

rw 

Aderu , 

bat. 

Angdr , 

charcoal. 

AdhS, 

blind. 

_ /V  # /v 

Ano , dsno , 

to  come. 

Adi  (plur.  fiiit'a), 

bowel,  entrail. 

A pud, 

own. 

Adld-badll , 

barter. 

Ap  matlab T, 

flattery. 

green  ginger. 

Apv, 

self. 

jW  rakhnl,  ad  rdkhno , 

♦ 

to  remember,  to  bear  in 

Ar, 

paramour. 

agds, 

Agdso , 

mind. 

matchlock. 

sky,  kcavon. 

(prep.),  in  front,  before. 

advance. 

Aran,  airan , 

Artl, 

At, 

A tad, 

forge,  anvil. 

looking-glasB 

hope. 

fallow. 

/V 

aeno, 

to  give  an  advance . 

Asno,  dno, 

-■v 

to  come. 

Zgre  nathno , 

Ageru , 

to  go  ahead. 

(<nZr.)f  two  years  henco. 

issue,  family ; ( adv .),  next 
year. 

A 80, 

Atd> 

As  rdJchni, 

Aste , 

are,  is. 

light,  brightness. 

to  expect. 

cause,  (for)  the  sake  (of). 

/V 

firefly. 

Aiu  (plur.  dtud), 

tear. 

atj<5  (fern,  aiji), 

this. 

Asukhiyd, 

ill. 

Ain, 

udder. 

Athdrl, 

sleet. 

Airan,  dray,. 

forge,  anvil* 

At  hi  nii  thd. 

absent. 

Ait  dr, 

Sunday. 

Athintd  rdhno , 

to  fast. 

Akh, 

eye. 

Aukhd , 

unsafe. 

AUkh, 

many. 

air. 

414 


J AUNSARt-ENGLISH  vocabulary. 


Jaunsarl. 


English. 


Jaunttirl.  English. 


Bdbd, 

Babd , 

Bachh,  bachhati, 
Bdchhd, 

Bdchhutf, 

Bdchhuye , 

/V 

Badhno , batfhno, 
Badhno , bddno, 
Bd4hm , bd<fO f, 

Badd, 

Bait, 

Biddy  at, 

Bdgh, 

Bagtaild, 
bagur , 

A (plnr.  65/u), 
Bahadur, 

Bdhtk , 

Bahire  dino 9 
Bahute, 

Bdldd , 

Bdj, 

Bajdr , 

Bdj  in, 

Bajt, 

Bdj  ut, 

Bakd , 

Bahai, 

Bakhat 

Bdki, 

Bdhrd  (fern.  b&kri), 
Bakrdd, 


B 

papa,  father. 

father  (used  in  the  hills), 
the  small  hornet, 
king. 

(Jem.),  calf. 

(masc.),  calf, 
to  fill. 

to  biud,  tie,  wrap. 

carpenter. 

cloud. 

outside. 

cloudy. 

leopard. 

leopard-cub. 

air. 

arm. 

brave. 

(prep.,  adv.),  besides, 
to  come  out. 
many, 
cramp. 

barren  (a  woman) ^ 
market. 

the  retaining  wall  of  a 
hill-tield. 

fallow’,  barren  (in  agricul- 
ture). 

(prep.)^  except. 

beautiful  (general) . 

bark  of  tree,  etc. 

time. 

prophet. 

goat. 

hair  of  goats. 


Bakrdwd, 

Bakrdwi , 

Bal  (plur.  ball), 

Bdl,  bad , 

Bald, 

Bataan , 

Ban , 

Ban, 

Ba  nd , 

Ban  {fhdrti, 

Ban-gura, 

Banna  biral,  banna  birdli, 
Bdnno, 

Band , 

Ban  sugar, 

Banna, 

Bad, 

Bar , 

Bard, 

Baratfi, 

Bari  si.  bardsd, 

Barat  rdkhno, 

Btirn  and, 

Bdrh , 

Baris , 

Bar  j an  rdkhnl, 

Barndl, 

BartidtO, 

Bdru , bdu, 

Bdi, 

Bdtan, 


herdsman  for  goats, 
herds  wo  man  for  goats, 
creeper. 

hair  of  lmman  body. 

ear-ring  (for  women) 
worn  on  inside  of  ear. 

brah  ma^. 

forest. 

oak. 

dam. 

wild  cat. 

acorn. 

( female ) wild  cat. 
to  mend, 
to  plough, 
wild  hog. 
acorn. 

hair  of  human  body. 

day. 

big. 

axe  (in  Sansogh  Village, 
Deogarh  Khatt). 

outside. 

to  fast. 

to  come  out. 

hedge. 

year. 

to  send  to  Coventry  (used 
only  on  account  of  tho 
enmity  of  a dead  person) . 

form 

yearling^ 

sand. 

(m asc.),  bamboo. 

vessels  of  earthen* ware  or 
baskot-ware. 


J ATJNSABi  -KNGIjISH  VOCABUIiARY. 


115 


JauntarL 

English. 

Juunsarl. 

KiiglUh. 

B&9 T, 

BasnS, 

adze. 

to  abide. 

Bhadotjit 

August  harvest.  This 
includes  cheat,  k a g n f, 
jhagdrd,  and  unirri  gated 
rice. 

Bdt, 

wind,  air.  ’ 

BhSrj , 

hemp. 

Bdt, 

way,  track,  path 

Bhagdwa, 

fish-dam. 

Bata, 

share. 

BhSgivSn , 

fortunate. 

BSp  dekhnl , 

to  await. 

Bhait, 

offering. 

Bath , 

beautiful. 

Bkaitdg , bhetdg , 

committee,  punehayat. 

B%thlnt 

beautiful  (a  woman). 

Bhaltl , 

younger  sister. 

Bati, 

wick. 

Bhajno , 

to  re  tire  from  a case. 

Baa , 

egg. 

Bhandtvaia, 

dam. 

seat, 

to  hatch. 

Bhafik  phirno , 

to  be  a vagrant. 

Batall, 

path. 

j Bkdrd , &/n*rS, 

i 

burden,  foetus. 

Batud , 

purse. 

! Bkdrd  pdriuno , 

l 

to  procure  abortion. 

barn. 

sand. 

1 ^ 

i Bkdrd  parno , 

abort  ion. 

Baurk , 

bull. 

1 

! Bharl , 

many. 

£ 

Baunio , 

to  turn,  to  return. 

j £/«*/, 

cookfl  rice. 

Baurd  (plur.  baufS), 

shoulder. 

i Bhatero, 

sufficient 

Baiva  ldnl. 

to  swim. 

j B hat  i-b  hiiti-kd, 

i 

various. 

Bdwand. 

dwarf.  The  popular 
explanation  is  that  he  is 
only  “fifty-two  99  fingers 
high.  The  word  is 
really  a corruption  of 
the  Sanskrit  vamana . 

i 

i 

1 (plur.  bkaua ), 

, Bhauj , 

! 

Bhd\i~ka&ui, 

brow. 

sister-in-law. 

(a dr.),  somehow. 

Bh\ , 

haft,  handle. 

lihdu-kdkT. 

(udt\),  somewhere. 

Begdr, 

bundle. 

Bhdu-kuai , 

anj . 

BegT  achkd. 

best. 

l ^ 

Bhaurl , 

black  bee. 

Begd, 

unwilling. 

Bhaurnd , 

to  fill. 

Bend , 

musk-pod. 

i Bhnyd , 

vagrant. 

Be  sang. 

i 

certainty.  j 

Bkdya, 

younger  brother. 

Be -ear  am* 

1 

obscene.  j 

BhaU'f, 

authority. 

Bdikurl, 

i 

woman.  j 

Bked, 

mystery. 

Belt  mdnukh, 

| 

woman. 

Bhed  'plur.  bkeija), 

ewe,  sheep  {sing,). 

BfYulid9 

evening. 

Bheddwa , 

herdsman  for  sheep. 

Beya, 

(rt(Zu.),  yesterday. 

Bke<jdwi , 

herds  woman  for  sheep. 

Bhadar  karnU, 

to  shave  the  head. 

Bhetdg,  bkaUdg , 

committee,  punchay a t . 

BJtSfa 

vessols  of  metal. 

Bketuno, 

to  meet. 

416 


JATJNSAkI" ENGLISH  VOCABULARY 


Jauuaarf. 

English. 

J aunsari. 

English. 

Bhituanii, 

k doll  (of  wood  or  rags). 

Bidrl9 

clear  (of  the  sky). 

Bhijiya  %, 

wet,  damp  (of  clothes, 
etc.). 

Bij, 

lightning. 

Bhindt 

elder  sister’s  husband. 

Bij, 

grain  (for  seed). 

Bhtrvo, 

to  wear,  to  put  on  clothes, 

BijSr, 

plant. 

etc. 

Bijnfl, 

lightning. 

Bhtt, 

'wall. 

Bikh9 

poison,  venom. 

Bhitodi  nafnno , 

to  enter. 

Bikno, 

to  vend. 

Bhitori . 

(prop.,  adc.)9  in. 

BlnSsno , 

to  taste. 

Bhiir&io, 

( adr.)9  within. 

Bindhno, 

to  drill  holes. 

Bhol , 

husk  of  barley,  masur , 
mis,  or  Idbiyd. 

Bio9 

broad. 

Bhnka, 

puncture,  leak. 

BirS79  birSlif 

female  cat. 

Bhakturl , 

a small  puncture  or  leak. 

Bisar , 

mistake. 

Jf37i  ord , 

granary  (of  stone). 

Bish, 

poison,  venom. 

Bhubhe , 

strawberry. 

Bist?, 

delay,  late. 

BhublikJno , 

to  roar  like  a bear. 

Brtdh, 

bullock. 

Bhulchil,  bhuiehd, 

earthquake. 

Bird, 

doctor. 

BJtu7-chjlj 

pheasant. 

Ifrlrl, 

enemy  (cf.  bwair). 

Bhturhd, 

earthquake. 

BnhU, 

bark  of  treo,  etc  . 

Bh  njnd f 

to  fry. 

Bolt  denii. 

to  announce. 

Bhukno \ 

to  bark. 

Bfilndj 

to  announce. 

Bhul , 

mistake. 

Ball, 

aunt,  father’s  sister. 

Bhiil-bisurx 

mistake. 

Bn(jhu  par-n£n39 

great-great-grandfather. 

Bhumt, 

earth. 

Bvkii9 

kidney. 

Bunno9 

to  weavo. 

Bh 

husk  of  barley,  chauldf , or 
tiui  tin  it. 

B'irn  (fern  lurt)9 

bad . 

B h t>  / cls'l , 

will -o' -the- wise. 

Bvty 

tree. 

Bid  7, 

dinner. 

?Jy*h 

interest  (on  loans). 

BiSund , 

to  curate. 

By dih i -kd  rtik&9 

torch. 

Tiirhnu  ndd9 

( prcp.9  adv .),  amid. 

Bwair  (pronounced  boir)9 

enmity. 

i 

c 

Ghaain , 

cattle. 

Ch%yd9 

spot. 

GkabSnd, 

to  munch. 

Chakru&9 

tick. 

Oh*4rf  lt 

spoon, ladlo. 

i 

Chdkurd  (fern.  ch&hurl ), 

: 

chakor. 

JATJNSlBi-ENaiilSH  VOCABULARY, 


417 


Jatmsarl. 

English. 

Chal , 

UBL*. 

Chalag , 

quiet. 

Chalkurl , 

bird . 

ChambS} 

marvel. 

<v 

Chaniblu % karno , 

to  be  surprised. 

C Inina, 

broken  kernel. 

Chdnrhak , 

(adi\),  suddenly,  acciden- 
tally. 

Chdnl, 

kernel  of  a peach  or  apri- 
cot. 

ChnniSthd, 

dough  (of  gram). 

Chha pp'ir, 

roof. 

Charakh, 

hyena.  The  animal  is  not 
found  in  Jaunsar-JJawar. 

Cha  ra t,  cha  rhctt, 

corpulent,  fat. 

Cha  >Mnd, 

to  browse. 

Ctnirii  , 

thigh. 

ChJJJ, 

spot. 

ChJt  nd, 

to  lick,  to  kiss. 

Chau, 

rice. 

Cl.*  1 n. 

in>. 

Chav  HI  hd. 

dough  (of  r /until  1 or 
c/an  ((Ft). 

Chauchhj3nd, 

to  twitter. 

Chnukas, 

beware. 

ChaumotsS, 

monsoon. 

Ciiaurt , 

woman’s  large  hat. 

Chuurd, 

broad. 

Chaw  no. 

to  strain. 

Cheld , 

disciple. 

GheLkvfd, 

kid. 

Chgniatha  ktiduwS, 

chapati  (of  chenl ), 

Ch?ni<Mtho, 

dough  (of  client). 

-chh. 

(prep,),  upon. 

Chhacha, 

apricot  chutney. 

Chhddno , 

to  fling,  to  cast  stones. 

Chhdduno, 

to  vomit. 

J aunsuri. 

English. 

CJihaTau  (see  chhed ), 

brink. 

Chhailkd, 

bark,  of  tree,  etc. 

ChhaprT, 

cream. 

ChhSr , 

ashes. 

Chhfis, 

buttermilk. 

Chha  sd. 

hare. 

Ghhatydnds  karno , 

to  destroy  rcot  and 
branch. 

Chliatyanas  bSnnd, 

to  destroy  root  a cl 
branch. 

Chhauli, 

hitch. 

Chhanld,  chant’)  (pi. 
c hh ante  ; fern,  chhauli 3 
pi.  chhautid). 

baby,  child,  boy,  lad. 

» 

Chhauli , 

chin. 

Chhdyal, 

shade,  shadow. 

Chin’d , ched,  c.hhaiau, 
chncwau. 

side,  edge  (of  a field,  rivu 
etc.). 

Ch  h typ". 

black  vulture. 

Chhc ti  rl. 

wife. 

Chhd wait  (sec  chheo). 

border. 

( * Iihhl , 

permission. 

Chhirnd  karni, 

to  pardon,  foigive. 

Chhodl  den (7, 

to  desert. 

Child  t/no3 

to  forsake,  to  abandon. 

Chhdrt, 

goat-  hide. 

Child  rd. 

cowhide,  buffalo-hide. 

Chhordr, 

ash-heap. 

ChhdlJ , 

( masc .),  baby. 

Chick, 

green  walrnit  shell. 

ChTjJtono , 

to  shriek. 

Chilam , 

pipe,  hookah. 

ChiLkhcino, 

to  glisten. 

Chinno, 

to  build. 

Ghinndrl, 

ant. 

Chiphldud, 

to  a moo  the. 

Chip  hid, 

smooth. 

— 3 u 

VOL.  IX,  PAST  IV. 


418 


JAUXSARI-ENGLISH  VOCABULARY, 


Jftunsari. 

English. 

Jaunaari. 

English. 

Chi  mo. 

to  fry,  to  burn.  . 

Chu(f  no, 

to  pinch* 

Chit  ti\ 

white. 

Chwjll  Idnl, 

to  backbite. 

Chdfjirild , 

(prrp.,  adi'.),  around. 

Chuijno , 

to  pick,  to  glean,  to  lift, 
to  carry. 

Chu  par. 

butter. 

ChSh 

bill  (of  a bird). 

Chi • jir7, 

clay. 

Chukh, 

lemon. 

Churns, 

flat,  love). 

i Chal, 

hearth. 

Clio  r no , 

to  conceal,  to  hide. 

1 

1 Chula, 

apricot. 

Chord  no, 

to  abscond. 

i 

j Chur , 

hump. 

Chfltte, 

basket. 

| Cliydh , 

marriage,  wedding. 

Chubdno, 

to  prick. 

Chydu-mydu, 

mushroom. 

] 

0 

I)ab  no, 

to  press,  to  bury. 

Ddnno , 

pomegranate. 

Dad, 

tooth,  teeth. 

Ddrol, 

pomegranate. 

Ddd, 

line  (punishment). 

Ddr  u. 

gunpowder. 

Dadd, 

elder  brother. 

Ddthn, 

jaw. 

Pfide»kl  dchhoi, 

blackberry. 

Datrd, 

(masc.),  sharp. 

Dudl , 

elder  sister. 

Ddtuihl, 

(fern.),  sharp. 

Dadiau, 

harrow. 

Daukl , 

ladle,  spoon. 

Ddd  kvrehno , 

to  gnash. 

D au  ao. 

to  burn. 

Dadd, 

mountain. 

Dantl , 

(cifZv.),  to-morrow. 

Pfi'jrS , 

1 

sharp.  j 

Daw, 

tether. 

Ddi-bhd 7, 

brethren. 

Ddto  Idno , 

to  strangle. 

Dak , 

shale. 

nijs, 

large  walking-stick,  club. 

Daki, 

vomit. 

'■  P?‘jh 

walking-stick. 

Dali, 

bundle  of  lighted  sticks 
of  ehir-wotd. 

1 Dollar, 

hiccough. 

Jidnik  ddnik  hasno , 

to  smile  (in  Western  Par- 
ganas). 

i Pell, 

1 

i 

stone  of  fruit;  apricot, 
peach  or  walnut-shell. 

Dan-pun, 

charity. 

Dalkonr. 

i ■ 

\ 

apricot,  peach  or  nut- 
shell. 

Ddr, 

door. 

i 

i Do  no. 

to  give. 

liar  deno  lal, 

to  shut  (.a  door). 

! dipo. 

god,  deity. 

Ddrim, 

Darkhdst  karnf. 

pomegranate. 

to  request. 

i 

I Deo  dtfkhdund, 

to  consult  a brfihmap  if 
a god  be  angry. 

to  sh.it  (a  door). 


i 


wholo  kernel. 


J AUNS £ RI-EN GLISH  VOCABULARY. 


4.19 


Jaunsarl. 

English. 

J Jinn  sari. 

English. 

Dpun5, 

to  walk. 

Dhyalufl t dhi Sna, 

married  girl  at  her  father’* 
h 01186. 

Dewar , 

husband’s  younger  brother. 

nibs, 

irrigated  field. 

Dhabsir , 

better. 

Didiydnd, 

to  bellow  (of  a buffalo). 

Dhi I deni, 

to  cry. 

Dig  m i t op  Id, 

woollen  cap. 

Dhdgd, 

Dhaiyd, 

thread. 

(adv,),  near. 

Dll , du  rig  us, 

Dilbrl, 

avalanche  (of  stones, 

etc.). 

granary  (of  wood). 

Dhakiydno , 

to  push. 

Pnk(~n’, 

shale ; a grave. 

D/*5  mtfrnC, 

to  call. 

DokL  rO, 

field. 

Dhdn, 

paddy. 

patio, 

to  ignite. 

Dhankhdl , 

bellows. 

Dnpdri , 

lunch. 

Dhdn  sdtnd, 

labour;  d/uiln  sdtud,  indus- 
trious. 

Do-past  riy 

pregnant. 

Dhanu , 

bow  (the  weapon). 

Dord-kd  dhos , 

matchlock. 

Dharkuwa , 

afternoon  (from  1 to  4 
P.M.). 

Do  rot  is,  duretu , 

TJntiyd , dfitiyd 

ear-ring  (for  men). 

(»/ dr.),  to-morrow. 

Dhartf, 

earth.  1 

Dudh  do  no. 

to  sucklo. 

p/idrri. 

male  cat.  j 

Dudh  rhOmo, 

to  wean. 

Dh$ dd. 

circular. 

Dud  hi,  dud/,  u. 

tt  at. 

DM, 

clod. 

Dudhl  do  til. 

to  suckle. 

Dhenmand,  ijheinnand. 

(«»[/.),  ankle. 

| T)  mill  u , 

teat. 

Dhenvuine , fhenmane, 

anklet?. 

Duffy  dud. 

to  roar  like  a bear. 

Dhidnd,  dhydturi. 

married  girl  at  her  father’s 
house. 

Dug Ci  r. 

stone. 

Dhll  karnij 

delay. 

Du  tin. 

other,  another. 

I)hhi  4<ii 

anything  round. 

| Dukhtl , 

ill. 

Dhud, 

smoke. 

! Du  rig  os,  dll. 

avalanche  (of  atones,  etc.)* 

phudh , (jhung, 

precipice. 

Dun’, 

(a  le.),  far. 

Dhudhydt , 

smoke. 

Du  rot »/,  d^rot  u. 

ear-ring  (for  men). 

Dhiing9 

precipice. 

Du  rh 1 rnd. 

to  hate. 

Dhununo , 

to  shiver. 

Durkd'no, 

i 

to  bellow  (of  a cow). 

Dhvp, 

incense. 

Dus, 

sun,  day. 

Dhdr , dhur*4au, 

dust. 

Dus-ko , 

(nrfr-)f  daily- 

DhUrnl  (plnr.  dhumifi ): 

► ague. 

Du  yd  ah 

both. 

E 

Ebt 

(udr.),  now. 

jjjkhfih’, 

alone. 

Ebhi, 

(fltfr.),  now. 

OlllUrdt, 

(adv.)t  to-night. 

S n •> 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


420 


J AUNS  A RI-EN GLISH  VOCABULARY, 


Jaunsarl. 

English. 

J ami  sari. 

English. 

Endu, 

castor  oil  plant. 

fitter, 

(adv.),  thus. 

(adv.),  BO. 

jbthoi  aste , 

(udi>.),  therefore. 

JUtkf, 

(acZv.),  licre. 

Ethu-chh, 

(prep.),  upon  this. 

< 

G 

Gdb-furd  (fern,  -f uri), 

(jttasc.),  lamb. 

Ghdm  tdpnd9 

to  bask. 

Gschf, 

girdle. 

Ghdmo-ki  krin, 

dawn. 

Gad, 

odour. 

Ghar-ke  6dtl, 

unirrigated  x’ice. 

Gai i. 

stream. 

Ghar-kuri, 

goods  and  chattels  and 
house. 

GadgadiyS , 

cohabiting. 

Gharno , 

to  manufacture. 

Gain , 

sky. 

Ghat  and , 

to  shorten. 

Gsj, 

muddy  water  or  stream ; 
echo. 

Ghdtf, 

bell. 

Gajani , 

spate. 

/V 

Ghati  deno. 

to  cover. 

Gtiji, 

mesh. 

Ghatll, 

the  second  size  goat-skin 
(of  the  fonr  kinds). 

Gdjid, 

meshes. 

Ghat  ?io , 

V 

to  shut  up. 

Galaurd, 

cheek. 

pheddni. 

to  complain  to  gods. 

Gan,  gandu, 

mumps. 

G han rat , 

water-mill. 

Gand , 

a man  who  has  mumps. 

Ght’jauti , 

sparrow. 

GdnjcL, 

bald. 

Ghfppd, 

goitre. 

Ar 

Ganno9 

to  count. 

GhPr  (plur.  ghdrt), 

abdomen,  belly,  stomach. 

Garbhin, 

pregnant 

Ghtr-turi, 

stomach. 

Garh , 

fort. 

i 

Ghfsdi,  gheslt,  * 

fencing-stick. 

Garhan , 

eclipse. 

GhJn, 

pity,  mercy. 

Garho, 

tight. 

G hi  nno, 

to  carry. 

Garrano , 

to  growl. 

Ghdl , 

chamois  (Himalayan). 

Garui 5, 

heavy. 

Ghuife  badi-knri  baithno, 

to  kneel. 

Garur9 

brown  vulture. 

J Ghutffi  (plur.  ghuife), 

knee. 

Gdt9  gaut9 

body. 

Ghughutl , 

dove. 

Gawno, 

to  thaw. 

i 

Ghurno, 

to  snore. 

Gayar  (fcm.  gayarln). 

Ju-rdsmar. 

G ichno, 

to  tread. 

Qhulno, 

to  swallow. 

G &(J  9 

ball. 

Gilt, 

damp  (of  earth). 

Ghaghrd,  ghaqhrd. 

petticoat. 

Git, 

ballad. 

Ghdm9 

sun-warmth. 

Glt&rl, 

singer. 

J axjns ArI-bn  gush  vocabtjlabt, 


421 


Jauns&rl.  English. 


Giya, 

gum  (of  the  mouth). 

Qd, 

chameleon. 

Gddno, 

to  melt. 

Gdbar , 

dung  (of  cattle),  manure, 

GdbraS, 

dunghill. 

Gdde-kd  chSgd, 

foot-print. 

Gdde-kd  gUthd , 

toe. 

Gddni, 

small  pickaxe. 

Godno , 

to  weed. 

Gddd, 

foot. 

Get, 

mud. 

Gdrd, 

flint. 

Gdtno, 

to  surround. 

Gudre, 

rags. 

Gugur , 

incense. 

Jaunsarl.  English. 


Quh , 

excrement  (human). 

Guild , guind, 

sweet. 

Oilman, 

conceit. 

Gant, 

ape. 

Gunol, 

faulty,  sinful. 

Gural, 

chamois  ( Himalaya n) 

Gnrdo , 

snake. 

Gurdivatd, 

s weet. 

Gurh 

hip-bono. 

Gurkdno , gurno. 

to  thunder. 

Gut  ha, 

thumb. 

Guthi, 

4 

finger. 

Guthnd , 

to  plait. 

Gtcdhi  deni, 

to  bear  witness. 

H 


Hdchhdl , hisdu. 

raspberry. 

JTdtau-ki  guthi. 

linger. 

Hddno, 

to  move,  to  walk. 

Hat  d tend. 

to  halloo. 

J Id  dud, 

bone. 

Hat  hit,  hathiiali , hatni , 

palm  of  the  hand. 

Hagdd, 

aimful. 

Han,  hal, 

plough. 

Hagdtd  deno , 

to  embrace. 

Hau, 

(adv.),  yos. 

Hat 4 , haifh) 

ghost. 

II an  Idno, 

I 

to  plough. 

Hai-tdbd, 

outcry. 

i 

' Haw,  hdicd, 

sweat. 

Sdjar, 

present. 

Hand, 

wind. 

JJal , hauf 

plough. 

Hehio, 

i 

to  weed. 

Salidrd , 

wave. 

• Sftnd, 

1 ^ 

winter. 

Ildlno, 

to  shake,  to  quake. 

! Jlerno, 

I 

to  search. 

Sarin, 

deer. 

! llil,  hilar , 

mud. 

Sard, 

verdant. 

Hisdu,  hdchhcl, 

raspberry. 

S&rtt  l, 

ballad  (sung  at  the  Dlwali 

i Hirkiyd , 

i 

hydrophobia. 

festival). 

I 

Iltrkud, 

mad  dog. 

Sasno, 

to  laugh. 

' If rkh'd. 

hookah. 

sat. 

shop. 

f Hono, 

\ 

to  be. 

Sa\&nd, 

to  cry,  to  call. 

! Ho  par  dr, 

three  years  ago, 

422 


jaunsAri-english  vocabulary, 


Jatmsarl. 

English. 

J auns&rl. 

English. 

mth, 

lip. 

llurlund , 

to  descend. 

Ha, 

owl. 

Ilya  not. 

avalanche  (of  snow)* 

Hur, 

a ram  with  a flock. 

HyU, 

snow,  ice. 

IK 

i 

mother. 

1 

IniSrd,  inyirS, 

darkness,  dusk. 

Indrd-dhanu, 

i 

rainbow.  1 

- 

j 

Jabhi , 

(adv.)t  when. 

Jar  j anl,  jirjird. 

tough  meat. 

Jdchtl , jaidti. 

enhancement. 

J3rd , 

cold. 

Jadiydrd, 

wizard. 

Jarur , 

necessary. 

Jadiydri 

witch. 

Jiff  id, 

(con;.,  adv.),  as. 

Jadhi-aurf, 

(conj.,  odr.,  prep.),  since. 

Jau , 

barley. 

Jtidrd,  jddrd. 

hand-mill. 

Jau^kd  ktdmod, 

chapati  (of  barley). 

Jddti,  jdchti, 

enhancement. 

JawaT, 

younger  sister’s  husband. 

Jdgd, 

place. 

J3wiy3 , 

fisherman. 

Jagdre  jdno, 

to  wade. 

Jekt, 

(adv.),  where. 

Jdird , 

deaf. 

Jeth , 

husband's  elder  brother. 

Jaj, 

rot. 

JrthS, 

firstling. 

Jdkham, 

cold  in  the  head. 

Jethi  yuthf9 

big  toe. 

Jaldbo-ki  jarl , 

purgative. 

Jetliv , 

wife’s  elder  brother. 

Jdman-gatl, 

surety,  bail. 

Jhgdd, 

flag. 

Jamdno , 

to  yawn. 

J li  agrid t h3  koduwd , 

chapati  (of  jhSgdrd). 

JamSytiya, 

jaws. 

J hag  arid  t ho, 

dough  (of  jhagdrd). 

Jdmnf, 

bail. 

J hag  da  no , 

to.  dispute. 

Jamnd, 

to  grow. 

J hag  no, 

to  beat. 

J3nf 

avalanche  (of  stones,  etc.). 

Jhdl, 

bush. 

/V 

Jdno, 

to  go. 

Jhdld, 

insane,  mad. 

Jar , 

fever. 

J halmaldnd, 

to  twinkle. 

Jaram  (sic), 

birth. 

j Jhat , 

( adv.),  soon. 

Jdri, 

fringe. 

■ Jhateld , 

a posthumous  child. 

Jdri 

adultery. 

Jhilai , jhilff. 

(adv.),  under,  beneath* 

Jfirt, 

drug,  medicine. 

Jlrisd , jhitf, 

(adv.),  early,  morning. 

jaunsarI-english  vocabulary 


423 


Jannsarl. 

English. 

'Tannsari. 

English. 

JhGb, 

wrinklo. 

Jfigrd  (fem. 

mendicant,  beggar. 

JhBl, 

filth,  dirt  (of  tho  body). 

JOgtl, 

bundle  of  lighted  sticks. 

JhStS, 

(masc.),  buffalo.  1 

Jfigluri, 

beggar’s  daughter. 

JhdMj 

weaned  calf. 

which. 

Jhumhu , 

1 

ear-ring  (for  womon) 

worn  on  the  lobe  of  the 
ear. 

: 

Jojhrjdd,  jojliordy 

i 

j Jojholti, 

i 

marriage,  wedding. 

bride. 

Jhun , 

moon. 

Jdlc, 

leech. 

Jhuna-kd  d.4d, 

moonlight. 

Jolihno , 

to  weigh. 

Jhutta , 

liar. 

My 

harrow. 

Jllti  ttJlOf 

untrue. 

j J'  ri 

strength. 

Jibai , 

tree-bridge. 

Jr,  ruby 

to  add. 

Jindd  phul&tG, 

violet. 

Jr.rDy 

wife. 

Jibuti, 

to  wax  (the  moon). 

Judo  karndy 

to  separate. 

J irjird9  jarjaro , 

tough  meat. 

Jif'jS, 

nion  stache. 

Jtu, 

heart. 

Jutly 

girl’s  hat. 

Jogin, 

are  fly. 

Jw*s  karnby 

to  exorcise. 

i 

< 

Kdy 

what  ? 1 

Kdgtl  wd. 

comb. 

Kabila, 

Kachahly 

family. 

deformity. 

Kdly 

(rtdr.),  why  r wherefore? 
(ro /?;/.),  because. 

K acli  liar  I,  kachhdyaly 

armpit. 

Kaitior , kali,  kauaaly 

h JcLiy  the  green  pigeon. 

Kachld,  kachlo  (fem. 

kachll)y 

bad. 

J\djdy  kdjcly 

a tattoo  mark. 

Kachlo  uidnanOy 

to  take  offence. 

Kajl, 

soup. 

Kachlo  siclndy 

nightmare. 

Kdkd, 

uncle,  father's  brother. 

Kbd, 

arrow. 

! 

• 

KdkaUy 

female  bamboo. 

Kdtfdy 

Kadhfy 

1 

hook. 

j 

i 

1 

(giir.),  whun  ? 

Kdkiy 

! 

unut.  father's  brother's 
wife. 

Kadhl  kadhfy 

(adv.)y  now  and  then. 

Kakydlhl  child  m9 

portable  bamboo  pipe. 

KSdly 

natural  dike. 

Kdlhdy 

dumb. 

Katfidicdy 

thorny. 

KdlJy  kain~ry  kaunal , 

kvkla,  the  green  pigeon. 

Kdgaty 

paper. 

■v 

Kalkdn  karnby 

to  annoy. 

ESrjM, 

comb  (for  a man). 

^ Kama  </, 

i 

blanket. 

Kag&ltth 

wrist. 

! Kama  n o. 

to  earn. 

424 


JATTNiABt-ENGLMH  VOCABCXAKT 


JaunaftrL 

English. 

K&mfi,  kdmO,  h&moi, 

V 

large  tiome-made  blanket 
weighing  eight  to 

twenty  seers. 

Eamln, 

base. 

K&md,  k&m8%,  kSmfa 

large  home-made  blanket, 
weighing  eight  to 

twenty  seers. 

Etna, 

a one-eyed  person. 

Etna  bttl, 

whisper. 

Randai, 

archer. 

Ran&k  kanSk  hasno, 

to  smile. 

Ka  nik, 

dough  (of  wheat). 

Kaflj  y&r, 

soup. 

Kansyony 

centipede. 

Kanthtdll , 

ear-ring  (for  women ) 
worn  on  the  edge  of  the 

ear. 

Kaptst 

tinder. 

Kaphan, 

shroud. 

Ear, 

famine. 

Earamphutld , 

misfortune. 

Ear Hr  y 

promise. 

Karar?y 

| 

hard. 

ESrt, 

rent,  hire  (of  land,  house, 
etc.). 

EarlSy 

manure,  dung  (mixed 

with  litter). 

EarjS  g&<fno9 

to  borrow. 

KarutoQ, 

bitter. 

Rtsiy 

pickaxe. 

O , 

(adt\),  how  ? 

Eat, 

gristle. 

Ka  than  da  dSwQ  thdkl9 

jail  (lit.y  being  tied  to  a 
stake  or  *og, — an  old 
punishment). 

Eatih , 

several. 

Eat  no9 

to  cut,  to  bite,  to  kill. 

EatrS , 

(mafic.),  buffalo-calf. 

Katrly 

( fern .),  unweaned  calf, 
buffalo-calf. 

Katth'jy 

( adv .),  together. 

Jauntfit  English. 


Eatthfi  kam§9\ 

to  colloct ; to  gather. 

Eaunal,  kainOr , kth , 

ho kla,  the  greon  pigeon. 

Earned, 

crow. 

Kawiy 

blackberry. 

Kdivi  maft f, 

loam,  mould,  clay. 

Kawd , 

black. 

Kere-kl  iemi, 

banana. 

- kh , 

(l>rep.),  to. 

Khaby 

mouth. 

Khobar  karnl , 

to  cure. 

Kliady 

a grave. 

KhadatnSy 

to  bury. 

Khaduy 

ram. 

KhS'fy 

division  of  a u Khatt.,# 

KhaJ, 

artificial  dike. 

Ehaichno , 

to  drag  ; to  tear. 

KhSj, 

itch ; grain  (for  food). 

Khal, 

skin,  the  largest  size  goat- 
skin of  tho  four  kinds. 

K hair  a, 

goat-skin  bag;  the  third 
size  goat-skin  of  the 
four  kinds. 

Ehaloti , 

tin1  smallest  size  goat-skin 
of  the  four  kinds. 

Khan , 

quarry. 

Khannt , 

hare -lip. 

Khanntr , 

ruin  of  a house  or  village* 

Khanno , 

to  dig. 

KhdnU, 

to  eat. 

Khano  jdgd, 

eatable. 

KhSi  a, 

streamlet. 

Khardflgy 

grasshopper. 

Kharnt , 

cramp. 

Kharti&y 

oak. 

KharaS, 

itch. 

Khtt , 

fit ; It  upve. 

Khay 

crab;  bed. 

JATJNSiBl-ENGLISH  VOCAfitTIA-ttY.  - 


425 


.1  aunsarl. 

English.  **  #' 

Jannsari.  % 

Engl  ink. 

Khdtan , 

ltd,  cover. 

Kddi, 

bribe. 

Khdtar , 

(for)  the  sake  (of). 

Kfiduwd, 

chapati  (of  madud) . 

Khatkar , 

lattice  door  for  a byre. 

Koh, 

nest. 

KhStre, 

rags. 

Kdhni , 

story,  fable. 

Khautdi , 

chimney-hole. 

Koike, 

(udv.), where  ? 

Khe, 

clast,  ashes. 

K*klds, 

pheasant. 

>v 

Khedno , 

to  drive. 

Krilai, 

nest. 

Khej, 

care,  grief,  melancholy. 

Kort , 

leper. 

Kh^jidrd, 

anxious. 

Elmo, 

to  bore  holes. 

Khej  learnt , 

to  mourn. 

Eos , 

honey- comb. 

Khejuno , 

to  mourn. 

//«/•, 

granary  (of  wood). 

Khtirdl, 

tenant. 

Knthrd , 

bag. 

Khiskno, 

to  slip. 

Knthu  waste , 

(<t'h\),  why  ? 

Klrissif, 

pocket. 

Krlyarf 

linsk  of  client,  jhatj'Zrd.  or 

Kir/ no. 

to  spoil,  to  waste. 

K'gdr'i, 

spider. 

Klr'si  fjdtfno* 

Eh  Me  a no. 

King./, 

to  extort. 

to  feed. 

cold  in  the  head. 

Kurhll, 

Kuril  lid, 

filthy. 

hearth-broom,  made  of 
hdbtii’  grass. 

Kh  ulh 

airv. 

Kuidicit, 

pickaxe. 

KLihnrl , khuwfl, 

commit  tee,  pnnehayat. 

Knklidd  (fem.  kukhfi ), 

cock . 

Khurl  (plur.  khurld), 

razor. 

Kukhrd  (fem.  kukhrl ), 

pheasant. 

7v/i  i?  {(•/■;,  kliumrl , 

pnnehayat. 

Kulhrdijahi, 

chicken. 

Khnd , 

chaff,  etc.,  removed  from 

Kukhrl, 

hen ; Eve’s  apple  (in  the 

the  threshing-floor. 

throat) . 

Khiva  d, 

husband. 

Kukri, 

bitch. 

Kichh-nd , 

nothing. 

Kukri, 

maize. 

KtI, 

wedge,  peg  ; pimplo. 

Kuktdlld, 

puppy. 

Klla, 

pimples. 

Kuknr  (fem.  kukri), 

dog. 

Kiliydrd, 

matchlock. 

Kukri  td. 

puppy- 

Kim , 

yeast. 

Kul, 

conduit,  canal. 

Kimmotfi  (plur.  feimmd- 
#«*)> 

flying  ant. 

Krdd , 

dam. 

KinfvrS, 

curly. 

Kund, 

who  ? 

* 

Kirf, 

worm. 

Kunhd, 

family. 

Ki-ta, 

\adv .),  or. 

Ku  not, 

irrigated  fiold. 

K#da4 1, 

dough  (of  madud  X&d®)* 

Kiiphu, 

strawberry. 

3 l 

VOI„  IX,  PART  IT. 


426 


JAUNSAM-ENGLISn  VOCABULARY 


.1  an  n sari. 

'English. 

Jaunsfirl. 

English. 

Kiikhv, 

cuckoo. 

KnHydUd, 

pine -martin. 

Kurdri  (plur.  kurariya ), 

a\T. 

Kit  sty  Si  Idnl, 

to  tickle. 

Kurer , 

fog,  mist. 

Kii.Hydd, 

pine-martin. 

Kvrjano , 

to  VOX. 

KiU , 

interest  (on  loans). 

Kurd, 

lion  so. 

Kvrai , 

somobody. 

K&sanl, 

misfortune. 

Kicfi, 

any. 

Ldbn, 

leaf. 

L 

Lankn, 

large  gourd,  calabash. 

Ladd , 

stutterer. 

ij,/, 

tail . 

Ld.4e-ka.ri  bfilnd, 

to  stutter. 

Lekkd, 

account. 

shame. 

Lekh d-jdkhS  (plur.  - jdkJie ) 

, account. 

Lakrd , 

wood  fuel  and  dressed 

Lcurl, 

cypress. 

Lai  iy  9 no, 

planks. 

to  exclaim,  to  cry,  to 

Lew  no, 

to  bring. 

shriek,  to  shriek  like  a 

Lhas, 

corpse. 

Lanyiir , 

jackal. 

ape. 

LTbnd, 

to  loop  (smear  with  cow- 
dung  and  earth). 

Ldno, 

to  apply. 

Lika  (or  liko)  deni , 

to  abuse. 

Lappa?  mdrnl , 

to  slap. 

Lild , 

blue. 

Lardl, 

battle. 

Lisin , 

ladder  of  wood. 

Ldrhi  t t e. 

children. 

LfitiniyS, 

reaper. 

Ldt, 

foot. 

Ldli, 

iron. 

Lata , 

dumb. 

Lflhpetah , 

dysentery. 

Ldt  r.lihdQnt, 

Ldthd, 

to  kick. 

large  walking-stick. 

L.i, 

Ldr  no. 

blood;  creeper. 

to  search. 

Ldt  hi, 

walking-stick.  ; 

Lath-kadi, 

Ldt  Id  til, 

walking-stick. 

to  kick. 

Liid, 

Luifitl, 

blackguard. 

cord  (in  Bawar). 

Lankly  dr3> 

flame. 

L»*jd«r, 

shrew. 

Lankl, 

gourd,  calabash. 

Lt-ri, 

wrinkle. 

M 

Mich, 

veranda. 

j MachhnySrS, 

mosquito,  gnat. 

Markka  (plur.  viSclihe), 

fish. 

i Muchhu'Sr, 

fisherman. 

Mil <hh  T-hd  k&4S, 

fisli-lio.'!:. 

| Madat  deni. 

to  help. 

JAUNSARI- ENGLISH  VOCABULARY. 


427 


Jftunaarl. 

1 

English. 

i 

.)  au  n sari. 

English. 

Madno, 

i 

lo  rub.  | 

Mernuty 

floor  of  stone. 

Mahishf 

i 

(femJ)y  buffalo.  | 

Merd, 

my,  mine. 

Mahishdwd  (fern,  mahish-  herdsman  for.  cows  and 

Mosel, 

hush,  silence. 

&wi). 

buffaloes. 

Mihnnd, 

mouth. 

Main , 

wax,  beeswax. 

Alilnd, 

to  find. 

Majyvt, 

firm,  strong. 

Minna  t. 

labour. 

MsjhS, 

bed. 

1 Mihiry 

brother-in-law. 

Alfijhands , 

(adi\9  prepay  amid. 

1 

I 

! MW,,-, 

sweet. 

Mdkwd, 

fly  (tjio  insect) . 

! 

1 Mfihul 

temple. 

Mdlak, 

owner. 

1 

1 

.mu  ini. 

the  hole  of  exit  and  en- 

Mdmdf 

uncle,  mother’s  brother. 

I 

trance  of  a hive  in  a 

1 

dwelling  house. 

Mdml, 

aunt,  mother’s  brother's 

1 

wife. 

! Mohr, 

able-bodied.  Cf.  morh. 

Mando  (fern,  mandi ), 

(//ms'\),  bad. 

’•  Mold, 

honey-bee. 

Manjhan , 

girdle. 

Mokl-kd  gon, 

fpiren-bee. 

Mdnno, 

to  accept. 

M(jkt  ~kd  tird, 

beehive  (in  the  house). 

Mdnukhy  ma  nu kht , 

man. 

AfakT-ko  kos, 

honeycomb. 

MSrct, 

pool-,  thin,  feeble. 

Mnly 

cost. 

Marly  mariyd-kd-dukh, 

cholera. 

' MM*  ydtfnd , 

to  buy. 

Mariy&y 

dead. 

M find  a. 

pheasant. 

Mar  nil , 

to  beat,  to  hit. 

M'lrh, 

bold,  hero.  Cf.  Mohr. 

Maro, 

weak. 

M'inl, 

oak. 

ftl&tct, 

friend. 

Mosiyd-kd  held. 

cousin  (mother’s  side). 

Mdthdy 

forehead. 

M*s>i  no. 

to  sprain. 

Mdttiy 

clay,  earth. 

M'-tiiy 

big,  liU. 

Matyanr, 

floor  of  mud. 

AF~{  ■ bdnUOy 

to  fatten. 

ATatiyrd, 

proud. 

Mud, 

bead. 

Mauhy 

honey. 

A I Jlda-kh, 

i 

(prepay  to  the  head. 

MaurnOy 

to  vane  (the  moon). 

| Alutlii-clih, 

(prep,\  upon  the  head. 

Mausdy 

husband  of  mother’s  bister. 

' Al  U (Ido, 

hair  of  the  human  head. 

3 lausf, 

aunt,  mother’s  sister. 

i ^ 

j Mud  i yard  % 

i 

top. 

Alans Oy  mau880y 

meat,  flesh. 

j Mud  luno. 

to  shave. 

MStfid, 

frog,  toad. 

| Alud  710 ro. 

(m/e.),  near  the  head. 

MSgn^y 

dung  (of  goats). 

j Mnd-t:i, 

(prep.),  under  the  head. 

Mely 

peace,  advice. 

j Mnen, 

wax.  beeswax. 

Mel  d$nly 

to  advise. 

| Mugarfy 

mallet. 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


3 l 2 


426 


JAUN8A.B.1- ENGLISH  VOCABULARY. 


J fill  r.  sari. 

English. 

J aunsari. 

English. 

Muji, 

miser. 

MUnikd  -thaidkS, 

best. 

/V 

Mvkarono , 

to  deny. 

Murid , 

ear-ring  (for  men). 

Mulch, 

me. 

Mushd, 

rat. 

Mukrdno , 

to  refuse. 

Mushri , 

club. 

JlfsAdo, 

sufficient. 

Mulkiyd, 

competent. 

Mu(h, 

fist. 

JL [unikd, 

(adi?.),  quite,  entirely. 

Mutod  huwd, 

dead. 

N 


(adr.),  no. 

Nachd&niya  glt9 
nachauniya  git. 

ballad  (song  with  dance). 

yKdno, 

to  roar  like  a tiger  or 
leopard. 

Xadrd  (fem.  nSdri), 

little,  baby. 

yaga. 

bare. 

yshu9 

(odr.),  nay. 

yd*, 

navel. 

ydi. 

corn,  grain. 

ysias. 

complaint. 

ys-mardi, 

coward. 

ydnd , 

grandfather. 

AM*, 

ruin. 

AM*  bdnno , 

to  destroy. 

Ndsl, 

the  part  of  a share  in 
which  an  iron  plough- 
share is  fixed. 

Nds  karno. 

to  destroy. 

ysts , 

relation. 

yathnO, 

to  depart. 

A dtiyd, 

grandson. 

yabiitd  (fem.  ndtfZfe), 

grandson,  grandchild. 

yaud  (fem.  nauF), 

new. 

yang, 

nail  (of  the  body). 

\auno9 

to  bond. 

Nausud, 

a worn-down  share  ; it  is 
used  for  ploughing 
ground  before  seed  is 
planted. 

Ndw , 

name. 

Ndwd, 

brook,  ravine. 

Neno , 

to  bear  off. 

Nerd, 

(adr.),  about,  near,  by 
beside. 

li had  no, 

to  bathe. 

Niara,  nidrd , 

green  grass. 

Kick, 

base. 

Niddn , 

fool. 

NTyabl, 

low. 

Nigurd, 

misfortune,  cruel. 

Nik  lino. 

to  olimb. 

NinuU , fufiffwo, 

ringal-bamboo  ( Arundin 
aria  faloata ). 

Nindjiyd  rfihno, 

to  fast. 

Nlr , 

clear  (water). 

Nisdbl, 

just. 

Nirdtt, 

hopeless. 

Nd , 

new. 

Nflnkf, 

girl. 

Nvn , 

salt. 

Nydd, 

justice. 

Nyuid  dSno , • 

to  invite. 

JATIN8.A.BI- ENGLISH  VOCABTJLABY. 


429 


Jauna&rl. 

English. 

Jaunsari. 

* 

EngU«h. 

Obdiat, 

< 

drought. 

:> 

OkhS, 

difficult. 

Ochh&fl,  ochhiiri , 

(adv.,  prep.),  oyer,  above. 

Qhhap , Qkhtir, 

walnut. 

04»r, 

cave. 

Okhatt, 

medicine. 

Ohi, 

alas. 

Okhd, 

difficult. 

Oj, 

dew. 

Olno, 

to  knead. 

OJart, 

bowel. 

Os, 

dew. 

01(3, 

other,  another. 

Oik *, 

basket. 

Ok&rS  haianS, 

to  call  back. 

Ola, 

dough  (of  barley). 

1 

p 

PachhUf, 

cataract,  waterfall. 

Pdja, 

cherry-tree. 

PachhMsu , 

rear. 

Pajihdr , 

boughs  for  fodder,  etc. 

Pachht9  pdchhT, 

(adv.),  backward,  behind. 

Pika, 

mature. 

/V 

Pachhi&no 

to  return. 

Paled  no, 

to  cook. 

Pachht  dSno , 

to  give  back. 

Paharno, 

to  catch. 

Pdchhi  nathno , 

to  go  back. 

Pahawano, 

to  bake. 

Pachhll 1, 

last. 

PSkh, 

wink,  fin,  feather. 

Pachhle  bil&i  nathno, 

to  go  behind. 

Pdkwi I, 

persevering. 

/V 

Pachno , 

to  digest. 

Pdftnd, 

guest. 

PachrdrS, 

sharp. 

IV 

Pantli  rfflihno , 

to  trust. 

Padind, 

mint  (the  plant). 

P3pl, 

cruel  leper. 

PSdOwt, 

(adv.,  prep.),  over. 

Par3r, 

(adv.),  year  before  last, 

P3drS, 

right,  straight. 

■v 

Parehhno , 

to  examine,  to  prove. 

TdgSi, 

cord,  rope. 

Parle  billd , 

(adv.,  prep,),  beyond. 

Paharno,  to  wear,  to  put  on  clothes, 

etc. 

PahUchano,  to  approach. 

PcudJi,  Wrth. 

Patj,  fatigae. 

Pain3,  painS  (fem.  painl),  sharp. 

PainSno,  paiy&no,  to  sharpen. 

Pain  karnS,  to  sharpen. 

Par-ndnd, 

Pdrno, 

Parthai , parthe, 

Pasaurt I, 

Pdsiyd , 

Pasiya  lanl, 

| Pasti, 

great-grandfather. 

to  nourish. 

(adv.,  prep.),  beneath. 

rib. 

snare. 

to  snare. 

animal,  beast,  brut?* 

Pair, 

• 

ladder  of  stone  steps. 

; Patanyd, 

I 

spark. 

430 


jattnsArI-english  vocabulary. 


J nunsari. 

English, 

J auus art 

English. 

Tatar, 

— — j 

harlot. 

Phdynd, 

heel  of  the  foot. 

Paf*r, 

slate. 

Pheddno, 

to  cast  stones. 

Patero, 

squint-eyed. 

Plieifv, 

fig-troe. 

Pater hBnOf 

to  squint. 

Phed  tided  ddnd, 

% 

path. 

i 

(female)  kid.  , 

Flier, 

(ado.),  again. 

Fat  ha, 

! 

The  part  of  a sharo  in 

Phtm , 

opium. 

which  tlio  iron  plough- 

sharo  is  fixed.  j 

1 

Phirno , 

to  turn. 

Palidno, 

to  believe. 

i 

Pliuch,  pliuch  un , 

tail. 

Patidnd, 

certain.  | 

Phuchhnaili  tdrd , 

comet. 

ratra. 

lean.  | 

| 

Phurhun , pliuch , 

tail. 

Patta, 

lease.  ! 

P huh  no. 

to  ignite. 

Pdtthar, 

stone.  | 

Ph  tlhydrd , 

blow. 

Patyaur , 

floor  of  planks. 

Fh'.L 

flower,  blossom. 

Pau  piddd, 

(adv.),  afoot. 

Ph>d  biydnf , 

clear  moonlight  without  a 

cloud. 

Paur, 

ladder  of  stono  stops. 

! Fh.'d  chair  d, 

fox. 

Pdwd, 

frost,  hoarfrost. 

i 

Phrdru , 

floweret. 

Pdyatd , 

bride’s  dower. 

Phulutn,  pludoto , 

blossom,  floweret. 

Pay  u no,  pain&no, 

tu  sharpen. 

1 

P/i'7  p/ue, 

husband  of  father’s  sister. 

Pffchno , 

to  crush. 

aunt,  father’s  sister. 

Ph’.phi, 

PSd  (plur.  pffdi), 

belly. 

■ Phii  phi  y T-hl  be  til. 

cousin  (father’s  side). 

Peo, 

yellow. 

Ph 

filthy. 

Pet*bhdri, 

pregnant. 

i 

! Ph/.:. 

dongh  (of  wheat). 

Pgturi, 

stomach. 

! Pirhhnrnnu, 

to  winnow. 

Phgchi , 

bundle. 

F 

cage. 

Phnte, 

the  pi  ejecting  stone  steps 

1 

in  the  wall  of  a terraced 
field. 

PitifJ, 

body. 

Phaka  no, 

to  dispute. 

Find, 

Phdphrd , 

husk  of  yihu  or  wheat. 

Fir, 

pain. 

Phareb , 

deceit. 

rv-7, 

flea. 

P harts, 

halo. 

llfh, 

back. 

Phurkfi, 

hoard. 

Pit  hi  plrhl. 

(adr.),  behind  one’s  back. 

Fhasal, 

crop. 

Pit  In  si  t 

bath. 

Phdwd , 

iron  ploughshare. 

Prir/i  rn, 

hollow. 

Phdwi  dent, 

to  spring,  to  jump. 

Podh, 

plant. 

PhdyJd, 

profit. 

.1 

Pnjuwt  (plur.  -100), 

cherry. 

JAUNSArI-EXGLISH  vocabulary 


431 


Janngfirl. 

English. 

Jaunsarl. 

English, 

Pdkhy 

ferment. 

Poyaitt 

dal 

Ptiknat, 

fat,  corpulent. 

Ptiyal-kd, 

first. 

PSr, 

(ttrfv.),  last  year. 

P&dv, 

(prep.),  in. 

PSrf, 

shin. 

Pvjno, 

to  worship,  to  adoro. 

Pflro, 

(acZv.),  day  bofore  yesterday, 

Pvnno , 

to  winnow. 

Pfithf, 

day  after  to-morrow. 

book. 

P?7r, 

bridge. 

PSti, 

stomach. 

Purdy 

full. 

Pcitnthd  (plur.  -the), 

butterfly. 

Purdty 

priest. 

Bfiifu a. 

widower. 

R 

Rtt, 

weather. 

Bayariytidd , ratfir , 

backbone. 

Ritdy  (fem. 

empty,  vacant. 

Ra/i  khusl. 

welfare. 

It  dh.no, 

to  abide. 

nSk.i, 

torch. 

Br  i~kdt 

(a Jr.),  daily. 

Rdkhno , 

to  have,  to  keep  . 

JW:rf, 

cash. 

Rarchnu , 

to  slip. 

Bitty 

tinder. 

RdtiB,  rattiyB , 

JldtiyaT, 

JiSdn, 

RJkhn-kl  niml , rfkh-nind t 

liikhtailfiy 

Bin, 

Ills,  rli  ray , 

morning,  dawn. 

(udr.),  early. 

piece. 

, hibernation  (lit.,  bear  s 

sleep  ”)• 

bear- cub. 

debt. 

jealousy . 

Rujiyai, 

Rtijndy 

7£><  ho, 

7?  //r, 

Jx~irhj  i-ki  sdkh, 

. . i 

ui-rnoy 

wet, 

to  soak. 

to  weep. 

sun -warmth. 

rabV  harvest. 

to  fall. 

Sahiaai , 

all. 

s 

Sii'jiirly 

narrow  lane. 

Sad, 

beggar. 

Sayan  blf9 

narrow  track. 

£aJ, 

sound ; echo. 

Sayardy 

narrow. 

Sa  da, 

(a Jr.),  continually. 

Slyly 

woman’s  large  hat. 

Sadtif, 

(«rfv.),  aluoyn. 

Say  fin. 

omen. 

Say, 

doubt. 

Sagydrdy 

snake. 

Sayd , 

Sagar, 

windpipe. 

dirt  (in  a house,  otc.). 

Sahy 

Sdhfadr, 

bough. 

small  bough. 

432 


JATJNSAKl-ENGIilSH  VOCABULARY, 


Jauntftrl. 

English. 

J AUQ0&r!. 

English. 

Saitnd, 

to  cherish. 

Sat a, 

hare. 

Sajail , 

peaoo. 

Satiydnd, 

to  gasp. 

Sajhf , 

partner. 

f'V 

Sds  mar  no. 

to  sigh. 

Said, 

fresh. 

Sasno , 

to  pant. 

Sikh, 

honey -comb. 

Sastd, 

cheap. 

Salih, 

harvest. 

Sastdnd, 

to  rest. 

Saiihi, 

evidence. 

SlSU, 

mother-in-law. 

Sdkh  purnl. 

to  give  evidence,  to  bear 

Sdthl, 

friend. 

witness.  i 

i 

Sdtl, 

paddy. 

Sahra, 

small  stone,  flint.  1 

Said , tours, 

A 

► Sdtl, 

small  bough. 

locust. 

Satkuwd, 

grasshopper. 

Sal\ 

wife's  younger  brother. 

Sdto-paltB, 

barter. 

SamSi, 

yoke. 

den. 

Sdtri, 

SambhSlnd, 

to  bear. 

S,}t  fid. 

see  dial  a. 

SammS, 

season. 

Sau, 

oath. 

Sau. 

sign. 

Sa  u. 

a grave. 

Sandukrl, 

small  box. 

Sank, 

desire. 

Sanyad, 

chain. 

Sau  karnt, 

to  swear. 

Sangal , 

chain. 

Styal, 

porcupine. 

Sangdrno , 

to  dispose  ( e.g . of  a dead 

body). 

Sayaiid, 

level. 

Sdn  mlrni, 

to  wink. 

Sedho, 

chimney -hole. 

Sapath , 

i-ath. 

Stj, 

after-birth. 

Sarah, 

ro:ul . 

Sr  hi  a,  tfjkhtd, 

nut,  dry  walnut-shell,  egg 

_ 

shell. 

Sard  no. 

to  corrupt. 

Semi, 

seed -pod. 

Sarah), 

shame. 

fiardi. 

1 

Sf  mi  find. 

to  wither. 

autumn. 

Sardiyl-kl  fakh. 

\ Serd, 

cool,  cold. 

kliarjf  harvest. 

i 

Sfsurd, 

father-in-law. 

Sarin  t,  tarty  at,  tarlata , 

contract  bargain. 

i 9 

Sariyai , iafiyi. 

SV;  M, 

white. 

putrid. 

Si,  stun , 

furrow. 

S fir  no, 

to  endure. 

Sia  7i, 

border. 

Sarto,  (plur.  tartuS), 

bug. 

Si  dr, 

crack  (in  wood). 

Sari 7, 

hail 

Si  hud, 

to  sew. 

SarOfj  ghds, 

hay  left  on  the  ground  for 

use  in  winter. 

Sldhn, 

right,  straight. 

Sds, 

breath. 

Sih, 

tiger. 

JATJNSAIU- ENGLISH  VOCABULARY 


433 


Jau  atari. 

Kn^lith. 

Jauntart. 

Slhan* 

tigress. 

Sml, 

Sikh  a 

to  teacli. 

Suai  n , 

Siki  ka  ri. 

crawling. 

Suyand , 

Sil,  s,nd’ 

moist. 

Sfitjand  ka  mi. 

Sim*?, 

scemul  (cotton -tree). 

Siiyar,  strrujn  r, 

8>ny. 

born. 

$ti 

m y 

tfinijhno. 

to  smell. 

N ft  if  t a it  o. 

f 

St  no,  siU  site, 

moist. 

Suylhjl", 

Sir,  sir. 

sinew,  nerve. 

S " kh'U, 

Sir  7, 

sy  rup. 

Sukhr. 

Sir  nn, 

pillow'. 

S h k h An  ri, 

S;rL  Fr, 

Cl’  vernnirnt. 

S •*  kh  ia  f,  * r*  kh  %y  •• , 

Sirkiri  $t%  i/'iX, 

tenant,  paying  rent  to 
( iovernineut. 

SllUn, 

S J.-torii, 

Sts  , 

lead  (the  metal). 

S /,  - [ il  t‘  i . 

Sit>  F no. 

1 1 » Ci  ok. 

S >_•  A* / v ;7f  $ *7 /t  hia  i. 

wax,  bees  wav. 

S A [/has. 

,vt. 

Siu  :t.  si, 

furrow. 

S)>  it  itt  s v;/o  r. 

< 

lie,  >be. 

■ S/./tuH, 

S 'i  Tn  7. 

♦hit. 

j 

i 

>’?/  /i*:. 

S'  - o'. 

ipie.-t  ion. 

S » j*  t tr 

N -,>o\ 

to  brush. 

s-i'.i. 

leisure. 

Svrn  >/  >, 

to  consider. 

S’~/r, 

he. 

S OsL'ijti  run -J, 

S ft  1 , 

S \‘i  K 

she. 

S \i  • , 

that  very,  the  same. 

Si)  ih . 

Sop  no. 

to  deliver. 

S w A //  o, 

Sorro, 

to  scratch. 

Stcino, 

Sti  7, 

club. 

Sirin*  drkh.no, 

S*wl,  ,<fa2tZ, 

locust. 

Syiil,  syr'-,  *1 1 •*' 

T 

Talhf, 

(,,t Jr.),  then,  however. 

TCibr; 

Tabhi  tau , 

therefore. 

Titiknii, 

£*» 

* 

VOL.  IX,  paut  IV. 


Eii'jlialt. 

parrot. 

broom. 

oath, 
to  swear, 
hog,  . 
sucking  pig. 
to  search, 
sucking  pig. 

(iidc.),  easily, 
ca^e. 

0 easily, 
arid,  dry. 

\v  li  it*-. 

evening  star, 
evening  Mir. 

dry. 
ha  \ . 

pig.  h,#-« 
t « » listen, 
gold. 

so i petit  (ophiuphagim  and 
i ubr:»  class). 

winr.ow  ing-siev.'. 
spirituous  liquor, 
to  whistle. 

interest  (on  loans);  eric ■- 
(in  stone,  etc.). 

drv  ginger, 
to  sleep, 
d ream  • 
to  dream. 

jackal- 


copper, 
to  catch. 

jU 

O K 


434 


JAUNSARI-KNGLISH  VOCABULARY 


Jaunaari.  English. 


Tdkhrf, 

balance. 

Tdl, 

pond. 

Tdl, 

bell,  such  :is  is  listened  to 
tlu‘  neck'  of  a c»>w,  etc. 

Tn  mb  id. 

bntli ; hornet. 

Tamdkhu}  taindkii , 

tobacco. 

Ta  mdkii  klinn o , 

to  smoke. 

Taondku  Jut  no. 

to  smoke. 

Tandkie  <jit , 

ballad  (sung  in  chorus). 

Tanya, 

spark. 

Tdo-kh, 

thee. 

I (Tv, 

fever. 

Tara, 

star. 

Tarkhan, 

var]  entcj . 

Tar  taro, 

tougli  leather. 

Tar  tear, 

sword. 

Tasf, 

( ade.)s  at  that  very  time. 

Tiiln, 

warm,  lmt. 

Tati r. 

neck,  throat. 

Tnuhi , 

(adr.),  alter. 

Tauy, 

veranda. 

Tauriya-ki  rdti, 

chapV/i  (of  wheat,  fried 
in  oil). 

Tvhdr, 

holiday. 

Tehdr, 

fetid. 

Teki, 

(ad there. 

Teidd, 

('/dr.),  he) ond. 

TaSn-kh, 

him. 

TcS-kdf 

Ids. 

Tdte, 

maize. 

Tetki  at  ho. 

dough  (of  Indian  corn). 

Tdthu-chh, 

(cdc.),  upon  that. 

TS tkydlha  kn duwd , 

chap&n  (of  maize). 

Thdbno , 

to  conceive,  to  catch,  to 
hold. 

7 harf?, 

inigai^d  field. 

J Aim  sari.  English. 


Thdle, 

(adv.),  beneath. 

Than  da , 

cool. 

Thapdd, 

mortgage. 

Thar  no , 

to  wait. 

jVr 

Thdrn  hand, 

to  stand. 

T ha  thno, 

to  decide. 

That  ta. 

jest,  banter. 

That  the  (plnr.), 

banter. 

Thaufd,  Ihdurd , 

arrow  with  a barbed  point.. 

Thdknd , 

to  prohibit. 

V 

Thrsiydno , 

to  stumble. 

Thfis  khdijf , 

to  stumble. 

Tht~g  Idyni, 

to  trip. 

Thu  (phir.  thdaT), 

buttock. 

T h>  >r<~, 

short. 

Thr-n,  karnd9 

to  abate. 

Thuru  t } in rn. 

wconoimrally. 

Thnth , 

snout. 

Thuknd , 

to  spit. 

T ha  Id , fhuhl. 

fat,  corpulent. 

Thftni  (plur.  thdniya ), 

nostril. 

7 id-kd, 

her. 

7 ibii. 

hill. 

Ttkhd, 

(adr.),  soon,  early. 

Tikhord , 

(adr.),  early. 

Ttkhd  {ikhd, 

(adr.),  quickly. 

Tikrdnl , 

moon. 

Til-ifik  karni, 

to  repair. 

Tindn , 

wet,  damp  (of  clothes,  etc.). 

TipU, 

drop. 

Tird, 

hive  (in  a dwelling  house). 

Tvrrhhd , 

sloping. 

Tis, 

thirst 

TUa, 

thirsty. 

t 


JATJNSARl-ENGLISH 


.faun  sarn 

English. 

Tim, 

plover.  j 

i 

Tftra , 

i 

(masc.),  partridge;.  j 

Titrl, 

(fern.),  partridge. 

Tlu-kh, 

their. 

TlySr, 

persevering. 

Tni, 

(a dr.),  under,  below,  be-  j 
neath.  i 

rap, 

i 

the  part,  of  a pipe  which  j 
holds  the  fii'e  and  tobacco.  | 

Ttpl, 

cotton  cap. 

Ttpri, 

basket. 

u 

UbitXno, 

to  boil. 

Ubhau, 

( adr .),  above. 

Vbhi, 

(<»</)•.),  (Jem.),  up. 

TJbhn, 

(ndc.),  up. 

Ufa!  niithnU, 

to  elope  with. 

&da  ro-p  u faro ; 

( adr. ),  about,  near. 

U(fau  huriyd, 

runaway  couple. 

JJdxtwa  nen  t, 

to  abduct  (/cm*.,  as  the  verb 
lefers  to  abducting  a 
woman). 

U day  alt. 

basket. 

Udno, 

to  fly. 

Udo,  undo, 

(adr.),  boneath. 

Uydro, 

airy. 

Uijarno, 

to  open  (a  door). 

TJqld , 

(adr.).  ftljovc. 

V(jlo9 

high. 

TJjuno , 

to  wake,  to  arise. 

Ujytiod, 

light,  brightness. 

TJkdl , 

ascent. 

Wah  terS , 

alas. 

▼01.  IX,  PA%T  IV. 


VOCABULARY. 

435 

.JatmAan. 

English. 

Tnrn, 

blow  match  for  match!' -ck. 

Tnrno , 

to  break. 

Tubitu, 

to  tuaze  wool. 

Tuyif  ri,  f u It  a n , 

rope -bridge. 

Tit  hi  an. 

to  roar  like  a juckal. 

Tukriv, 

to  bite. 

To  j)hdn , 

calumny. 

Tvrnr-turr , 

trickle. 

Tvs, 

husk,  husk  of  rice,  rh'~nt , 
jhd'jnpi  or  haunt. 

1 hh al  Lt~d  karu-i. 

to  exorciso. 

T'k/onu, 

to  sole. 

VkhrJ  dhdn, 

unirrigated  rice. 

Unit  7. 

chief. 

Unit", 

nice. 

Unit  siii j. 

large  needle  for  sewing 
home-made  woollen 

cloth. 

U lit  Id,  udn. 

(adr.),  down. 

Uparl't  pur,  iii'li  ‘ pur . 

loft. 

Ur  n"  h*~niu. 

to  frown. 

Usd -"'jo, 

to  swell. 

Vsnd, 

descent. 

TJst>  llO, 

\ 

t o leap,  to  spring. 

Utrdr  (pi  ur.  ntriiyti). 

ear-ring  (for  women)  worn 
on  the  edge  of  the  ear. 

Utu.ir  hand, 

to  hasten. 

Ut r.  /id. 

to  descend. 

W 

T Yaj,  sonnil . 

" S i:.g 


436 


ENGLISH-JAUNSART  vocabulary. 


English. 

.faunsnri. 

English. 

J aunsurl. 

i 

A 

Abandon  0*6.), 

rhhoduOm 

Afternoon  (1  to  4 r.M.), 

dharkiiioa. 

Abate  (rh.). 

•*V 

t hr  n>  lea  mo. 

Again, 

phdr. 

Abduct  (r b.)t 

tidtJiC*  n*nf  (fern.,  as  the 
verb  refers  to  abducting 

Ague, 

tlhurni  or  (pi.)  dhurnid • 

a woman). 

Air, 

died,  lidivu , bdf,  bay  nr. 

Abdomen, 

•jlf~r. 

Airy, 

kfiulii,  uydrfi. 

Abide  , 

r ' h no,  hanno . 

A la  s. 

r hi,  leak  tdrd. 

Able-bodied, 

)/i“hr. 

All, 

s a hid  a i. 

Abortion, 

bkdrd  par  no.  To  procure 

A lone, 

HI)  hid. 

abortion,  hhdrd  para  a no. 

About, 

nerd*  (near),  udard-pudaro. 

Always, 

amldl. 

Above, 

ngldy  nbhait,  «’» clihnri . 

Amid, 

birfmn  n mdjka n d<~>. 

Absccfes, 

•lb n r. 

Animal, 

pa<u. 

Abscond  (vb.)f 

rllnr  >t  u d. 

Ankle, 

dhd%imand,  dhdnmand  (pi. 

•ad). 

Absent, 

dt hi  tin  f lid . 

Announce  (r /;.), 

hr, hid.  bdli  dd rid. 

Abuse  (i />.), 

hied  dd/ify  1 1 k’t  ih'H/  (sic.). 

Annoy  (*:/».), 

kalkdn  knrnd. 

Accept  ( rb .), 

man  nd. 

Another, 

dkd,  duijn. 

Accidentally, 

rlldfirhak. 

Ant, 

rh  nmStri ; flying  ant. 

Account, 

l*~khT , h'klid-jn  v d,  pi. 

kh  a modi  (pi,  •did.) 

/ A hi"  - )•  >kh dm 

Acorn, 

b a n u d}  b a n - •jura . 

Anvil, 

air  an,  a run. 

Add  (r&.). 

Anxious, 

khtjidrd. 

jd-rnd. 

Adore  {vb.), 

Any, 

k/vdf  bhdri-kuai. 

pij/no. 

Ad  ultery. 

jdrl. 

Ape. 

1 any  nr,  yiinl. 

Advance, 

1 

<i‘jdn. 

Apply  OM. 

land. 

Advance  (vb.), 

ay. iu  ild rid  (to  give  an 

Appn  «icli, 

pa  hue  ha  no. 

advance)  : dye  nalhnd 
(to  go  ahead). 

i 

Apricot, 

nhiilti. 

Advice, 

nidi . 

Archer, 

kan</di. 

•Advise  (tb.), 

nidi  ddn  i. 

Are, 

a so. 

Adze, 

has*. 

Arid,  dry, 

sUkkiai. 

Afoot.. 

y.au  piddd. 

Arise  (vbm)9 

. ^ 
f tjunOm 

After. 

laubf. 

Arm, 

bah  (pj.  baht). 

After -birth, 

fid]. 

Armful, 

hajdd. 

englisii-jauxsabI  vocabulary. 


437 


English.  .laiinsiin.  English.  Janns;iri. 


Armpit, 

karhhdyal,  ka chhnrl. 

Around, 

rhnif  i rdu. 

Arrow, 

kthf  : with  a barbed  iron 
point,  thanrd , thdnrd. 

As, 

jaso. 

Ascent, 

ukdi. 

Ashes, 

chhdr , kite. 

Ash-heap, 

i:/thnfor. 

At  that  very  time, 

tail. 

Baby, 

(mnsc.)  cltlmuin  (pi.  •(>■)  ; 

(fern.)  rhlumtl  (pi. 

-(/«)  ; (mane.)  chhnti  . 
(muse.)  ntidrd  ffein. 
-•In).  In  Snnsogh, 

chlmntd  (pi.  -(c). 

Back, 

pith  : behind  one’s  buck, 
pi  (hi  pdclth  ; to  go 
buck,  ptichhi  nut  lino  ; 
to  go  behind,  pachhb~ 
hi  hi'/  nut  had:  to  give 
back,  pnchlii  dr  no. 

Backbite  (vb.)9 

cutt'ih  hi  af 

Backbone, 

twjai  njtujd,  rnyir. 

Backward, 

pii'  hkh  p>n'li hi. 

Bad, 

lawn,  tutiii>tl>>9  ktichh , 

kwhld : (fcin.)  ban, 

ithindi , kaehli. 

Bag, 

k'thrd. 

Bail, 

idaHhl-'ptii,  /dm  id. 

Bake  (cb.)9 

pnkdico  no. 

Balance, 

tdkhrl. 

Bald, 

gdnjd. 

Ball, 

<jFj ; anything  round, 

dhi  ndd. 

Ballad, 

tjit  : (sung  at  the  Diwali 
festival)  hdnil ; (sung  in 

chorus)  iantfkie  \jit  : 
(song  with  dance) 
iiar/i  a u n vja  <J  It : a a rh  - 
dM niyti  [fit- 

Bamboo,  hfi*9  (female)  kdktiu. 

kere-ki  seniT, 


Aunt,  Father’s  sister,  ph'uph ?, 

• - 1 - .1.  » ■ i 


hold  ; Mother’s  sister, 
mau&i  ; Father’s 

brother’s  wife,  kdkl ; 
Mother’s  brother's  wife, 
•n.dnti. 

Authority, 

hhdivi. 

Autumn, 

sanil. 

Avalanche, 

(snow)  hijan.nl;  (stones, 
etc..)  jdn,  dil9  fJniujn'i, 

Await  (vh.)9 

hat  drkhni. 

Axe, 

hi  ran  (pi.  -r'njn) . In 
Sansagh  village,  Deo- 
garh  Khatt,  it  is  ('ailed 

baradi. 

B 


Banter, 

thdtf  hd,  that  t hr. 

Bare, 

n dtjd . 

Bargain, 

iiinjat,  sar/uffl. 

Bark  (eb.\ 

hh  n Into. 

Bark  of  tree,  etc., 

hahnh  b"kr»t.  chhnifkd. 

Bariev , 

hi  a. 

Barren, 

hd‘,  (of  a woman);  l>r  jo 
(in  agriculture ). 

Barter, 

•td hr-lnidl i,  sdt‘-pul (•  . 

Base. 

fount  a,  nich. 

Bask  ('■/..), 

•j  it  i-ii  Id  pad. 

Basket, 

nddyall,  rtki.  h’pri,  chrtki. 

Bat, 

d'i^rt1,  tjiltido. 

Bath, 

•inn bid,  pit  l~>s7. 

Bathe  (rb.)9 

, y 

no  a <no. 

Battle, 

hi  rd'. 

Be  (ch). 

I,-  tin. 

Bear  (cb.), 

< imhhdl nd : to  luar  oil, 
nT no  : to  bra " in  mi  ml, 
d.l  rdkhnb  ; to  boar  wit- 
ness, i/irdhf  dr ni , fik/i 
p •mi. 

Beast, 

p,i>tt. 

Beat  (uh.). 

- • > <y  - 

.nmw.  inn[jnu. 

Ufuutit’nl,  /'< 't!1*  (gfucra!)  : bill  bln  (of 

ii  woman)  ; l>dk*7  (gene- 
ral). 


Han&na, 


438 


KNGLIsn-JAUNSAItl  VOCABULARY 


English. 

Jannsari. 

Because, 

i 

kS  l. 

Bed, 

mdjhd,  khdt. 

Bee  (honey-), 

moki ; Black  lx*e,  bluiurt . 

Beehive  (in  the  house), 

moki-kd  tlrd . 

Beeswax, 

main , mufti,  sltlm;  honey- 
comb, kos,  sdk/i. 

Before, 

agas<),  dgd  so. 

Beggar, 

jilt’d  (fem.  j^grt),  sdd ; 
Beggar’s  daughter, 

jJgturl. 

Behind, 

pdrfihi. 

i 

Believe  (vb.), 

. i 

pat  id  ho . j 

Bell, 

ghdti,  tdl  (such  as  is 
fastened  to  the  neck  of 
a cow,  etc.). 

Bellow  (vb.), 

(jtirkduno  ^(of  a cow)  ; 
didiydnd  (of  a buffalo). 

Bellows, 

dhankhdl . 

Belly, 

ghfr  (pi.  ghfrJ),  p$d  (pi. 
pedl). 

Below, 

toi. 

Bend  (rb.), 

n anno. 

Beneath, 

t /,  thdlf , udn,  part  Lai, 
jhilf. 

Beside, 

nero. 

Besides, 

bdfiik. 

Be^t, 

beg  7 drkkn,  vi  u n i hi- 

tkaiubi. 

Better, 

dc h hr,,  dchhd  (fem.  drkkt ), 
dhabsir. 

Beware, 

cl  tankas. 

Beyond, 

pd rlf  bill  7,  t fsd> ", . 

Big, 

bard,  m<~fd. 

Bill  (of  a bird), 

ckiij. 

Bind  (vb.), 

bad  hud. 

• 

Bird, 

chnfkuri. 

Birth, 

pa  i da  jar  am. 

Bitch, 

kukri , cbhaull. 

Bite  (vo.), 

kdlnd , Ink  no. 

Bitter, 

karuiou . 

English. 

Jaunaiirt. 

Black, 

kdwd. 

Blackberry, 

kdwl,  dchhtH,  (fd<jf~ki 

dchhdi. 

Blackguard, 

Ifuf. 

Blanket, 

kdmad.  The  large  homo* 
made  blankets  weighing 
eight  to  twenty  seers, 
are  kdmd,  kdmoi , kdm* 
di. 

Blind. 

adhd. 

Blood, 

lot. 

Blossom, 

phut,  phulutO , phuletfi. 

Blow, 

phnkydrd. 

Blue, 

Uhl. 

Board. 

pharkd. 

Body, 

gdt,  pint/,  gaut . 

Boil  (-•/-.). 

ubdrtnd. 

Boil  (noun), 

dbur. 

Bold, 

md  rh. 

Bone, 

hadud. 

Book, 

pnthi. 

Border. 

si  an,  rhhfwau. 

Bore  holes  (rb.). 

V 

hi  mo. 

Borrow  (/•'».). 

karjd  gad  no. 

Both, 

»v  <y  'v 

duyaai. 

Bough, 

sah : a small  hough 

sdhtadi,  salt. 

Bonn  el. 

adi  (pi.  ddid),  *\jan 

ho  A . 

dha nu. 

B«»x  l small  j. 

sandukrl. 

Boy, 

chhautd. 

Brave, 

bahddur . 

Break  (,/.,), 

tnrno. 

Breath, 

sds. 

Brethren, 

ddl-bhdl. 

Bribe, 

kddi. 

Bride, 

yfijIlOll'tr  . 

ENGLISH-.!  AUNSAlti  VOCABULARY, 


439 


English. 

Jaui>*fui. 

English. 

JaunBurl. 

Bridge, 

Brightness, 

Bring  (vb.), 

pur;  a rope-bridge.  tu<jnn% 
in  hart;  i\  tree-bridge, 

jibdf. 

ujydiod , dsn. 

lew  no. 

Brute, 

Buffalo, 

Bug, 

pas  a. 

jlmtd  : fern,  mahish ; un- 
defined calf  (fem.), 

hat  n : weaned  calf 

(fem.),  jludrt. 

sar.su  (pi.  sarsiid). 

Brink, 

chlui  7a  u. 

Build  (r/./.), 

rlu  and. 

Broad, 

biO , rhtinro. 

Bull, 

hanrh. 

Brook, 

■/idwd. 

| Bullock, 

hndhm 

Broom, 

.snail/, ; a h earth -broom, 
made  of  hdbni-gv  ass, 
Icnckud. 

, Bundle, 

i 

j Burden, 

pi i del  it,  begdr. 

hhdrd , bhdrd. 

Brother, 

tJd'Iii  (filler),  lihdi/n 

(younger). 

Burn  ( '*/>.), 

flan  no,  chi  su'd. 

Brother-in-law, 

* 

mi  tar.  Wife’s  younger 

brother,  sdld  ; her  elder 
brother,  jetlm.  Iliis- 

1 Hind's  younger  brother, 
illicit r ; his  e 1 d e r 

brother,  j*:[U.  Klder 

sister’s  husband,  hhiud  : 
younger  sister’s  hus-% 
band,  gaica  7. 

Bury  ('•?*.), 

Bush, 

Butter, 

Buttermilk. 

Butterfly, 

ddhnd,  hhadd^nd. 

jhdL 

c Impair. 

riihd.S. 

j>  ’•/*“/  hd  (pi.  p~t  d i lie) . 

Brow. 

hi  mu  (pi.  him"  a ). 

Buttock, 

tJld  (pi.  f final ). 

Biowse  (vb.)9 

char  an. 

| Buy  (rb.), 

in ‘'Jr  gad no. 

Brush 

! By, 

imr>  > . 

c 

Cage, 

pi'iaro. 

Castor- oil  plant, 

dad  fi. 

Calabash, 

lauh\  IftnKt. 

Cat  (male), 

dlt  tr*‘,  : wild  cat,  t>an 
dhdru. 

Calf, 

l-drltlnt ye  ( fern,  hdrh  •’< a /»’!  ; 
huffulo-ealf,  laird  i fem. 
halt’).  Cf.  Buffalo. 

Cat  (female). 

1 i rd ; , hi rd i l ; d ild  ca t . 

fauna  hi  rdf , hi  an  a 

hi  rill. 

Coll  (vb.), 

■V' 

/dijji/ii,  (ltd  .ad ft.  > : to 

call  bark,  'l;di~‘  ha'du  ». 

Cataract, 

pa  c hh  dr. 

Calumny, 

t vphdn. 

Catch  (vb.), 

pahirnu , thdhun , tnitnr 

Canal, 

HI. 

Cattle, 

rfiiiiii  n. 

Cap, 

U pi  (cotton),  d.;/  '.7  /.'/</<! 
(d«  ollen). 

Cause,  (for)  the : 

Cave, 

sake  (of),  urt’\ 

f dir. 

Caro, 

him}. 

j Centipede. 

hih.syon. 

Carpi  liter, 

hd d fu'J,  1/d tf~  r , f < / / .V/i  i . 

t 

i 

j Certain. 

pat idn ' . 

Carry  (vb.)9 

7 ~ a , . 

Can <j no,  ynninn. 

I 

Certainty, 

Cash, 

rfilerU 

1 Chain, 

sail  gad.  sail  gal. 

Cast  atones  (vb.)f 

V i V 

p/ic f/r7 w (7,  r/t //  #7 </  /;  • > • 

i 

, Chakor. 

rhdhurd  (fem.  -ri ). 

440 


ENGLISH- JAUNSARI  VOCABULARY. 


Kn^lish. 

J annum. 

Chamois  (Himalayan), 

tjnraly  fjlioL 

Chapali, 

of  wheat,  fried  in  oil, 
tauriyd-ki  rdt?  ; of 

barley,  jau-lci I kddwoa  : 
of  niadufi,  A tfdinod ; of 
jjhagrtrii,  jhagri&t  kd 

kodnwd ; of  cheni, 

rhenidthd  hod  till'd  ; of 
maize,  ( & ( kyat  lid 

k?'dnivd. 

Charcoal, 

afiydr. 

Charity. 

dan-pirn.  j 

Cheap, 

S'lSfo. 

Cheek, 

(jal  nay  ft. 

Cherish  (vb.)9 

sa?tn> T. 

Cherry, 

pnjvwd  (pi.  -tre)  : -tree, 
/ul.jd. 

Chicken, 

knkkrdyalni. 

Chief, 

vmti. 

Child, 

chit  mi  Id  (fem.  -(f)  ; 

ch ild ren , I drh it- to  ; a 
posthumous  child,  J7ia- 
frld. 

Chimney- hole, 

khantdi,  sod  die. 

Chin, 

chhautt . 

Cholera, 

min  i,  mariyd-kd  duhli. 

Chutney  (aprioot), 

r Minolta. 

Circular. 

dh?dd. 

Clay, 

null  t 7,  rhrtprt. 

Clear  (sky), 

bidr/  ; (water)  nir. 

Climb  ( vh 

nil; u no. 

Clod, 

dkpl. 

Cloud, 

hddr, . 

Cloudy, 

baddy  a T. 

Club, 

sold,  dZijd,  vivshp. 

Cock, 

hnhh  (id. 

Cohabiting 

(jddffdd  iyd. 

Cold, 

jit  yd,  sort). 

Cold  in  the  head, 

jdkham,  khnfjfJ. 

Collect  (rb.). 

hit  ( lot  karno. 

Comb. 

kdfiied  : for  a man,  kSgof. 

Come  (r&.), 

dndy  dsnd . 

Come  out  (vbi) , 

ha  ro  d no,  bakin’  dsnd. 

Kuglish. 

JaunsiirT. 

Comet, 

pkuckknaild  tdrd . 

Committee, 

khumrf , hhaildg . 

Competent, 

7a  ulkiyd . 

Complaint, 

ndlas ; to  complain  to 
gods,  <//*<*£ 

Conceal  ( vb.)9 

V 

r ho  run. 

Conceit, 

yuiudn. 

Conceive  (?’&.), 

Hid  Into. 

Conduit, 

knl. 

Consider, 

V 

Sorh.no. 

Continually, 

finda. 

Contract, 

so  rial,  sariyat , sarin  fd. 

Cook  (? •?>.), 

paled  no,  sit  and. 

Cool, 

(hand ft,  srrnm 

# 

Copper, 

hV".. 

Oortl, 

pd>r'd;  in  13  a war.  Unfit). 

Corn, 

7i  d I. 

Corpse, 

Ihds. 

Corpulent, 

j > • A //  r 1 / , f%ka  yt 7 7,  ( h u Id. 

Corrupt  (vb.)9 

sardnd. 

Cost, 

in*  1. 

Count  (W>.), 

(ja  n n d. 

Cousin, 

(mothers  side)  nidsi yd-%d 
hd Id : (father’s  side) 
p/#.  n ph i yd-kd  hot  d. 

Cover, 

khdtav. 

Cover  («?/».), 

fflu.it  i do  no. 

Coventry, 

to  send  to,  bar  Jan  rdkhni 
(used  only  on  account 
of  the  enmity  of  a dead 
person). 

Coward, 

7id-mardt . 

Cowhide, 

ch  hard  (also  used  for 
buffalo-hide). 

Crab, 

khut . 

Crack, 

suf  (in  stone,  etc.)  ; sidr 
(in  wood). 

Cramp, 

kkarnd • 

Crawling, 

hvri. 

Cream, 

chhdpri. 

ENGLISH”  JATJNSA.RI  VOOABULAKY. 


441 


English. 

Jaunaarl. 

English. 

Jau  astiri. 

Creeper, 

Crop, 

i 

lOl,  bal  (pi.  b3lt).  | 

1 

phasal.  : 

I 

Cuckoo, 

kukliu.  After  Hie  Hishu 
Jatrii  festival,  the  bird 
becomes  ill  of  fever,  and 
is  silent. 

Crow, 

. 

kauwS. 

I 

Cure  (vb.), 

khabar  kamt. 

Cruel, 

papf,  nigurS. 

Curly, 

kindure . 

Crush  ( vb .), 

/V  - ^ 

j)$chno. 

Cut  (vb.). 

kdtno. 

Cry  0 ’&•)» 

hat 3 no , dh3  dentM  laliydnd. 

Cypress, 

lend. 

Cub, 

(leopard-)  bagt  ailfi  ; 

(bear-)  rikhtaild. 

Descent, 


vino. 


leniy. 

Prd, 

j 

png  ait. 

Desert  (vb.). 

chhndi  dendm 

Tin  r>i 

bhanSwatS , kuld , band  ; 

Desire. 

sauk. 

1 /»A  I .1  | 

tish-dam,  bhagSwa. 

Destroy  ( vb .), 

nds  bdtino,  nas  karnd  ; 

l)anip, 

gild  (of  earth) ; tindd. 

to  destroy  root  and 

bhijiyai  (of  clothes, 

branch,  chhafySnas 

etc.). 

bdiino  (or  karnd). 

Darkness. 

iniard. 

1 )ew, 

o*, 

Dawn, 

ghdmn-ki  krln,  rdttiyS. 

Difficult, 

ok  lid,  dkha. 

Day, 

da  8,  bar. 

Dig  (u6.). 

kha  nnd. 

Dav  liefore  yesterday. 

porS. 

Digest  (vb.), 

park  gd. 

and  day  after  to-morrow 

Dike, 

khdi  (artificial):  kadi 

Dead, 

marlyd,  mutod  huw3. 

(natural) . 

Debt, 

jSird. 

Dinner, 

bidt. 

Debt, 

rin. 

Dirt, 

jhdf  (of  the  body)  ; sSgar 

(in  a house,  etc.). 

Deceit, 

phareb , 

Decide  ( vb .), 

ilia  th  no. 

Disciple, 

chela • 

Dispose  (vb.), 

sangdrnd  ( e.g .,  to  dispose 

Deer, 

harin. 

of  a dead  body). 

Deformity, 

kachald • 

Dispute  (vb.), 

V . -v 

phdkuno,  ghagduno. 

Deity, 

dco» 

Division  of  a * Khatt  *, 

khdij. 

Delay, 

dhil  karnl , tistS. 

Doctor, 

bded. 

Deliver  (vb.). 

sop  ao . 

Dog, 

knku  r. 

Den, 

sdM. 

Doll  (of  wood  or  rags), 

bh&ioanti. 

Deny  (vo.), 

mukarfino. 

Door, 

ddr : lattice  door  for  a 

Depart  ( vb.)f 

/v 

nathno. 

byre,  khatkar. 

Descend  (vb.). 

iitrdnd,  hurluno. 

Doubt, 

t&fi- 

~ p w 3 x 

YOU  IX,  PART  IV. 


442 


KN GLISH-J AUNSAEl  VOCABULARY, 


English. 

Dough, 


Dove, 

Dower  (bride’s), 

Down, 

Drag  (vb.), 

Dream  (vb.), 

Drill  holes  (vb.)3 
Drive  (vb.), 

Early, 

Earn  (rb.), 

Ear-  ring1, 

Earth, 

Earthquake, 

Ease, 

Easily, 

Eat  (vb.), 

Eatable, 

Echo, 

Eclipse, 

Economically, 

Edge  (of  a field,  river, 
etc.). 

Egg, 

Elope  with  (vb.), 


Jaunaari. 


(of  manual  kodo ),  kodatfl  ; 
(of  ehanh %l  or  c.haudi), 
chauatho ; (of  wheat), 
pi  do,  kanik ; (of 
barley),  did  : (of  client), 
c h o n i a ( h d ; (of 
jhaydrd ),  jhagaridtlid  ; 
(of  Indian  corn),  tetkl 
at  ho  : (of  gram), 

chanidlh'l. 

yhuyhnti.  If  ft  dove  sits 
on  a house  and  coos,  it 
is  a very  bad  omen. 
The  bird  is  killed  or 
hunted  away. 

pay  did. 

undd . 

kli  a ich  n o. 

swlnn  dekhno ; a dream, 
swlno.  Of.  Nightmare. 

bindhnd. 

Tilled  no. 


rdfhjni , jJti.id , jhisl. 

Adverb,  tikhd , Ukliord. 

kamdno. 

(for  men)  murkl,  dfirotu, 
dure [n.  (For  women), 
(on  edge  of  the  ear)  utrdl 
(pi.  utrdiyd ),  leant hdfill ; 
(on  inside  of  the  oar) 
bald  : (on  the  lube) 

jkOmku. 

dhartl , vidttl,  bliumi. 
blinicho , hknJchdl. 

S 1*  fill . 

sukhal,  seiche  kari . 

khdnd. 

khdnd  fofjo. 

yd),  sad. 

y urban . 

third  thfir*. 

rhheo. 


bat l,  pinnl. 
vddfi  nathno. 


English. 

Drop, 

Drought, 

Drug, 

Dry, 

Dumb, 

Dung, 

Dunghill, 

Dusk, 

Dust, 

D warf , 

* Dysentery, 

E 

Embrace  (vb.), 

j 

Empty, 

Endure  (vb.), 

Enemy, 

! Enhancement, 

i 

Enmity, 

! Kura  go  (vb.), 
i Enter  (vb.), 

i 

Entirely, 

Entrails, 

Ev‘’s  apple  (in  tho 
throat). 

Evening, 

Evidence, 

Ewe, 

Examine  (vb.), 

Except, 

Exclaim  (vb.). 


Jaunsarl 

tlpu. 
dbdiai. 
jcirl. 
s fikiye. 
kdlhd,  Idld. 

(of  cattle)  gObar;  (of  goats) 
m?gn&  ; (mixed  with 
litter)  kdris. 

gobrds . 

inydrl 5. 

dhiirdtfau , dhvr,  khe. 

banana.  (Tho  popular 
explanation  is  that  he  is 
only  * fifty- two  ' fingers 
high.  The  word  is 
really  a corruption  of 
the  Sanskrit  vdmana). 

I fill  pet  dll. 

hrtgdti)  deno. 

rltn. 

sdrno. 
bfilrl . 

jddt.1,  jdchtl . 

bwair  (pronounced  loir), 

bidnno. 

bhitodl  nathno , 
niunikd. 
a did. 
kvkhrl. 

b*vke. 

sdkhi ; to  givo  evidence, 
sdkh  purnl. 

bheQ. 

parekhno . 

bdjut. 

laliy&no. 


EN GLISH-J AUNSAHI  VOCABULARY.  413 


English. 

' Jaunsari. 

English. 

Jaunsari. 

Excrement, 

Exorcise  ( vb .), 

Expect  (vb.), 

fjiih  (human). 

ukhal  bed  karno  ; jives 
karno.  * j 

as  rdkhnl. 

aT 

W 

dkh  ; one-eyed,  kdnd.  Such 
persons  are  considered  to 
he  deceitful.  Squint- 

eyed,  'pafero.  Such  per- 
sons are  said  to  be  un- 
trustworthy. 

Extort  (ub.). 

khnsl  gddnd. 

F 

Fable, 

kflhnl. 

Find  (rb.), 

m iind. 

Fall  (rb.), 

r&rno. 

Fine  (the  punishment), 

dad. 

Fallow, 

bajfi,  dsdo. 

Finger, 

gffthi,  hdtau-ki  gut  hi. 

Family, 

kunbd , kabllu.  ! 

i 

Firefly, 

jogln,  agydrl. 

Famine, 

1 

kdr. 

Finn, 

i uiajgut . 

Far, 

dure . 

First. 

pAyal~kd. 

Fast  (rb.), 

burnt  rdkhno  ; a thin  to 

Firstling, 

jet  lid. 

TiVindy  ninfijiyd  rdhno. 

Fish, 

mdchhd , (pi.  mdchhe)  . 

Fat, 

mrjtd,  thtild,  thuld , lend! , 

charhdl. 

Fish-hook , 

rndrhhl-kd  kd<f< *• 

Father, 

bdbd ; (in  the  hills)  babti. 

Fisherman, 

machhwdr , jdvoiyd. 

Father-in-law, 

sgsiird. 

Fist, 

miith. 

Fatigue, 

paij. 

Flag, 

jhddd . 

Fatten  (rb.), 

mSto  bdnno. 

Flame. 

lanhiydrd. 

Faulty, 

g until. 

Flat, 

^ ^ \ 
chtirati,  Buaino. 

Feather, 

pSkh. 

Flattery, 

dp  matlabi. 

Feeble, 

mdrd . 

Flea, 

pisu . 

Feed  (rb.), 

/v 

fr/iOznlno. 

Flesh, 

% 

mausso. 

Ferment, 

ptikh. 

Fling  (Hi.), 

chkddno. 

Fein, 

bdrnoi. 

! Flint, 

fjord,  sdkrd. 

Fetid, 

Fetus, 

tehdr . 

blidrd . 

j Floor, 

(of  mud)  matyaur ; (of 
stone)  me  rant  ; (of 

planks)  patyaur. 

Fever, 

Field, 

iar- 

fokhrd ; irrigated  field, 
thaiff,  kuntil9  fold. 

Flower, 

' Floweret, 

Fly  (the  insect). 

phot. 

phulutDy  phnletti , phulrfi. 

mdkicd. 

Fig-tree, 

phedu ; (fruit)  phetfu-kd 

ddnd. 

Fly  (rb.), 

udnd. 

Fill  (t;b.), 

bcufhndj  badhno , bhaurnd. 

Fog, 

kurSfm 

Filth, 

jhtil. 

Fool, 

n i dan. 

Filthy, 

kuchll , ph&rd. 

Foot, 

gfidoy  Idt. 

Fiu, 

pakh . 

Foot-print, 

gd’fv^ki  chdgd . 

3 L 2 


TOL.  IX.  PART  IV. 


EX GLISH-J AUNSARl  VOCABULARY. 


4,14 


English. 

Jaunsarl. 

English, 

Jaunsarl* 

Forehead, 

mSthfi. 

Friend, 

scithf , mdtd. 

Forest, 

ban. 

Fringe, 

jdri. 

Forge, 

dr  an. 

Frog, 

m&dkd. 

Forgive  (v6.)f 

rhhiind  karnt. 

Front, 

agdsd , dgdid. 

Forsake  (r&.), 

•■V 

chhndno . 

Frost, 

pdwd. 

Fort, 

garh. 

Frown  (t >&.), 

urvrd  hernS . 

Fortunate, 

bhdgwdn. 

Fry  (t b.), 

bhtljno , cliisno. 

Fox, 

phul  chaurd. 

Full, 

puro . 

Fresh, 

sdjo. 

Furrow, 

s?f  si  an. 

G 


•Gasp  (rfc.), 

sasiydnd. 

Gold, 

suno. 

Gather  (v&.), 

/K 

leal t ho  karno. 

Good, 

dchho. 

Ghost, 

haid , hairh. 

Goods  and  chattels  and 
house. 

ghar-knri. 

Ginger, 

(green)  ado;  (dry)  .fiitf/i. 

Gourd, 

lauki , (large)  lankc. 

Girdle, 

manjhan , gdchl. 

Government, 

sirkdr. 

■Girl, 

chhaufl , nftnkl ; (married 
girl  at  her  father’s 
house)  dhyaturl , dhiSna. 

Grain, 

ndj  ; (for  food)  khdj  ; (for 
seed)  blj. 

Give  (rb.), 

deno. 

G ranary. 

(of  stone)  bliord;  (of 
wood)  kotlidr,  dfibrl. 

Glass  (looking-), 

dr.sf. 

Grandchild, 

ndhltd ; (fem.)  •It. 

Glean  (u6.), 

Glisten  (?;6.), 

chug  no. 

chilkhdno. 

Grandfather, 

ndnd ; great-g  randfather, 
par-ndnd ; great-great- 
grandfather, bu<fhu  par- 
ndnd. 

Gnash  (v6.), 

ddd  kurchno. 

Grandson, 

ndtuid , natty d. 

Gnat, 

machhnydrd. 

Grass  (green), 

nidrd , nidrO. 

Go  («&.)» 

jdno. 

Grasshopper, 

khardog , tiatkuwd. 

< ioat, 

bdkrd  (fem.)  Idkri.  A 
goat  sitting  upon  its 
hind  legs  is  a very  bad 
omen,  and  the  animal  is 
killed  and  sold  at  once. 
Goat-hide,  chhorl ; goat- 
skin bag,  Jchalrd.  'there 
are  four  kinds  of  goat* 
skins.  The  biggest  is 
c;  lied  ZrAffl ; then  ghatll  ; 
then  khatrd ; and  the 
smallest  hluilvti. 

( Jrave  (noun), 

Grief, 

Gristle, 

Grow  ( vb.)9 

Growl  ( vb .), 

4(>knr9  khdt9  khdd,  sai *• 

khej. 

kat. 

jam  no. 

garrand. 

God, 

d*o. 

Guest, 

pdfind. 

-Goitre* 

ghtppd. 

Gum  (of  the  mouth). 

glyd. 

ENGLISH-J  AUNSAbI  VOCABUIjABY. 


445 


KoglUh. 


Haft, 

Hail, 

Hair, 


Halloo  (t>5.). 

Halo. 

Handle. 

Handmill, 

Hard, 

Hare, 

Hare-lip, 

Harlot, 

Harrow, 

Harvest, 


Hasten  (u&.), 
Hat, 

Hatch  (v6.), 
Hate  ( vb.)9 
Have  (cfc.). 
Hay, 

Head, 

Heart, 

Hearth, 

Heaven, 

Heavy, 


Jaunsarl. 


H 

bif. 

Saru,  saru. 

(of  human  head)  mu 4 So  ; 

(of  human  body)  bd&, 
bdl.  Hair  on  the  breast 
denotes  truthfulness.  A 
man  without  hair  is 
suspected  of  being  un- 
reliable. Hair' of  goats, 
bakrafi. 

hatdwno . 

jpharis. 

ltd. 
jgdrfi. 
ka  retro, 
chh'ixd,  8asa. 
khantta. 

■ pdtar . 
dadiauy  jol. 

sdkh.  (Kharif  harvest) 
sardiyd-kl  Sdkh  ; (Kabl 
harvest)  ruriyd-kl  sdkh  ; 
(August  harvest)  bha- 
dvdi . Tho  last-named 
includes  chent , kggni, 
jhag^rdy  and  unirrigated 
rice  (iikhri  dhdn  or 
ghar-ke  sdti). 

utaur  harm. 

(woman’s  large  hat) 
c hourly  sdgi ; (girl’s) 
jutl. 

bdtl  senl. 

tin  rkdrnd. 

rdkhno . 

sukho  ghds.  (Left  on  tho 
ground  for  use  in 
winter)  tdrud  ghds. 

in  ft  4. 

jlu. 

chul . 

agdsy  a gas. 

1 

yarud.  j 


English.  Jannsari. 


Hedge, 

Heel, 

Help  (t?6.), 

nemp, 

Hen, 

Her, 

Herdsman, 

Here, 

Hero, 

Hibernation, 

Hiccough, 

Hide  (r&.), 

High, 

Hill, 

Him, 

Hip-bone, 

Hire, 

Ilis, 

Hit  (Vb.)y 

Hive  (in  a dwelling- 
house). 

Hoarfrost, 

Hog, 

Hold  (ib.). 

Holiday, 

Hollow, 

Honey, 

Honeycomb, 

Hook, 

Hookah, 


bdrh. 

(of  the  foot)  phdyna* 
madat  deni. 
bhSg. 

kvhhrl. 

tid-kd. 

gdyar  (f.  gayarln ) ; (for 
cows  and  buffaloes)  mahi - 
shdwd  (f.  mahishdivl) ; 
(for  goats),  bakrdwd  (f . 
bakrdwl) ; (for  sheep) 
bhe4dwd  (f.  bheddwl). 

ttki. 

mbrh. 

rtkho-ki  nindy  rthh-nind 
{lit.  “beftr’B-slerp”). 

dekdr . 
clioniQ. 
ug  lo- 
ti bd. 
test-kh. 
gtiri. 

(of  land,  house,  etc.)  kdri. 
tfs-kd. 

-x 

vidrno. 

lira.  The  hole  of  exit  and 
entrance  is  mdhkanl . 

pdwd. 

su  itga  r,  ^suga r ; wi Id  hog, 
ban  sugar. 

th  ditto. 

tchdr.  4 

■pdchrt). 

mauh. 

inoki-k § kvS. 
kadd. 

hflkkd,  chil am. 


ii...  - • t 


446 

ENGLISH-JAUNSlRI  vocabulary. 

English. 

Jauna&ri. 

English. 

J au  n sari. 

Hope, 

1 

Husband, 

khwSd. 

Hopeless, 

nir&L 

Hush, 

mesS. 

Horn, 

Sing. 

Husk, 

tui;  (of  barley)  bhSSr 

bhii8 ; (of  rice)  ta£ ; (of 

Hornet, 

any  So , tambiS ; (the  small 

chSnl9  jhaaDrS;  or  kaunl ) 

hornet)  bachh , bachhau. 

kdyar,  tus ; (of  gihu,  or 

wheat)  phSphrS ; (of 

Hot, 

tsto. 

vn  asur , ml/,  or  IdbiyS) 

bhdS;  (of  chaulS 1,  or 

House, 

kurd . 

ma4ud ) bfcfi*.  Chaff, 
etc.,  removed  from  the 

threshing-floor  is 

How  ? 

kasd. 

Hyena, 

charakh.  The  animal  ia 

However, 

tabht. 

not  found  in  Jannsar- 
Bawar. 

Hump, 

chur. 

Hydrophobia, 

hirkiyS. 

Ice, 

hyu. 

i 

Interest  (on  loans). 

sut , bySj,  kut. 

Ignite  («6.), 

/V  'V 

phukno , 

Invito  (rb.), 

nyutd  den§. 

m. 

dukhlS , as&khiyd. 

Iron, 

Uh. 

In, 

bhitsfi,  pads. 

Is, 

a so. 

Incense, 

dhup,  gugur. 

Industrious, 

dhSn  SituS. 

Issue,  family. 

_ 3r 

agi. 

Insane, 

jhSlS. 

Itch, 

khSj,  kharus . 

J 

Jackal, 

£yS6td,  syS<  1,  si/JZ.  Its  cry  I 

Jest, 

thSttd. 

at  night  is  a bad  omen.  1 

Jail, 

1 

kSthaudS  dewd  ihdlci,  lit.  | 

Jump  (rb.), 

phatvJ  deni. 

being  tied  to  a stake  j 
or  log, — an  old  punish-  ! 

! 

Just, 

nisdbl. 

ment. 

Jaw, 

i 

4&thd ; jaws 9 jamSytiya. 

Justice, 

i 

nydfi. 

Jealousy, 

rl§,  rlS-rag, 

i 

K 

Keep  (vb.), 

rdkhno . 

i King, 

bdchhd. 

Kernel, 

4er  (a  whole  kernel) ; 
chdnS  (a broken  kernul); 
chant  (kernel  cf  a peach 

j Kiss  ( vb .),  lick  (v6.), 

i 

chat  no. 

or  apricot). 

Knead  (vb.), 

Glno . 

Kick  (vb.)> 

lab  IciTiij  l3t  chha 

Knee, 

(pi.  ghil4*)tQ 

Kid, 

chelkufo;  (female) 

Kneel  (r&.), 

ghude  b8di-kari  bai\hnd • 

Kidney, 

buku, 

kdlno 

Kokla  (the  green 

kainor9  kaunal,  kdll. 

Kill  ( vbj , 

pigeon). 

ENGLISH-JAUNSArI  VOCABULARY.  447 


English. 

Jauns&ri.  j 

English* 

J&uns&rL 

L 

Labour, 

minnat,  dlydn  s£tnd. 

Lemon, 

chukh . 

Lad, 

chhautd . 

Leopard, 

bagh . 

i 

Ladder, 

(of  wood)  list n ; (stone 

Leper, 

7c5rf,  pdpl. 

steps)  paur,  pair.  The 

projecting  stone  steps  in 
the  wall  of  a terraced 

Level  (adj.), 

say  and,  chdraJ. 

field  are  phait*.  • 

Liar, 

jhattd. 

Ladle, 

chdtfdi , daulil. 

Lick  (rb.). 

chat  no. 

Lamb, 

gab-turfi,  (f.  - lurl ). 

Lid, 

khdtan . 

Last, 

pachhli 1. 

Lift  (rb.). 

chugno. 

Late, 

biste,  aberd. 

Light, 

dso,  ujydwG. 

Laugh  (t6.). 

ha  87i0. 

Lightning, 

bijurl , by. 

Lead  (the  metal), 

slsd- 

Lip, 

hdth. 

Leaf, 

Idbu. 

Liquor  (spirituous), 

sur . 

Leak, 

bhdkd ; (a  small  leak) 
bhok-turi. 

Listen  (td>.)? 

sunno. 

Lean, 

pdtrd. 

Little, 

nddrd. 

Leap  (rb.), 

A 

itstr.no. 

Lizard, 

go  (chameleon). 

Lease, 

pat  (a. 

Loam, 

Leech, 

.m. 

j Locust, 

Stiwd,  Said. 

1 9 

| 

Leep  (smear  with 

COW-  UbnO. 

j Loft, 

1 

iiplld  pur , uparld  pur. 

dung  and  earth)  (rb.)« 

i 

Low, 

nigalo. 

Leisure, 

s’hta. 

Lunch, 

depart. 

M 

Mad, 

jhala;  a mad  dog,  hlrkvd. 

Marvel, 

cliambd. 

Maize, 

kukri,  tete. 

Matchlock, 

dord-kd  (fhds,  dgan,  i 

yard. 

Mallet, 

mug  art. 

Mature, 

pdkd. 

Man, 

mdnukh,  manukhl. 

Me, 

mukh. 

Manufacture  (vb.). 

gharno . 

Meat, 

mauso. 

Manure, 

Many, 

gdbar , kdrli. 

Medicine, 

jarl,  dkhatl. 

bharl , bahute , alekh. 

Mark  (Ipttoo), 

kdjiif  kdj$l. 

Meet  (rb.), 

bhet  and. 

Market, 

bajdr . 

Melancholy, 

khdj. 

Marriage, 

jDjhdfa,  chydh . 

>• 

Melt  ( vl .), 

'V 

gflano. 

448  bnolish-jattnsAb!  vocabtcaky. 


English. 

* Jaans&rl. 

English. 

l JFauntftrl. 

Memory, 

ad. 

Mosquito, 

machhnydrd . 

Mend  (06.), 

bdnno. 

Mother, 

ijf. 

Mendicant, 

jtgi*' 

Mother-in-law, 

idiot . 

Mercy, 

ghin. 

Mould  (olay,  loam), 

kdwi,  mdttt. 

Mesh, 

gSji  (pi.  gSjiS )• 

Mountain, 

4S<f8. 

Mill  (water-), 

ghaurat ; hand-mill,  jSdrfJ, 

Mourn  (r6.), 

khejuno , khSj  karnl. 

j&drd. 

Moustache, 

juga. 

Mine, 

Mint  (the  plant), 

m&rd. 

Mouth, 

khab. 

padtnd. 

Miser, 

mujf. 

Move  (rh.) , 

ha  4nd. 

Misfortune, 

karamphUtld,  nigurd , 

Mud, 

hilar , gdr,  hll. 

kuianl. 

Muddy  (of  water  or  a 

gdj. 

Mist. 

fairer. 

stream). 

Mistake, 

bhul,  bisar,  bhul-bisar. 

Mumps, 

ganau.  A man  having 

Moist, 

ill,  ill  ft,  sf nd. 

mumps  is  called  gandt. 
and  the  mumps  them- 
selves are  called  gan . 

Monsoon, 

chaumd8d. 

'X. 

Munch, 

chabdno. 

Month, 

mihnnd. 

Mushroom, 

rhydS-mydu. 

Moon, 

till  rani,  jhUn . 

Musk-pod, 

bind. 

Moon-light, 

jhvnd-kd  aid  ; clear  moon- 

light without  a cloud, 
phul  biydni. 

My, 

mero. 

Mortgage, 

tJiapfid. 

Myself, 

dpfi. 

Morning, 

rati?,  jhlid . 

Mystery, 

bhed. 

Nail  (of  the  body). 

navg. 

Name, 

ndu\ 

Narrow, 

sdgard ; a narrow  lane  is 
sdgarl . 

Navel, 

ndl. 

Nay, 

ndhn . 

Near, 

nerd , dhdiyd , dhaiyd  ; near 
the  head  mud  nirn. 

Necessary, 

jar*r. 

Neck, 

tat*. 

Needle, 

(a  large  one  for  sewing 
home-made  woollen 

cloth) j undl  ritn. 

Nerve, 

8f 

N 

Nest,  kdh,  Icrtlat. 

New,  no , naua,  (f.  naul ). 

Nice,  t imtd,  dchhfi. 

Nightmare,  kachld  swind.  A night- 

mare portends  disaster 
or  a tumble  soon.  A 
person  gnashing  his 
teeth  in  sleep  portends 
death  to  his  parents. 
If  he  sobs  or  weeps  in 
lu's  dreams  it  is  a very 
good  sign.  To  laugh 
in  his  dreams  is  a very 
bad  sign.  T^see  water 
or  a corpse  in  a dream 
is  had.  So  also  to  see 
a buffalo.  Ter  see  a 
fcnake  in  a dream  means 
that  the  god  is  angry 
and  a Brahman  (bdman) 
. must  be  consulted  (dSo 
dekhdnnd ),, 


english-jaunsAr!  vocabulary, 


449 


English.  ?. 

Jfwns&ri. 

English. 

♦ JauriBart. 

No. 

na. 

Nourish  (vb.)9 

pdrno . 

Nostril,  it 

thunl  (pi.  thuniyS). 

Now, 

eb9  ebhi ; now  and  then, 
kadhl  kadhl . 

Nothing, 

lachh-nd. 

Nut, 

6&khtd9  iikti 1. 

o 

Oak, 

bdn9  mdru,  Jchariu. 

Our, 

amdrti. 

Oath, 

Sau9  Siigand9  Sapalh. 

Outcry, 

hdi-ldhd. 

Obscene, 

besaram. 

Outside, 

bdrdS'i , badoy  bdrn&l. 

Odour, 

gad. 

Over, 

nchhorJ,  padowe. 

Offence  (to  take)  (vb.)9 

Offering, 

Omen, 

Open  (a  door)  ( vb .), 

Opium, 

l a chid  mdnano. 

bhait. 

tag  fin. 

■v 

tig  dr  no. 

phi  m. 

Owl, 

ha.  The  owl  is  not  per- 
mitted to  utter  his  ill- 
omened  notes  near  a 
village,  and  if  he  does 
so  is  hunted  away.  If 
lie  calls  from  the  roof 
of  a houso,  some  or.c  in 
the  family  is  sure  to 
die. 

Or, 

kl-td. 

Own, 

dpn~>. 

Other, 

dkd9  dulja. 

0 wner. 

mdlak. 

Paddy, 

Pain, 

Palm  (of  the  hand), 
Pant  (vb.)9 
Papa, 

Paper, 

Paramour, 

Pardon  (vb.)9 
Parrot, 

Partner, 

Partridge, 

¥ 

Path, 

* 

Peace, 

Peg» 

Permission , 


i 

p 

sd(l9  dhdn. 

Persevering, 

tig  dr,  pdklCd. 

pfr. 

Petticoat, 

gh dgh  ro,  ghd gli rj . 

fmtnt , hathll , JiathSuili . 

Pheasant, 

kftkhrd  (f.  kukhrl),  k'jkld>', 

sasnd. 

bhuT-chtl , mtinnii. 

Pick  (r6.), 

chug  no. 

bdbd. 

Pickaxe, 

kdsi,  kudrtwd  ; a small  one, 

kdgat . 

gd4ul. 

dr. 

Piece, 

r$4z. 

clihimd  karril. 

Pig. 

sugar , suiigar. 

sad. 

Pillow, 

si  ran? . 

sdjhl. 

Pine- mart  in, 

kustyd\  kusiydli 

tltrd9  (f.  tUri). 

Pimple, 

Ill  (pi.  klla). 

bdt9  batdU. 

Pinch  (vb.), 

chufad. 

s mi  ail,  mil. 

Pipe, 

chilam ; a portable  bamboo 

pipe  kakgSfhl  chilam ; 

Jell. 

the  part  which  holds 

chhld.  $ 

the  fire  and  tobacco  is 
tdp. 

3 M 


VOL.  IX,  PART  IV, 


450 


KXGLtSH-JAUNSARl  VOCABULARY. 


Kopliab. 

1 .liiuusfui. 

English. 

4 Jaansarl, 

pit, 

khat. 

Precipice, 

<fhUg,  4h%4h. 

Pity, 

Place, 

Flait  ( vb.\ , 

Plant, 

Plough, 

Plough  (t* &.), 

Ploughshare  (iron), 

gliln. 

guthnd . 

bijar,  pddh. 

hau , hal. 

band,  hail  land. 

phaiva.  The  part  of  the 
share  in  which  the  iron 
ploughsharo  is  fixed  is 
nasi  or  patlia.  When 
worn  down  the  sliaro  is 
called  nausua  and  is 
used  for  ploughing 
ground  before  stod  is 
planted. 

Pregnant, 

Present, 

Press  (t>&.), 

Priok  (vb.)9 

Priest, 

Profit, 

Prohibit  (t ?&.), 

Promise, 

Prophet, 

Proud, 

pe^bharl,  dd-pasta, 

garbhin. 

ha  jar. 

ddbno. 

chubdno. 

purdt. 

phayda. 

Ihekno . 

kardr . 

bakl. 

maugrd. 

Plover, 

tiinU 

Prove  (t •&.), 

parekhno. 

Pocket, 

Jih  is*  ci. 

Punchayat, 

bhetag , khuwfl. 

Pod  (seed-), 

Poison, 

Pomegranate, 

Pond, 

Semi. 

biSh,  hi  kit. 

darOl,  dar  ?ad , da  rim. 

tal. 

Puncture, 

Puppy, 

j 

Purgative, 

Purse, 

hhdkd ; a small  ouo, 
bhdktnri. 

kuktaild,  kukutd . 

julabo-kl  jafl . 

bat  ltd. 

Poor, 

•mar a. 

Push  (e&.), 

dhakiydnd. 

Porcupine, 

Sdyal. 

Put  (on  clothes,  etc. 

)(?b.),paharno , bhirnd. 

Powder  (gunpowder), 

dam . 

Putrid, 

sariyai,  sariyu. 

1 

Q 

Quake  (tfc.)» 

halno. 

Quickly, 

ilkhd  ilkhd. 

Quarry, 

khan . 

Quiet, 

chalag . 

Queen-bee, 

Question, 

moki-ka  gdn. 

s*al. 

Quite, 

munikd . 

R 

Hags, 

khdtre,  gudre 

Ravine, 

ndwS. 

Rainbow, 

indra-dhanu . 

Raw  (crops), 

did. 

Ram, 

khdtfu ; a ram  with  a flock 
is  hvr. 

Razor, 

khUrl,  (pi.  khUrid ). 

Raspberry, 

hisdu,  lidchhdl. 

Reaper, 

Id&niyd. 

Rat, 

musha . 

Rear, 

pochhaiH . 

ENGIiISH-JAUNSAbI  VOCABULARY.  451 


English, 

Jnunsari. 

English. 

Jaunsarl. 

Refuse  ( yb.}, 

mukrOno. 

Riugal-bamboo  (arundi- 

nindwo , nindli. 

naria  falcata ), 

Relation, 

ndtd. 

Road, 

surah. 

Remember  (vb.), 

Sd  rakhnl . 

Roar  (v&.)> 

(like  a tiger  or  leopard) 

Rent, 

kdrl. 

n ad  no  ; ^ (like  a bear) 
fi  Off  yd  no,  bhv  bhkdndj 

Repair  ( vb .), 

til-t&k  harnl. 

(like  ajackal)  lafiydnd, 

t nkdno. 

Request  ( vb.). 

Rest  ( vb.), 

darhh&st  karnl. 

sa  stand. 

Roof, 

child p par. 

Rope, 

Retire  (from  a case)  ( yb.),  bhdjno . 

i 

Rot, 

Mi- 

Return  (vb.). 

pachhianS , baupno. 

\ 

Rub  (r&.), 

itiadno. 

Rib, 

pasaupa. 

Ruin, 

n d*  ; of  a house  or  village, 

Rice, 

chau ; cooked  rice,  blidt.  | 

khunnlr . 

Right, 

sldho,  padro.  j 

Run-awny  couple, 

nd an  kuriyd. 

s 

3 

Sake  (for  the  — of), 

khdtar , Gste. 

Shave  (i*6.), 

murf  Id  no  ; to  shave  the 

Salt, 

head,  bhadar  karno. 

nun. 

She, 

SO,  S\jj. 

bhed  (pi.  bliedd). 

Same  (that  very), 

stjf. 

Sheep, 

Saud, 

bcLu,  bdrii. 

Shell, 

(green  walnut-shell)  chirk  ; 

Scratch  (vb.). 

idrno. 

(dry  walnut-shell)  tektd 
sdkhtd  ; (apricot-,  peach- 

.ry  'V  ^ 

or  nut-shell)  Qelb  ne. 

Search  (t?ZO, 

suytano , Lorno , her  no. 

dell ; (egg-shell)  sdhtd, 

sdkhta. 

Season, 

sammd . 

Shepherd, 

see  Heidsinan. 

Seemul  (cotton  tree), 

simdl. 

Shin, 

port. 

Separate  ( yb .), 

judo  karno. 

1 

Shiver  (r&.), 

dhu  nund. 

Serpent, 

supdnoi  (ophiophogus  and 

cobra  class). 

Shop, 

hat . 

Several, 

katlh. 

Short, 

thord. 

Sew  (vb.) » 

sibno. 

Shorten  (vb.), 

glut  tano. 

Shade,  shadow, 

chh'lyal. 

Shoulder, 

ban  pi  (pi.  baurS). 

Shake  (vb.). 

hdlno . 

Shriek  (rb.)» 

_ -w  _ V 

cJiTgdtono,  tally*  no. 

Shale, 

#5&ar. 

Shrtw, 

lugdur. 

Shanip, 

ZdJ,  sarain . 

Shroud, 

hap  hau. 

Share, 

bgtd. 

Shut  (vb.), 

(a  door)  ddr  deno  hit,  dar 

Sharp, 

paind,  paint*  (tern,  paint) ; 

lan5;JM>  shut  up) 
ghat  no. 

ddtrd  (fern,  d&tuffei); 

(fSyrd ; pachrdpO. 

Side, 

ehheo . 

Sharpen  (*&•),* 

paindno,^  pain  karno, 
payuno. 

Sigh  (vb.). 

/V 

3as  indmo. 

O ..  A 

VOL,  IX , PAST  XV. 


>1  u 2 


452  ENGUilstf-JAUNSARt  VOCABULARY. 


English. 

Jauusarl, 

English, 

Jaunsarl. 

SJgu, 

sdn. 

Somehow,' 

bhau-kaJdi,  **  ' 

Silence, 

mesS. 

Somewhere, 

bh&U'kdkf, 

Sinful, 

gundl , 

Soon, 

jhal , tikhd. 

Since, 

jadhi-aurT, 

Sound, 

icaj. 

Sinew, 

sir. 

Soup, 

kanjyar,  kfiju 

Singer, 

gitSrl, 

Sour, 

amid. 

Sister, 

(elder)  <Z<Idl ; (youngor) 

Spark , 

patangS,  tanga . 

fc&d7/f ; sister-in-law, 

bhnuj . 

Sparrow, 

IV. 

ghejaut  T. 

Skin, 

khal. 

Spate, 

gajSnl . 

Sky, 

agSs,  gain . 

Spider, 

k'yard. 

Slap  (i&.)i 

htppar  mdriil. 

Spit  (t ;h.), 

thukno. 

Slate, 

pal  Sr, 

Spoil  (vb,), 

khdnd. 

Sleep  (»6.)> 

sutno. 

Spoon, 

chSdoi,  daukf . 

Sleet, 

afharl. 

Spot, 

rhasS , chaga. 

Slip  (v&.), 

rarch no,  khisk no. 

Sprain  (rfc.), 

/V 

Sloping, 

t i rchhd. 

Spring  (t  •&.), 

us [dtio,  phaiol  dent. 

Slow  match  for  matchlock 

fora. 

Squint  (t?6.), 

pat  pro  hdno,  squint-eyed. 

/V 

paierd , 

Smell  (r b.), 

Jinghno.  . 

Stand  (r &.), 

l hard  hdno • 

Smile  (r&.), 

kan?k  handle  has  no : (in 

the  western  rarganas)  1 
dSnik  danik  hasnd.  j 

Star, 

fdrd  ; evening  star,  .fufe- 
fdrd,  suk-tarS. 

Smoke  (tobacco)  (t>b.) , 

/V  I 

tamaku ~ tidtno,  tarnSkU  j 

Stick  (walking-), 

lath»kii(lt,  lathi,  ^d$gl : 

khand,  | 

dhuS,  dhudhySt, 

larger,  laths,  4%(J&  ; a 
fencing- stick,  ghgstji, 

Smoke, 

ghesll. 

Smoothe  (v&.), 

chi phlS  no. 

Stomach, 

gher,  pSluri,  pd[l,  gher - 

Smooth, 

chip  hid. 

Stone, 

patthar , (ffigur ; a small 

Snake, 

sag  yard,  gurdo. 

stone,  SSkrS;  stone  of 
fruit, 

Snare, 

pasty  S, 

Story, 

lidhnf. 

Snare  (rh.), 

pa  sly  a ISnl , 

Straight, 

padrd. 

Snore  (v6.) f 

ghtirno. 

Strain  (tl>.), 

cbSwno • 

Snout, 

thdth. 

Strangle  (t?6.), 

ddw  Zdtfd. 

Snow, 

7 a 
hav. 

Strawberry, 

ktlphU , bhubh§,  m 

So, 

rsdf. 

Stream, 

gSd ; a streamlet,  khSrS, 

Soak  (vbi) , 

rujno. 

Strength, 

jdr. 

Sole  (rk.)» 

uklwnd. 

Strong, 

majgut . 

Somebody, 

kivai. 

Stumble  (i>6.), 

f khSrfl,  thedy&no. 

ENGLISH-JAUNSARI  VOCABULARY, 


453 


English. 

’ ! 

English. 

— , — — 

J&une&rl. 

Stutter  (<&.), 

IdQe-kari  bGlnft,  *'.* 

Surronnd  (rb.), 

/V 

ydlno . 

Stutteror, 

. ladS. 

Swallow  (rb.), 

rs> 

ghutno . 

Sucking  pig, 

Suckle  («&.), 

Suddenly, 

Sufficient, 

suydtG,  sugtSyld. 

dvdhl  denl9  dudh  dend, 

chdnchak. 

bhaterd , muktS. 

Swear  (rb.), 

Sweat, 

Sweet, 

Svyand  karni , /aS  karni. 

hdivd9  haw. 

mithd,  gulndy  quite,  t yurCL- 
watfi. 

Sun, 

Sunday, 

da 8.  Sun-warmth,  yhdm, 
rur. 

a it  dr. 

Swell  (rb.), 

Swim  (rb.), 

/v 

u saw  no. 

bawd  Idni. 

Surety  (bail), 

jaman-yati. 

Sw  ord, 

t a near. 

Surprise  (t*b.), 

sv 

chambhd  karno. 

Syrup, 

T 

slrd. 

Tail, 

phUrh,  phuchun,  l?g. 

This, 

aijd9  aijO , fem.  a?jf. 

Tas>te  (vb.), 

binds  no. 

Thorny, 

kadidwd. 

Teach  (vb.), 

sikhdno . 

Thread, 

alidyd. 

Tear, 

dsu  (pi.  dsud ). 

i 

Throat, 

tdtu. 

Tear  (rb.), 

•«%  'V 

A7i  aichno. 

! Thumb, 

i 

yvtli  7. 

Teat, 

dad  hi , dudhu. 

i 

Thunder  (rb.), 

yurndj  yu rhino. 

Teaze  (wool)  (rb.), 

tubno. 

Thus, 

fthoT. 

Teeth, 

did. 

1 Tick, 

chalcr  nd. 

Temple, 

vi'Iuil. 

• Tic’do  (rb.), 

kastydi  Id  at. 

Tenant, 

klu'fdi  ; (if  paying  rent  to 
Government)  st  rArdrf- 

£d?nf. 

Tie 

Tiger, 

bad  no. 

slli;  tigress,  slhan. 

Tether, 

dSw. 

Tight, 

y irho. 

Thaw  (rb.), 

yawno . 

Time, 

bakhat . 

Their, 

tiu-kh. 

Tinder, 

ru7,  kapds. 

Thee, 

Then, 

There, 

Therefore, 

Thigh, 

tdo-kh, 

tabhlm 

tekh 

Utlii 5?  Jab7*I 

c7iaru5. 

To, 

Toad, 

Tobacco, 

Toe, 

*kh  ; To  the  head,  inuja- 
kh. 

} a m l kh  u,  tamaku. 

yoifp-kd  gut  hi  : big  toe, 
jot  hi  gut  hi. 

Thin, 

ward. 

j Together, 

kattlid. 

Thirst, 

tu. 

To-morrow, 

detiyd , </Miyj9  dautf. 

Thirsty, 

it  to. 

To-night, 

dlld-rat. 

454 


EN GLI SH- J ATJ NS  Alt!  VOCABULARY, 


English, 

JauuB&ri, 

English. 

Jauns&ri, 

Tooth, 

dSd. 

Tread  (vb.). 

gSchno. 

Top, 

mU4iydro. 

Tree, 

bu{. 

Torch, 

rfika,  bydihf-hi  rfikci  ; (a 
bundle  of  lighted  sticks) 

Trickle, 

Trip  ( vb .), 

iurur^uri. 

ikes  Idgni. 

jtigti ; (of  chir-wood) 
daii. 

Trust  (vb.), 

panth  r&khnd. 

Tough  (of  meat), 

jarjarfi,  jirjiro  ; Tough 

Turn  ( vb.), 

, phirno , baujrno. 

Track, 

(of  leather)  tar  tarn. 

batj  a nail  ow  track,  j 

sdgari  bdt.  1 

Twinkle  (r6.), 

Twitter  (r&.), 

jhahnaldno . 

chauchiySnd. 

u 

Udder, 

ain. 

Untrue, 

jhulthd. 

Uncle, 

(father’s  brother)  kSkd ; 

Unwilling, 

bego. 

(mother’s  brother) 

mdmct ; (husband  of 
father’s  sister)  phuph.2  ; 

iibhd  (fem.  ubhi),  chau. 

Up, 

(husband  of  mother’s 
sister)  mausd. 

Upon, 

- clih £ upon  tho  head, 

mutfa-chh  ; upon  this, 

Under, 

tdi , par  the,  jhilai  ; under 
the  head  mu (f- tdi. 

ethu-chh  ; upou  that, 
tethu-chh. 

Unripo, 

did. 

Us  (ace.), 

c imu-kh . 

Unsafe, 

achaythd,  aukhd. 

Use, 

chll. 

V 


Vacant, 

rlid  (fem.  riti). 

Vessels  (of  metal), 

bhtiffe  ; (of  earthen-ware 
or  baskot-ware),  has  an. 

Vagrant, 

bhaya,  b ha  ilk  phirno  (to 
be  a vagrant;. 

Vex  (vb.). 

hurjcLnd. 

Various, 

bhdti-bhati-h £. 

Violet, 

jin  dd  phulvid. 

Vend  (vb.), 

bikno. 

Virgiu, 

an^bydl. 

Venom, 

bish , bikh.  | 

Vomit, 

4&ki. 

Veranda, 

mdch,  taug. 

Vomit  (vb.), 

chhSduno. 

Verdant, 

hare . 

Vulture  (brown), 

garur  ; (black)  chheppd • 

W 

Wado  (vb.) , 

jag  are  j&no. 

Wall, 

bhlb ; tho  retaining  wall 
of  a hill- field,  bdjin. 

Wait  (vb.), 

jharno. 

Wake  (vb.), 

ujuno. 

Walnut, 

tikhtir,  dhhar. 

Walk  (vb.), 

hd4no,  4$uno. 

Wane  (t&.),  •* 

maurno  fw.g.  of  the  moon). 

* 


ENGXISH-JATJNSArI  VOCABULARY, 


455 


When  ? 
Where, 
Where  ? 
Wherefore  P 
Which, 


English. 

! 

Jauns&ri.  | 

1 

English. 

Jaunsarl. 

Warm, 

tats. 

Whisper, 

k3n&  b3tl. 

Waste  (vb.), 

khtino. 

Whistle  Ob.), 

su6ky3runo. 

Waterfall, 

pacJihGf . 

White, 

folds,  chins,  ietta. 

Wave, 

hali3r3. 

Who  ? 

kuna . 

Wax, 

main,  vnucn9  allha . 

Why  ? 

Ml,  kstha  wans. 

Wax  (vb.)» 

jidno  (e.g.  of  the  moon). 

Wick, 

bati. 

Way, 

bat. 

Widower, 

radu3. 

Wo, 

3m. 

j Wife, 

I 

j5ru9  chhiuf I. 

Weak, 

mard. 

| W ill-o'-the- W i sp, 

bhutaS3» 

Wean  (vb.). 

/v 

(ifidb  chdrno. 

i Wind, 

i 

h3iv3 , b3t. 

Wear  (vb.), 

bhirno*  paharno . 

j Windpipe, 

say  3 . 

Wink, 

pakh. 

Weather, 

rit. 

Weave  (vb.). 

btmno. 

| Wink  (vb.), 

s3n  m3rnl . 

/v  a 

Wedding, 

jfijhCrS,  chyah. 

!.  Winnow  (vb.), 

piclihftrdno , punno 

Wedge, 

m. 

| W inuowi  ng-sieve , 

i 

siipd. 

Weed  (vb.), 

gddno,  helnd. 

j Winter, 

| 

he  find. 

Witch, 

jadiyarl . 

Weep  (vb.), 

runo • 

! 

Weigh  (vb.), 

jtichno* 

Wither  (vb.). 

s£mtono* 

Welfare, 

rxjl  khfisi. 

Within, 

hint  ras~>. 

Wet, 

bhijiyaT,  tindd,  rujiyai . 

i Wizard, 

jadiyGra. 

What  ? 

lit. 

i 

1 Woman, 

beti  m3nukh,  betkvrl . 

ladhT. 

jelce. 

lcSilcS. 

m. 

j'V*- 


Worm, 

Worship  (r?>.), 
Wrap  ( t’b .), 
Wrinkle, 
Wrist, 


fodder,  etc.)  pajihar. 
kirS. 
pujno. 

/V 

badno* 
lu  fl,  jhcb, 
kdgtiti. 


Yawn  (t'b.), 
Year, 


Yearling, 


3no. 


junu 


barii , barai ; last  year, 
ptir ; year  before  last, 
parSf  ; three  years  ago, 
hZ-parSf  ; next  year, 
Sgi  ; two  years  hence, 
agirft. 

bar&W* 


Yeast, 

Yellow, 

Yes, 

Yesterday, 

Yoke, 




A’Fvl. 

bail. 

bey&. 

samGl,  samdl. 


456 


SIRMAURT. 


The  State  of  Sirrnur  lies  in  the  south-eastern  corner  of  the  group  of  States 

which  centre  round  Simla.  Its  boundaries  are  as  follows 
where  spoken.  south-west,  south  and  south-east  lie,  in  order,  the  District  of 

Ambala,  tho  State  of  Kalsia,  and  the  District  of  Dehra  Dun.  In  all  these  the  language 
is  some  form  or  other  of  Western  Hindi,  see  pp.  63  ff.  of ' Part  I of  this  volume. 
To  its  north-west  lies  the  hill  tract  of  the  State  of  Patiala,  in  which  the  language  is, 
here,  Baghati.  To  its  north-east  lies  the  State  of  Jubbal,  and  to  its  east,  the  Jaunsar- 
Bawar  tract  of  Dehra  Dun.  The  language  spoken  in  the  last-named  is  Jaunsari,  the 
most  eastern  of  the  Western  Pahari  dialects.  The  language  of  Jubbal  is  the  same  as 
that  of  Sirrnur.  Leaving  Jubbal,  for  the  present,  out  of  the  question,  we  find  that, 
as  regards  languages,  Sirrnur  has  Baghati  to  its  north-west.  Western  Hindi  to  its 
south-west,  south,  and  south-east,  and  Jaunsari  to  its  cast. 


The  language  of  Sirrnur  itself  is  called  Sirmauri.  This  language  is  not,  however, 

confined  to  this  State.  It  is  also  spoken  in  some  hill  tracts  of 
Name  of  the  language.  Ambala,  bordering  on  Sirrnur,  and  over  most  of  the  State  of 

Jubbal. 


The  river  Giri  runs  through  the  State  of  Sirrnur  from  the  north-west  to  the  soutli- 
Sirmur  Dialects.  east  and  divides  the  State  into  two  nearly  equal  portions. 

The  south-western  of  these  tracts  is  called  Girl-war  or  Cis-Giri,  and  the  north- 
eastern is  called  Girl-par  or  Trans-Girl. 

Three  ranges  of  hills  intersect  the  Cis-Giri  country,  and,  from  the  name  of  one 
of  these,  the  local  dialect  of  Sirmauri  is  called  Dharthl.  The  dialect  of  the  Trans-Giri 
country  is  called  simply  Giripari.  These  two  dialects  are  much  alike.  The  main 
difference  is  that  Dharthl,  as  might  be  expected  from  its  vicinity  to  the  Western  Hindi 
of  Ambala,  is  not  so  distinctively  Paliari  as  Giripari.  In  order  to  assist  comparison,  a 
pretty  full  account,  so  far  as  was  possible  from  the  materials  available,  will  be  given  of 
both  these  dialects. 


Jubbal  Dialects. 


The  State  of  Jubbal  consists  of  two  portions — the  main  portion,  or  Jubbal  proper, 

lying  immediately  to  the  north-east  of  Sirrnur,  and  tho  outlying 
Barar  tract  lying  still  further  to  the  north,  and  separated  from 
Jubbal  proper  by  tho  State  of  Tarhoch  (in  which  the  Kirni  dialect  of  KiSthall  is 
spoken),  and  the  Punur  tract  of  Keonthal.  This  Barar  tract,  further,  has  to  its  east 
Kotkhai,  and  to  its  north  the  State  of  Bashahr. 


The  dialect  spoken  in  Jubbal  proper  is  a form  of  Giripari  locally  known  as  Bi&au. 
The  dialect  of  Barar  and  the  neighbourhood  is  called  Barari,  and  is  more  closely 
connected  with  KiUthall  than  with  Sirmauri.  It  is  dealt  with  under  the  head  of  the 
Kiffyhali  Group  on  pp.  599  ff. 


SIRMAURI. 


457 


The  following  is  the  estimated  number  of  speakers  of  the  various  forms  of 
Sirmauri : — 

DhE.^tl 
Ambala 
Sirmur 

Girlp&ri 

Sirmur 

Jubbal  (Biflfiau) 


Nothing  of  consequence  has  hitherto  been  ■written  concern - 
Authorities  and  Literature,  ing  Sirmauri,  nor,  so  far  as  the  present  writer  knows,  does  it 

possess  any  literature. 


vot..  IX.  PART  iv. 


458 


SIRMAURI  DHARTHT, 

The  materials  for  the  illustration  of  this  dialect  are  very  insufficient.  They  consist 
merely  of  the  two  specimens  annexed  (a  version  of  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son,  and 
the  statement  of  a person  accused  in  a Criminal  Court)  and  the  usual  list  of  words. 
Owing  to  the  defective  nature  of  the  alphabet  used,  and  to  the  inevitable  inconsistencies 
of  spelling,  these  do  not  furnish  very  safe  guidance,  and  the  following  remarks  must  be 
taken  with  some  reserve. 

Alphabet — The  alphabet  used  is  a variety  of  the  Takri  alphabet,  known  as 
Sirmaurl,  of  which  we  have  already  seen  specimens  in  the  Jaunsarl  section  of  the  Survey. 


SIBHATJRt  DHlBTHl.  459 

The  following  table  shows  this  alphabet,  as  it  has  been  employed  in  writing  the 
specimens : — 

The  Sirmaurl  Alphabet. 


f i ■ 

* 

a 

3 

"da 

a 

3) 

dha 

i,  I &5 

na 

u & a 

<J 

j>a 

e 

^ orm 

pha 

ai 

ba 

6&o 

3> 

bha 

au 

rna 

ka 

X 

ya 

kha 

vo 

ra 

ga 

la 

gha 

un 

wa 

clia 

y> 

£a 

chlia 

V 

sha 

i 

ja 

j? 

i 

i 

sa 

jha 

r> 

ha 

ta 

6 

i 

ka 

tha 

6 

i 

ki,  ki 

s 

i 

1 

4a 

ku,  ku  I 

4ha 

j 

ke,  kS 

0 

kai 

ija 

ta 

r> 

ko,  kO 

tha 

9? 

kau 

xyxjxjjx;  c* x g c*  5 ^ ^ ^ 


460 


WESTERN  PAHArI. 


Pronunciation. — Tho  vowel  scale  is  very  uncertain.  The  letter  a is  pronounced 
like  the  6 in  * hot  ’ and  is  sometimes  written  a,  sometimes  o,  and  sometimes  au.  Thus, 
the  word  pronounced  ghor,  a house,  is  sometimes  written  UV,  ghar,  and  sometimes  wtv, 
ghor.  In  the  present  notice  of  the  dialect,  when  a is  written  a it  will  be  left  so,  but 
when  o represents  a short  6,  it  will  be  transliterated  6.  Thus,  u*  will  bo  transliterated 
ghar , and  ufa  will  be  transliterated  ghor.  This  6 is  sometimes  broadened  to  au  as  in  a 
third  form,  ghaur  of  the  same  word. 

Just  as  there  is  a short  6,  so  there  is  a short  e,  sounded  like  the  e in  * met.’  This  is 
sometimes  written  i and  sometimes  e.  Thus,  t vs,  him,  is  sometimes  written  f?ro»  tis,  and 
sometimes  HW,  tes ; so  svti,  with,  is  sometimes  written  f%^,  and  sometimes  Hu*  Here  I 
shall  follow  the  same  system  as  in  the  case  of  a.  When  e is  represented  by  i,  I shall 
transliterate  it  by  /,  thus,  fuu,  tis,  hut  when  it  is  represented  by  e,  I shall  transliterate  it 
by  e,  thus,  HU,  tvs. 

The  vowels  * and  e are  freely  interchangeable.  Thus  we  have  both  si  and  se,  he,  and 
ik  and  ek , one,  bandi  diyd  or  baude  diyd,  he  divided. 

Similarly  u and  b are  freely  interchanged.  As,  hoAvever,  u is  always  Avritten  instead 
of  u,  the  result  is  an  apparent  interchange  of  u find  b ; thus,  guicd  or  gbted,  he  Avent. 

We  have  also  other  interchanges,  such  as  e and  ai  in  beta  or  bait  a,  a son  ; khech 
or  khaich,  pull : o and  au , as  in  ghord  or  gaura,  a horse  ; mo  or  mail,  by  me  ; and  even  5 
and  b in  ha  or  ho,  I. 

As  regards  consonants,  a marked  peculiarity  is  the  frequent  dropping  of  an  initial  h, 
as  in  ha  or  d,  I ; nth,  a hand ; iratr,  a deer ; bud,  to  be  ; hod  or  bd,  he  became. 

Similarly  aspiration  in  the  ease  of  the  sonant  consonants  gh,  jh,  dh,  dh,  bh  is 
dropped,  as  in  gaura  or  ghord , a horse;  ghor  or  gor,  a house;  bad  (not  badh ),  bind; 
bay  a or  bhdyar,  a brother.  On  the  other  hand,  h is  prefixed  in  the  Avord  hbr , and. 

There  is  a tendency  to  soften  hard  consonants,  as  in  the  Avord  dad  (for  dat),  a 
tooth ; paj  (for  pach ),  five ; and  pajd6,  fifty.  The  letters  b and  m seem  to  be  inter- 
changeable in  the  AA’ord  hi  sab  or  hisam  (for  hissa),  a share  ; Avhile  a medial  g is  dropped 
in  the  Avord  laud  for  lagana,  to  apply. 

In  Hindi  the  letter  6 (pronounced  like  the  sh  in  ‘ shine  ’)  generally  becomes  s,  but 
here  it  is  preserved,  as  in  bis,  twenty  ; paj  as,  fifty  ; San,  a hundred.  The  Sanskrit  sh 
(*)  becomes  S as  in  manats,  a man,  sometimes  Avritten  mdnachh,  AA'hich  points  to  inter- 
change between  chh  and  s. 

Nouns- — In  most  forms  of  Central  Paharl  Tadbhava 1 nouns  which  in  Hindi 
end  in  d,  end  in  b.  Butin  Jaunsari,  the  most  Eastern  form  of  the  Western  Paliari 
group  and  lying  immediately  to  the  east  of  Sirmauri  they  end  optionally  either  in  a or 
in  o.  In  Sirmauri  the  ending  in  a is  much  the  more  common,  o being  rarely  met  Avith. 
Examples  of  such  nouns  are  guard,  a horse ; kata,  a dog ; beta,  a son  ; and  batidd,  a 
share.  These,  as  in  Hindi,  form  their  oblique  singulars  and  nominative  plurals  in  e. 
Thus,  gaure,  kute,  bete,  and  baude. 

For  the  oblique  plural  the  usual  fo.wi  ends  in  6,  as  in  gauro , kuto,  etc. 

1 A tadbhava  noun  is  one  which  has  descended  to  Sirmauri  from  Sanskrit  through  Prakrit,  and  which  has  not 
(like  bdlak , a boy)  beer  borrowed  directly  from  Sanskrit. 


SIRMATJllI  DHARTHI. 


461 


Other  masculine  nouns  are  less  regular.  Either,  as  in  Hindi,  the  oblique  singular 
and  the  nominative  plural  may  be  the  same  as  the  nominative  singular,  as  in  pair-hethe, 
under  the  tree;  baw-klic,  (he  said)  to  his  father  ; mdnaa,  men  (sentence  121)  ; or  else, 
all  cases  of  the  singular  including  the  nominative  singular,  and  also  the  nominative 
plural,  may  end  in  e or  d,  and  the  oblique  cases  of  the  plural  in  b.  Thus,  ekl  jone-rd , 
of  a certain  man  ; babe , fathers  (sentence  106)  ; nbkrb  bedi-ro,  having  called  a servant ; 
dur  desb-khe,  to  a far  country  ; latb-khe,  for  the  foot ; ghorb-re.  neve,  near  the  house  ; 
nokre,  (my  father’s)  servants  eat ; n&ch-gitb  suae,  dancing  and  songs  were  heard  ; thbve 
dinb  paclihe,  after  a few  days  ; nbkvb-dd,  (put  me)  among  tile  servants. 

Feminine  nouns  appear  generally  to  remain  unchanged  both  in  the  singular  and  in 
the  plural ; but  also  sometimes  take  d as  in  unhid  diltl,  a complaint  was  given. 

The  case  of  the  agent  and  instrumental  always  ends  in  e,  both  in  the  singular  and 
in  the  plural.  Thus,  kanchhe  bcle  bulb,  the  younger  son  said;  bhukhe,  (I  am  dying)  of 
hunger ; bavoe  dekha,  the  father  saw  him  ; sadne  diltl,  the  complainant  gave  (a  false 
charge)  ; subye  (for  abbl-e  or  sobe-e ) chd raj  miinb,  all  experienced  amazement. 

Other  case  relations  arc?,  as  usual,  defined  by  postpositions,  the  most  usual  of 
which  are : — 

Instrumental  . . . . e or  dd 


Dative  .....  kite  or  ge 

Ablative  ...  dd 

Genitive  . ...  rd 

Locative  ...  dd,  in ; mb,  in ; pade,  on. 

Of  the  above  rii  sometimes  appears  as  rb,  and  da  as  do.  Moreover  these  two 
postpositions  are  adjectival,  and  agree,  like  adjectives,  with  the  governing  word,  in  the 
same;  manner  as  the  Hindi  kb.  Ice,  lei.  Thus  we  have  rd  tor  rb),  re,  rl  ; da  (or  do),  de,  dt. 
Similarly,  pade  is  an  oblique  masculine?  adjective,  and  has  its  feminine  pad}.  Further 
particulars  regarding  these  will  be  found  under  the  head  of  adjectives. 

The  case  of  the  Agent  ends  in  e,  as  above  explained.  It  should  be  added  that,  the 
subject  of  an  intransitive  verb  is  sometimes  put  in  this  ease,  as  in  kanchhe  bale  dur 
desb-khe  do-gbicd,  by  the  younger  son  it  was  gone  away  to  a far  country ; i.e.  the 
younger  son  went  away  to  a far  country. 

The  Accusative  is  usually  the  same  as  the  nominative,  but,  as  in  Hindi,  when 
definiteness  is  required,  it  takes  the  form  of  the  Dative.  Xo  examples  of  this  definite? 
accusative  occur  in  the  specimens.  The  following  are  examples  of  the  simple,  indefinite, 


accusative : — 


muktl  rbti  khdb,  they  cat  much  bread. 
ai  rnpayd  tea  de,  give  this  rupee  to  him. 

The  Instrumental  may  he  the  same  in.  form  as  the  Agent,  i.e.  may  end  iu  e, 
as  in  bhukhe,  by  hunger,  already  quotix!,  and  bblite  chile,  (1  heat  his  son)  with  many 
blows.  The  postposition  dd  is  also  used  as  in  pit  gut-da  bad,  hind  fhini)  with  ropes. 

The  usual  postposition  of  the  D&tiv6  is  klie,  of  which  ge  is  an  occasional  variant. 
Examples  are ; — 

apne  baw-klic  bolb,  he  said  to  his  father. 

dur  desb-khe  db-gbicd,  he  went  away  to  a far  country. 

so  apne  bdw-ge  dud,  he  went  to  his  father. 


462  WESTERN  PAHAUi. 

The  Ablative  also  uses  the  postposition  da  {do)  as  in  se  kas-dd  tod,  from  whom 
did  you  buy  that  ? 

gaw-re  bdniye-db,  from  a shop-keeper  of  the  village. 
bae-dd  chU  khaich,  draw  water  from  the  well. 

The  Genitive  takes  rd  (or  rd),  which,  like  the  Hindi  kd,  is  adjectival.  Examples  of 
the  masculine  singular  arc : — 

tes-rd  jetlid  beta , his  eldest  son. 

. bdw-rd  none  Sado,  (my)  father’s  name  (is)  Sado. 

The  usual  postposition  of  the  Locative  is  again  da.  Mo,  too,  meaning  ‘ in,’  and 
pade,  on,  are  also  used.  Examples  arc  : — 

merd  bapn  tes  chhaule-se  ghor-dd  rau-sa,  my  father  lives  in  that  small  house. 
tenye  test  bdgri-da  sUrld  jag  tie  tdyd , he  put  him  in  the  field  to  watch  swine. 
saped  gaure-ri  jin  ghor-mo  sa,  in  the  house  is  the  saddle  of  the  white  horse. 
sc  gaure  pade  asa,  he  is  on  a horse. 

mi-pade  plia radio,  he  will  make  a charge  upon  (i.e.  against)  me. 

Adjectives  are  declined  exactly  as  in  Hindi.  That  is  to  say,  those  in  d (or  d) 
change  to  e for  the  masculine  oblique  singular  and  for  the  plural,  and  to  i for  the 
feminine. 

The  postpositions  rd  (rd),  of,  and  da  (do),  by,  from,  in,  etc.,  are  adjectives,  and 
agree,  like  adjectives  in  a,  with  the  governing  noun.  Examples  of  the  nominative 
singular  masculine  have  been  given  above.  The  following  are  examples  of  the  other 
forms : — 

gate- re  baniye-db,  from  a shopkeeper  of  the  village. 

tere  bdto-re  glior-de  kaitne  bete,  how  many  sons  are  there  in  your  father’s  house? 

mere  ch ache-re  bete-ra  baydh  tes-ri  hobo  sathe  hoa,  the  son  of  my  uncle  is  married 
to  his  sister. 

es  gaure-ri  umar  kd,  what  is  the  age  of  this  horse  ? 

ghor-de  kaitne  bete,  how  many  sons  in  the  house  ? 

maii  tes-re  chhote-de  bohte  chhite  lae,  I applied  many  blows  upon  his  son. 

KaSmir  de-di  kaitni  dur,  how  far  is  Kashmir  from  here  ? 

The  postposition  pade  follows  similar  rules.  It  is  always  oblique,  but  when  it  is 
governed  by  a feminine  noun  (the  thing  which  is  ‘ on  ’)  it  takes  the  form  padi. 
Thus : — 

se  gaure-pade  asa,  he  is  on  a horse. 

se  tibe-pade  dagar  char,  he  is  grazing  cattle  (masc.  plur.)  on  the  hill  top. 

home  eki  ghone  pade  doe,  we  (masc.  plur.)  went  on  (i.e.  about)  a wall. 

tes-ri  pithi-padi  jin  pa,  put  the  saddle  (fem.)  upon  his  back. 

Comparison  is  effected  as  in  Hindi,  the  thing  with  which  comparison  is  made  being 
put  in  the  ablative.  Thus : — 

tes-ra  bhai  tes-ri  bobo-dd  bafd  asa,  his  brother  is  taller  than  his  sister. 

sbbi  da  achhd,  best  of  all,  best. 


SIRMAURl  DHaB^HI.  463 

PRONOUNS. 

The  pronoun  of  the  first  person  is : — 
sing.  nom.  ha,  a,  h§,  or  aw. 

ag.  mi,  mau,  md,  nidi. 
obi.  meh,  ml,  mi,  md. 
gen.  merd,  mehrd. 

plur.  nom.  ham,  hame,  home. 
ag.  hame,  home. 
obi.  hdmo. 
gen.  mdrd. 

The  pronoun  of  the  second  person  is  : — 
sing.  nom.  tii. 

ag.  te,  tail,  toe. 
obi.  tat. 
gen.  terd. 
plur.  nom.  turn. 

ag.  tume. 
obi.  tumo. 
gen.  tumdrd. 

A few  examples  may  lie  given  of  some  of  these  forms  : — 
ha  bhiiklie  morn e iCigd,  I am  dying  of  hunger. 

hd  terd  beta  bolne-khe  nd  da,  I am  not  (worthy)  to  be  called  thy  son. 
aw  pancho  le-rd"  od-thd,  I had  taken  away  assessor.*. 
a dj  bahot  chald,  I walked  much  to-day. 
mau  pap  kiyd,  I did  sin. 

mde  sftdu  nd  chhetd,  I did  not  beat  the  plaintiff. 

ml  apiie  nokrb-dd  rakli-lo,  place  me  amongst  thy  servants. 

hisab  md-khe  de,  give  the  share  to  me. 

merd  bdpn  tee  ghor-dd  rau-sa,  my  father  lives  in  that  house. 

ham  ghdne-ge  puje,  we  arrived  at  the  wall. 

home  ekl  ghone-pade  doe,  we  went  about  a wall. 

hdmo  khusi  hone  pdr§,  for  us  rejoicing  is  proper. 

nd  hdmo-dd  kdjyd  od,  there  was  no  quarrelling  among  us. 

tu  merd  sdthi  soda  royd,  thou  wast  always  Avitli  me. 

tai  pardwan-chdri  Id},  thou  preparedst  a feast. 

toi  mi  Ik  bdktu  bl  nd  diyd,  thou  didst  not  give  me  even  one  kid. 

terd  hukam  nd  mbra,  (I)  did  not  disobey  thy  order. 

The  Demonstrative  Pronouns,  Avhicli  are  also  employed  as  pronouns  of  the  3rd 
person,  are : — 

ai,  this,  sing.  obi.  es  ; plur.  ai,  obi.  in  or  ini. 

se,  he,  she,  that ; ag.  teniye  or  tenye,  obi.  tea,  teal ; plur.  se,  ag.  tine,  obi.  tin,  tint. 

Examples  are : — 

ai  rupayd  tes  de,  give  this  rupee  to  him. 
ai  gaura  kitne  din~rd,  how  old  is  this  horse  ? 


461 


WESTERN  PAHA1U. 


cs  gcture-ri  mnar  kd , what  is  tlio  ago  of  this  horso? 

se  tibe-pade  da  gar  char,  he  is  grazing  cattle  on  the  hill-top. 

teniye  tinl-khe  liisab  bande-diyd,  he  divided  tho  shares  to  them. 

tenye  mdnb  burd,  he  considered  (it)  had. 

tenye  test  bdgri-dft  Id  yd,  he  sent  him  into  the  field. 

se  tes-re  bdwe  dekhd,  his  father  saw  him. 

se  dpnd  ojrd  tinl-re  chh are  chhilke  khdy-rb  bliorne  Idgd,  he,  having  eaten  their 
abandoned  husks,  began  to  fill  his  belly. 

The  Relative  pronoun  is  je,  which  has  its  agent  sing,  also  jaie,  but  in  other 
respects  is  declined  like  se.  Thus  : — 

lk  bdktii  jaie  khtisi  Idtcdd,  a kid,  with  which  I might  have  made  merry. 
terd  diijd  beta  jeniye  ter l mdl  latdy-diyd,  thy  second  son,  -who  squandered  thy 
wealth. 

The  Interrogative  Pronouns  arc  kdn,  who,  old.  kas  ( kos ) ; and  kd,  what?  As  ex- 
amples we  have : — 

tal-pdclihe  kas-rd  clihbtu  die,  whose  boy  comes  behind  you? 
se  kas-da  Ida,  from  whom  did  you  buy  that  ? 
terd  naw  kd,  what  is  your  name  ? 

lcol  is  * anyone  ’ and  jo-kie  is  * whatever  ’ ; thus : — 
koi  test  khdiie-khe  nd  ded-thd,  no  one  was  giving  him  to  eat. 

jo-kle  ml-gechhe  dsdiyd,  whatever  is  mine.  (But  the  correctness  of  this  sentence 
is  doubtful.) 

CONJUGATION. 

A— Auxiliary  Verbs  and  Verbs  Substantive. 

The  Present  Tense  is  declined  as  follows : — 

Singular.  Plural. 

1.  asu,  osu  asa,  oso 

2.  ase,  ose  asa,  oso 

3.  asa,  oso,  oso  asa,  oso 

When  used  as  an  auxiliary,  we  sometimes  find  sa  or  so  used  instead  of  asa  (oso). 

The  Past  is  thiyd  or  thd,  wast  plur.  thiye  or  the ; fern,  (both  numbers)  thi.  Bike 
the  Hindi  thd,  it  docs  not  change  for  person. 

From  the  verb  bond  or  on  a,  to  become,  we  may  quote  the  past  participle  hod 
or  da ; conjunctive  participle  bi-ro  ; imperative  sing.  2.  o ; and  present  subjunctive  on,  I 
may  be. 

As  examples  of  the  use  of  these  as  verbs  substantive  we  may  quote : — 
tes-rd  bhai  tes-rl  bobo-dd  bard  asa,  his  brother  is  bigger  than  his  sister. 
jo-kie  ml-gechlie  dsdiyd,  leva  osb,  whatever  is  mine,  is  thine.  In  this  example 
the  meaning  of  dsdiyd  is  not  clear.  It  may  be  a present  participle  of  asa. 
jethd  beta  bagri-da  thd,  the  elder  son  was  in  tho  field. 
eki  jone-re  du  bete  tldye,  of  a certain  man  there  were  two  sons. 
hamo  khnsi  hbite  pofd,  it  is  proper  for  us  to  bo  joyful. 


S1KMAURI  DHARTHI. 


465 


h§  bolne~khe  terd  beta  ud  od  (or  hod),  I became  not  (i.e.  I am  not  worthy)  to  bo 
called  thy  son.  This  sentence  occurs  twice  in  the  parable,  and  in  one  case 
we  have  od  and  in  the  other  hdd. 


B.  Active  Verb.  —The  Infinitive  or  Verbal  Noun  is  formed  by  addin-  ««  to 

the  root.  Tlius,  tlpnd , to  beat,  the  act  of  beating.  If  the  root  of  the  verb  ends  in  d, 
dh , «,  r or  r,  then  no  is  added  instead  of  no.  Thus,  mania , to  die.  This  is,  liowevcr, 
only  a matter  of  pronunciation,  as  the  Sirinaurl  character  does  not  distinguish  between 
n and  n.  As  in  the  case  of  nouns  we  sometimes  have  6 in  place  of  the  final  d of  the 
infinitive.  Thus,  tlpyo.  As  examples  of  the  infinitive  we  may  quote : — 

8 fir tu  jdgne  lay  a,  he  was  appointed  to  watcli  swine. 
dj rd  bliorne  Idgd,  he  began  to  fill  his  belly. 

kol  test  khdne-khe  nd  deo-llid,  no  one  used  to  give  him  (anything)  for  eating. 
hotne-rl  pdtcan-chdri,  a feast  (in  honour)  of  arriving. 

The  Present  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  dd  to  the  root  as  in  tlpda , beating. 
If  the  root  ends  in  a vowel,  an  n is  inserted,  as  in  ondd,  being. 

The  Past  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  d to  the  root,  as  in  tipd,  beaten  ; od, 
become.  Sometimes,  as  usual,  we  have.*  0 instead  of  d,  as  tipd. 

There  are  the  usual  irregular  past  participles;  we  may  quote: — 


kantd,  to  do 
dend,  to  give 
lend,  to  take 
jdvd,  to  go 
and,  to  come 
mania,  to  die 


Psist  Participle, 

kit/d  or  kora 
dii/d  or  dittd 
liyd  or  liltd 
gaud  or  god 
dyd 
mod 


With  all  these  there  are  variations  of  spelling.  Thus,  god  may  he  found  spelt  gnied  or 
gated. 

The  Conjunctive  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  t (or,  after  d,  //)  to  the  root. 
Thus,  ftp/,  having  struck  ; kltdy,  having  eaten.  But  this  form  is  reserved  for  compound 
verbs.  When  list'd  as  an  ordinary  conjunctive  participle,  the  sufiix  rd  is  added,  as  in 
llpl-rO,  having  struck.  -Vs  irregular,  we  may  quote  mol,  having  died,  from  mania. 

Examples  are: — 


uokrO  bedl-ro,  having  calk'd  a servant. 
taras  khdg-ro,  having  eaten  (i.e.  felt)  pity. 
khoi-lchanddy-ro,  having  lost  and  squandered. 

Owing  to  the  frequent  interchange  of  l and  e,  we  have  forms  like  bande-diyd,  the 
share  was  divided. 

The  Noun  Of  Agency  is  formed  by  adding  did  to  the  oblique  infinitive  as  in 
rone-dld,  an  inhabitant. 

The  second  person  singular  of  the  Imperative  is  the  same  as  the  root,  and  the 
plural  adds  6,  or,  after  d,  to.  Thus: — tip,  beat  thou;  pa,  put  (the  saddle  on  his  back) ; 
de,  give ; led  or  Id,  bring  ye ; deb  or  do,  give  ye ; yaw,  sing  ye;  kit  am,  eat  ye. 

The  plural  imperative  of  bbhtd,  to  say — bold, — is  often  used  as  a kind  of  interjection 
at  the  commencement  of  a statement.  Several  examples  occur  in  the  first  specimen. 

VOL.  IX,  PiUT  iv.  30 


466 


WESTERN  PA  HAUL 


The  Old  Present,  used  chiefly  as  a present  subjunctive,  is  thus  conjugated : — 

I may  strike,  etc. 

Sing.  Plur. 

1.  tipd,  tipft  tipii,  flpiZ 

2.  tip?  tlpo 

3.  tip,  tlpo,  tipjf  tlpo , tlpd 

Similarly  we  have  chol/ti,  let  me  go  (to  my  father)  ; bblu,  let  me  say  to  him. 
se  tlbe-pnd?  da  gar  char,  lie  grazes  cattle  on  the  hill  top. 
tal-pachh?  kas-rd  chholn  die,  whose  hoy  comes  behind  you? 
porD,  it  is  proper  (for  us  to  be  joyful). 

mu  let  l ruti  Mad  d?b,  they  cat  much  bread  (and)  give  (it  away). 

The  List  of  Words  gives  the  following  forms  for  the  Future  : — 

I shall  strike. 

Sing.  Plnr. 

1.  tip??  (ipdg? 

2.  tipi  a,  1 1 pi e 

3.  (ipla  t.lpt? 

The  only  other  examples  are  both  in  the  second  specimen,  ciz. : hone?,  for  kdrfte, 
I will  make,  and  pharadlb,  he  will  complain. 

The  Definite  Present  is  formed  bv  suflixing  the  present  tense  of  the  verb  sub- 
stantive to  the  Old  Present.  Thus,  tipd  sa,  he  is  striking  ; rau  so,  he  dwells  (sentence 
223). 

Similarly  the  Imperfect  is  formed  by  suflixing  thd,  as  in  tipd  /ltd,  he  was  striking  ; 
nd  deo-thd,  no  ore  was  giving. 

The  Past  Conditional  is  formed  by  using  the  present  participle,  exactly  as  in 
Hindi.  Thus,  Idicdd,  I might  have  arranged  (a  feast  with  my  friends). 

The  Past,  Perfect  and  Pluperfect  are  r<  >rmed  from  tin?  Past  Participle,  exactly 
as  in  Hindi,  and  need  not  detain  us.  When  the  verb  is  transitive  the  subject  is  put  in 
the  agent  case  as  in  that  language.  Tn  this  connexion,  note  that,  the  verb  bblqu,  to  say, 
is,  in  Sirmauri,  transitive.  As  usual  we  sometimes  tied  the  past  participle  ending  in  b 
instead  of  a.  To  quote  a few  examples  : — 

a uj  bahol  chdtd,  I walked  much  to-day. 
kill  par  a , a famine  fell. 

bet  ? bp  a?  bdic-khc  bold , the  son  said  to  the  lather. 
bine?  dpi/?  ubkrb-kh?  bold,  the  father  said  to  the  servants. 
t?s-r?  bb ice  pap?  dig?,  his  father  gave  (him)  kisses. 
ter?  ha  tee  pdica  n-chdrl  kdrl,  thy  father  made  a feast. 
mot  gnwd  thd,  lie  had  died.  . 

Compound  Verbs  are  as  in  TIindl.  Intensives  are  common,  and  often  drop 
the  final  1 of  the  conjunctive  participle.  In  other  cases  there  is  the  usual  change  of  i 
to  e.  Thus : — 

mol  gnted  thd , he  died. 

sard  nidi  lot  bn  hold,  all  tiie  property  was  squandered. 


8IKMAU1U  DHARTHt. 


467 


do-gowd,  he  went  away  (to  a far  country). 
rdlch-lo,  put  (me  among  thy  hired  servants). 
hiaab  bande-diyd,  he  divided  the  share. 

As  examples  of  InCOptives  we  may  quote : — 

se  rone  laga,  he  began  to  dwell  (with  a man  of  that  country). 
bliorne  laga , he  began  to  fill  (his  belly). 
ha  rnorne  laga,  I began  to  die,  i.e.  I am  dying. 

Other  definite  presents  may  be  formed  on  the  lines  of  the  last  example.  Compare 
sentences  Nos.  191,  192. 


VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


468 


[No.  3.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


Central  Group. 


DkArthi  Dialect. 


WESTERN  PAIlARl  (SIRMAURt). 


Specimen  I. 


0)  L 3’W)  f)  &)")&)  9*)“)  mi  » 

vvi  tnws  t\  <■'>•')  r»*>D^€,  » 

V^tX  ^ eDS'l^tOV  " 

^>s.  jD/tV  "ell  3)^/7) 

0))3)  Z~\cy\n  ~7hn) 

^SiVx^i)  <■  £'/>  y>) cr> 

*o>  o>>fo*^  OJ^J  r'W'’? 

mi'i'H  \)t)  "yS>*7  V>t?£  t<>>  tl 

'vj'iS)  £)/i  Cj  »>/>  ?<^oo  £^o>)3)»» 

yic;[ \o)f*  ynrjs>  cy)V>l  «>{ 

0>/?/r»3D  " y><>^  cOMSytV 


SIRMAURl  ©BARTH!. 


JViTh  /r»^>  "cj  il<sy  fj)  3)f>0) 

'tfljny)  <4yi  *6l<n * 07)%^)  $)n*7  mww, 

*£)  <7  ~x> / V> c?^  *7)  '~£."5> h> * 

. sp)rt  V*<>^  ~i>c>  3>«^»  ~v>l  ejV) i^*> 

*T)0  «0^^0  6V>0  *tf5>*<7) 

^>4^  *>>?)3)  , ^3)  9? 

n€>  <WA)>  » \)  3)Jw3  <^1^)>y 

V7^  *t>  O oO^U  y^' 

«3VJ  0)Y>^>9  0^)79  Como  ♦ 

v r>o->  <041  "~^*)9  00V7 1^ 

-*£.  3)^0  *9)Xo)  e)  'V'h'w) 

^°7  <>£  3t«o*>  *n,nT)  S)  <r>>  A 
JOK  W^|  C)  ~VKy?  *))<??  ^^>7)  " 

^Oo<>  ")^)<^  /}}  V)C>9  ~?>VV>  <r>V^  o) 

^’L0’^  "*^)0  g.^  '■  V7<>^  ”^9A 

^ ^ VN>  *^V)  3V^5  /7)VJ^ 

<)V7^  v»«o  *£(</  //  ^V  »9 > <V>5^>  ^>0) 


470 


WESTERN  EAHiRf. 


r»  5>  » »)<o  o)o  3>i^/> 

t )))*o)  V)  eo)m)  ao)my  3)^1  oryyvo) 
~cr>y)  cOYruy  ^ '£,'37  * t) 

£)  A VJy>/V~0  )) 

*l)f)  ^£3)  Y>a>cn  "v> 0)  ~~cnu 


my  6 j*j>«nyto)  jy^y)  <v>v? 

**)>  f»  toy  0)^0  T )£(r>}  » V>0  Y)&\ 

mi  { n 

'V^o)  ^6)  "o<u  ay)  *ys<t  £)  &» 

ao)  <n  c>^  itoyoy  ^ ^Ts  3^) 

*})Y)  >7)  C^O  Y»}  ^O)><0) 

^>1*^)  ey) /r>)  X.)  CSV©')  miCT  /7>^;  # 

Yym^  0)0;  ><  ^o?  3)^ny  3)  » 

<?)o  v>^  0)r>{_  ■*}c>^'bio 

^x>09  * v>o^  r>v?) 


SIRMAURl  DHAUTHl. 


471 


» 3>y) 

"^<>9  om) 

*5”  "v»09  ~?>)n<5)  x£ 

*7^  ^ CJ_»>  23  3 0 3M 


TOfJh'J)  cy>.>>  1^09  rr?)f>t)  3?)*) 
*v>07  JL;A>  ^5A>  SJty  ~$>/?(^ 

X » tr>  yi>oo^n^)  S>d  <W4) 
v>  v,c>^ 

0))<n  (n)'ry)  ^ ^y  *V)0) 

^>>fc)  7>)  ^ v?0>V 

y>/7>  3)<))  ^y?>)  S^o 

^7/?  6<?)X  ^)WA 

X\f  J0^J9  "j)>  o; 

<?>V)  *^V)  3V  $9,)  ^T)  2>)  V 


4)72 


[ No.  3.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 


AYE  STERN  PAH  Alt!  (SIRMATTlU). 

RhakthT  Dialect. 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 


Speoimen  I. 


Eki-jone-rd  dft 
One-man-of  two 

bold,  ‘ bapu, 

i t-was-sa  id,  ' J'at  h e>‘, 

tini-khd  hi  sab 


held  thiyd. 
sons  were. 

nidrd-biindd 
{of-)  in y- portion 

bfuido-diva. 


them-fo  t lie-shore  was-dirided-ont . 

ajma-banda  bisam  lo-i*d(t/or  loi-rd) 

his-own-porlion  share  f (then-ha  ring 


Kfmchhd-betd 

Ily-the-younger-son 

hi  sab  ina-khd 

the-sharc  me-to 

Tlibrd-di  n 6-pachlic 
A-few-da  ys-afl  erwa  rds 

dur-deso-khe 
afar-country-to 


iipnd-bfiw-khd 
h is-own-fatli  er-to 
df*.’  Toniye 

giro.'  ’By -him 

kanchhd-betd 
by -t.h  e-you  nger-son 

dd-gdwa,  lior 

it-  icas-gonc-a  tea  y,  a nd 


apn:i 

and  kh6i-kliamhiv-rf> 

• • f 

goway 

-diva. 

Jobe 

sarsi  infil 

Ms-own 

propert y losl-sq  ua  nderod-h  a c i n g 

was-wasted. 

lichen 

all  the-property 

latay 

-l)6ta,  tdbd  tesi-ddso-da 

kill 

l*oya, 

hor 

so  tabe 

kaiigal 

was-npent-a  way,  f h an  Hi  a t-co  a a try - / n a -f  am  rue 

fell. 

and 

lie  then 

poor 

lid-gda. 

T esi  -ddsd-rd  eki  - j on  d -re 

sal  hi 

si  {for 

so) 

rone 

lagft. 

became. 

Thal-eou  nt  ry-of  a-man-of 

with 

he 

to- remain 

began. 

leniyc 

tesi  bfigrl-d:i  stirtii 

jagnd 

lava . 

Sd  upon 

ojra 

liy-him 

as-for-h  im  th  e-Jieht-i  n stri  ne  to- watch 

lic-was-put . 

lie  his-own 

belly 

(ini -iv 

cbbavd-clilii  1 kd  kbay-rd 

bhdriie 

liiga ; 

lidr 

koi 

tesi 

them- of 

aba ndoued-h  asks  ca  ten- a a r i ag 

I o-Jitl 

began  ; 

and 

anyone 

to-hit n 

klumd-kho  ua 
eatingfor  not 


deu-tha. 

gir.ing-was. 


J..bi 


tf-SL 

When  to-him 


jo,  ‘ more-Daw-re 
that,  ‘ my-fathcr-of 


ilne-r.dk  m 
so-mo  ny-serran  ts 


limkti 


lids 

sense 

roti 


ava, 

came, 

khao 


to  sama  {for  japa) 
then  hc-said 


ha,  otlii 
I here 
bole, 
may-say, 

tera  beta 
th  y son 

rakh-ld.”  ’ 
put."  ’ 


so 


he 


bhukhd 
by-hunger 
“liai  bapft, 

“ O father, 

bdlnd-khd 
calling- for 

Tbbe  si  {for  so) 
Then  he 

dekha. 

teas- see:.1. 


tes-rd-bawe 

by-his-falhet 


liiira. 

began.  1 

mail  Idre-ago, 
by-me  of-lhee-before 

OH.  Mi 

became.  Me. 

apnd-1>aw-ge 
h is-oten-  fath  er-to 
Taras 

Compassion 


morne 

to-die 


mi 

not 


den,  hor 

much  bread  eat  {and)  gine-away,  and 

Ha  apnd-bapu-gd  {or  -khd)  cholS  , lidr 
1 fmy -own-fat  her- to  may-go  and 
llam-ji-siti  pap  kiya ; bo 

Cod- with  sin  icas-done ; I 


libi  apnd-nbkrd-da, 

also  th  ine-oicn-scrcants-among 
dda.  Mcbbiye  durke  thiya, 

•went  As- yet  distant  he- was, 

khay-ro,  tesi  gold 

eateu-hacing,  . hint  on- the- neck 


sirmaxjrI  dhArthL 


473 


l&y-ro  mila,  hor 

applied-having  he-xoas-met,  and 

* h ft  bapii,  mo  terfl-age 

‘ O father , by -me  of-tliee-before 

tera  beta  na  hoa.’  Tobe 

thy  son  not  became .’  Then 


pape 

kisses 


diyc. 

tcere-given. 

Ram-ji-seti  pap 
God-with  sin 


Tes-re-bete 
By -his-. son 

kiya,  ho 
tcas-done,  I 


bawe 

by-th  e-father 


apne-nokro-khe 
h is-own-servan  ts-to 


* bold,  achhi 

bamna 

led, 

bamne-khc 

deo  ; gut  hi -da 

chhala, 

‘ say,  good 

clothes 

bring. 

for-clotliing 

give ; the-finger-on 

a-ri  tig, 

lato-khe  chhitra 

do. 

Khaw,  pid, 

maiigal  gaw ; 

mera 

the-foot-for  a- 

-shoe  give. 

Eat,  drink, 

songs-of-joy  sing ; 

my 

moi-guwa-tha, 

giri 

jiwa ; 

raehe-gowa  {for  gda)-tha,  giri 

mila.’ 

dead-gone-was,  again  lived; 


lost-gone-was, 


again  teas- got' 


bola, 

it-was-8aid, 

bolne-khe 

calling-for 

bola, 

it-was-said, 
hor 

and 

beta, 

son 

Tabs 

Then 


tenye  khusi  lai. 

by-him  rejoicing  tcas-arranged. 


Tes-ra 

llim-of 


j cilia 

the-elder 


si  ( for  se)  glioro-ri  {for  re) 
he  the-honse-of 

To  nokro  bedi-ro 

Then  a-serrant  callcd-hav 


beta  bagri-da  tha. 

son  the-field-in  teas. 

ncre  ava,  tenye  nach-gito 

near  came , by-him  dance-songs 

Saya,  ‘ bold,  ka 

ing  it-icas-asked,  'say,  what 


Jobe 

When 

sune. 

were-heard. 

uchliab 

festival 


lay-rakha  ? ’ Tenye  bola  ke,  ‘tera  bliayar  ay-rda, 

has-been-arranged?'  By-him  it-was-said  that , 'thy  brother  come-has, 

tere-bawe  tes-re  raji-kliusi  libtne-ri  pawan-ehari  kori.’  Tenye 

by-thy-father  him-of  safe-happy  arriring-of  a-feast  icas-made.'  By-him 
inanO  burn ; tis-re-gliore-khe  daYwda  bliaja.  Tes-ra  bawa  bSida 

it-was-thouglit  bad ; his-house-to  entering  h e-ref  used.  His  father  outside 

aya,  tesi  man  aw.  Bete  bola,  ‘ bold,  man  teri  tol 

came,  him  remonstrated-with.  By-the-son  it-was-said,  'say,  by-me  thy  service 
itm-bftrsd  ki  ; tera  lmkam  na  mora,  tog  ml  ik 

for-so-many-years  tcas-done ; thy  order  not  was-tra nsgressed,  by-tliee  to-me  one 
baktu  bl  na  dima  ( for  diya)  jaie  ho  apne-mitro-soge  khusi 

kid  even  not  was-given  by-tchich  I my-own-friends-with  rejoicing 

lawda.  Jobe  tera  duja  beta  aya,  jeniye  teri  mal 

might-have-arranged . When  thy  second  son  came,  by-whom  thy  property 

kanjani-rora-khe  latay-diya,  tai  tdsl-khe  parawan-chari  lai.’ 

harlots-to  xcas-squandered,  by-thee  him-for  a-feast  tcas-arranged? 

Bawe  bola,  ‘ he  beta,  tu  mera  satin  soda  rdya ; 

By -the-f other  it-tcaS-said,  *0  son,  thon  my  companion  always  remained; 

jo-kie  mi-gechhc  ftsdiya,  tera  Sso.  Hamo  khusi  hone  pdrO,  ero 
whatever  me-to  is,  thine  is.  For-us  happy  to-be  is-proper,  because 

kg  teri  bhayar  mui-gda-tha,  si  {for  se)  jiw-goa ; rache-gda-tha,  miti-gda.’ 

that  thy  brother  dead-gone-was,  he  alive-went ; lost-gone-was,  met-went? 

VOL.  IX,  PAST  IV.  V 


474 


[ No.  4.J 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAHlRl  (SIRMAUBl). 

DiiAhthI  Dialect. 

Specimen  II. 


Y>f))  n)f9 

♦ 

apt*  cnyYt  XrfYl 

”x)<>S  /»  ~3K)- 

c^lTs  m)  e 


e^vt^  it  c>)j  <m 


/7> 


e>  sis?  ir  fcm  ^x\ 

w'e  *a>3  « i)f) 

v>>0^9  £93*  (r>')<r>n  ”7noV>3) 

C.'iY)  ^^7 


2/»  * 


SIRMAURI  DHlRTHl. 


475 


^ c^yel 

'7))?)  v>«)  i^yiC)  ^4)  *"5)o\ 


II 


Tr>)<n)  « i/»n) 

"!>)  5VV)  I<  fc)<?09  ^£>  vjjo  ^)0) 

~y>(n  eo)vi 

IsYXO&y  « €^)o}£,)  y)\f> 

'o?> i|  *n>3>  II  <&)£${  t/flis))  JO  TO? 


Inn)  £ O'))  u 


</>>£.  V\V 

/n)(ruj)  4x40  ^3  Oo>VM<(_  <0>^K  *3#l 


UVio)£.  X)fl<0  " 


8^  *3 


<r»fc  « 


VOX..  IX,  PART  IT. 


:i  v i 


[ No.  4 ] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


470 


Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAHARl  (SIRMAURl). 

DuARTH!  DlAIiECT. 

Specimen  II. 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 

Mero  naw  Madho,  Baw-ra  naw  Sado,  jat  Kanait,  roneala 

My  name  Madho,  Fatlier-of  name  Sado,  caste  Kanait , inhabitant 

gaw  Koti-ra  6su. 
village  Koti-of  1-am. 


Sadue  mo-pade  jliuthi  nalso  diti  (for  ditti).  Mol 

By -Complainant  me-upon  false  complaint  icas-gioen.  By-me 

Sadu  na  chheta,  nft  hamo-da  kojya  6a.  Hdme 

the- Complainant  not  was-beaten,  not  ns-among  quarrelling  became.  We 

eki-ghSne-pade  doe.  TSthe  Sw  paKcho  le-ro  ghone-rl  sl<5 


a-toall-upon  went.  There  I assessors  taken-having  the-wall-of  foundation 
lawne  le-goa-llia.  J6be  ham  ghSne-ge  puje,  to  Sadue 

to-mark  brought-had.  When  ice  the-wall-to  arrived,  then  by-the-Complainant 

sSbl-khe  gall  dl.  J6be  mi  tipda  dora,  sObyo 

all-to  abuse  was-given.  When  to-me  beating  he-ran,  by-all 

chttraj  mano,  apae-apne-gh5ro-khe  bhage.  HS  bi  tai-da 

amazement  tcas-felt,  each-his-own-house-to  fled.  I also  him-from 

d6re  pom  bhaga.  Bhagde-bhagde  mero  lat  thokurwa. 

in- fear  fallen  ran- away.  In-running-running  my  foot  was- hurt. 

Gh6ro-da  tin-dino  besud  p6ra  roha.  Sadue 

House-in  for-three-days  unconscious  fallen  I-remained.  By-the-Complainant 

thapa  je,  ‘ mi-pitde  gall-ri  tai  pharadla.' 

it-was-considered  that,  ‘ me-upon  abuse-of  for  he-will-make-a-charge.' 

Nalso  rakne  (for  rokne)-re  (for  rl)  khatrl  Sadue  jhuthi  pharad 

Complaint  stopping-of  for  by-the-Complainant  false  charge 

ki.  Gall  jo  ml-khe  dl,  tes-ri  pharad  k6rwi. 

i oas-made.  jLhusc  which  me-lo  was-given,  lhat-of  charge  I-will-make. 

Sahi,  Sadhu  {for  Madho)  Badu. 

Signed,  Madho  Bddu. 


477 


■SIRMAURT  GIRIPARI. 

I.  Vocabulary  .—The  Vocabulary  of  Girlpari  Sirmauri  contains  many  words  which 
present  a strange  appearance  to  those  who  are  more  familiar  with  the  Indo-Aryan  Lan- 
guages spoken  to  the  south  and  cast.  We  have  met  a certain  number  of  such  words  in 
the  Pahftyi  languages  spoken  more  to  the  east,  such  as  Jaunsari,  Garhwali  and  Kumauni, 
and  we  shall  meet  many  more  in  the  Western  Pahari  languages  still  remaining  to  bo 
dealt  with.  As  it  is  in  Girlpari  that  they  first  become  a prominent  feature  of  the  Voca- 
bulary of  Sirmauri,  a list  is  here  given  of  some  of  those  that  are  worthy  of  note  in  the 
specimens  and  list  of  words  of  that  dialect.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  most  of  them  are 
relics  of  the  old  Khaia  language  formerly  spoken  before  the  Rajput  occupation  of  these 
hills,  and,  as  will  be  seen  subsequently,  many  of  them  give  evidence  of  phonetic  changes 
which  would  lead  us  to  class  the  Khak  languages  with  the  Pikcha  languages  of  the 
North-West  Frontier— Shin  a,  Khowar,  Bashgali  Kafir,  etc. 

achl  jand,  to  be  lost. 

dgli,  sin.  ■ 

djnd,  to  come. 

aulao,  a shoe. 

bagnd,  the  foot. 

bantyd,  beautiful. 

bafh,  all,  entire. 

chhewTd,  a man. 

chhewri,  a woman. 

chin  or  chon,  three. 

chii,  water. 

chiSnd,  to  give. 

chhdld,  a son. 

deS,  a day. 

devond , to  go. 

dhifu,  a daughter. 

dona  or  ddnd,  to  run. 

gaS,  gdSi,  gei,  or  gSSi,  up,  upon. 

horm,  to  run. 

hofna,  to  move,  to  go. 

jhagna,  to  beat. 

jhclnd,  to  see. 

led,  a house,  home. 

Jchech,  a field. 

Idt,  the  foot. 
madal , hair. 

pand,  to  cause  to  fall,  used  in  compound  verbs  as  the  equivalent  of  the  Hindi 
dalnd. 

pdfnd,  to  bo  proper,  to  be  meet. 
rigaf,  a servant. 


473 


WESTERN  PAHA?I. 


sadnd,  to  commit  (sin). 
tana,  to  ask. 

Sutnd,  to  run. 

The  verb  jdnd,  to  go,  is  also  used,  but  principally  in  compound  verbs.  Dewna  is 
generally  employed  when  the  idea  is  simply  “going”  used  independently. 

It  should  also  be  noted  that  the  termination  tu  is  often  added  to  a noun  without 
changing  its  meaning.  Thus,  sSr-lii,  a pig ; chhel-tA, , a kid ; dhi-tit,  a girl ; pdge-tu,  a 
rope.  This  termination  is  always  masculine,  so  that  we  have  achfio  (not  achhi)  dhitu,  a 
good  girl. 

XI.  Pronunciation* — The  spelling  of  Sirnmurl  words  is  not  fixed,  and  it  is  impos- 
sible to  say  whether,  so  far  as  the  vowels  are  concerned,  the  following  remarks  indicate 
real  changes  of  pronunciation  or  merely  varieties  of  spelling.  The  remarks  are 
entirely  based  on  the  specimens  as  they  have  been  received,  as  no  other  materials  are 
available. 

The  vowel  a is  pronounced  like  the  6 in  ‘ hot.’  In  the  local  character  this  sound  is 
indicated  at  random  by  a and  by  6.  Thus,  jabe,  when  pronounced  jobe,  is  sometimes 
written  and  sometimes  In  transliterating  the  o,  when  it  is  certain  that  it  lias 

the  sound  of  6,  is  represented  by  o,  not  by  o.  Thus,  is  transliterated  jabe,  and 
by  jobe.  Other  examples  are  deSa  and  deko,  the  oblique  form  singular  of  deS,  a country  ; 
rad  and  rod,  (he)  remained ; ghar  and  ghor,  a house  ; mardd  or  tndrdd,  dying.  Some- 
times this  6 sound  is  broadened  to  au,  as  in  gharche  (UV%)  or  ghaurchi  property.. 

We  shall  see  a similar  broadening  of  the  same  sound  in  KiUthali,  in  which  dialect  ghar,  a 
house,  often  appears  as  ganhr. 

Very  similarly  d and  o are  interchangeable,  as  in  durkd  or  durko,  distant;  dayd  or 
doyo,  he  ran.  This  is  specially  common  in  the  case  of  nouns,  including  past  participles 
which,  in  Hindi,  end  in  d,  and  in  Western  Pahari  in  0.  In  Sirmauri  such  nouns 
usually  end  in  d but  the  substitution  of  0 is  not  at  all  uncommon.  Thus,  we  have 
bhukhd , hungry ; but  Sutio,  gold ; dchhd,  good ; ndchno,  dancing ; and  many  past  parti- 
ciples, such  as  bold  or  bold,  said ; chhdrd,  sent ; sticho,  thought,  and  so  on.  • In  other 
Western  Pahari  dialects,  the  two  vowels,  when  final,  are  absolutely  interchangeable. 

There  is  a short  e,  sounded  like  the  e in  ‘met.’  This  is  sometimes  written  i and 
sometimes  written  e.  Thus,  teSi,  him,  is  written  both  f?nrt  and  In  such  cases  T 

shall  transliterate  i by  i,  but  e,  when  it  represents  e,  by  e. 

The  vowels  e and  * are  absolutely  interchangeable.  Thus,  ekl  or  Iki,  oblique  form  of 
ek,  one ; bhetno,  betno,  or  bit  no,  to  find  ; kai  or  kde,  towards.  This  is  specially  common 
in  the  case  of  feminine  nouns  which,  in  Hindi,  end  in  i.  Thus,  gharchl  or  ghaurche, 
property;  bar-bauchi  or  bd  r-bauche,  fields;  dpne  ghaurchi,  for  apiii  gli° , his  own  pro- 
perty; beke,  for  biki,  having  sold;  bonl  or  bone,  a sister.  As  examples  of  the  reverse, 
in  which  * is  used  for  e,  we  have  rigaro-ri  (for  -re)  sat  hi,  with  the  servants ; Uni  (for 
itne)  barso,  for  so  many  years. 

The  vowels  o and  u are  similarly  interchangeable.  Thus  the  postposition  of.  the 
ablative  is  sometimes  written  do  (sentences  104,  etc.)  and  sometimes  du  (ib.  231,  236, 
237,  241). 

As  regards  consonants,  we  may  first  note  the  frequent  dropping  of  the  letter  h when 
initial.  Thus,  hotna  or  bind,  to  go  ; arin  (for  harin),  a deer ; hame  or  time,  we.  Whon 


sir  m att  hi  giripari.  479 

a sonant  consonant  has  aspiration  the  aspiration  is  liable  to  he  dropped  (as  in  the 
Pi&Lcha  languages).  Thus,  bhebno , bet  no,  or  blind,  to  find. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  cerebral  n is  as  common  as  in  the  other  Pahari  languages, 
but  the  dental  n is  almost  always  written  in  its  place.  I have  not  ventured  to  restore 
the  cerebral  letter  when  it  would  be  expected.  A curious  instance  of  the  writing  of  the 
cerebral  a is  in  the  word  Panesur,  a corruption  of  ParmeSnr,  (rod. 

Two  consonantal  changes  are  noteworthy,  as  they  are  typical  of  the  Pi£acha  lan- 
guages. There  are  the  change  of  t (derived  from  an  ancient  tr)  to  ch,  as  in  chin,  three, 
and  khech , a field,  and  the  change  of  d to  j as  in  beSuj  for  be^ful(h),  senseless,  and  ddlij 
for  ddlid,  poor.  Especially  interesting  is  the  root  jhet,  see,  derived  from  the  Prakrit 
dittha.  Here  not  only  has  the  d been  changed  to  j,  hut  the  aspiration  of  the  th  has 
been  transferred  to  it,  and  it  has  become  j h. 

The  letter  s is  almost  always  changed  to  .4,  pronounced  like  an  English  sh.  Thus 
we  have  both  tisl,  and  much  more  often  tesl,  him,  and  deS,  a day,  representing  an  older 
divasa.  So  also  an  original  6 is  preserved,  whereas,  in  Hindi,  it  always  becomes  s. 
Thus,  Hand  (Hindi  sund ),  heard;  des  (Hindi  des),  a country.  The  Sanskrits//  (t?)  also 
becomes  s,  as  in  tndnas  (Sanskrit  mdnusha),  a man. 

The  letters  l and  r between  two  vowels  are  liable  to  elision,  as  in  pllnld,  or  pltnd , I 
shall  beat;  dona  (for  daur{a)nd),  to  run  ; pana , to  cause  to  fall,  for  pdrnd.  So  also,  an 
initial  r is  dropped  in  the  phrase  achl-god,  he  was  lost,  for  rdchl-god. 

Consonants  are  sometimes  transposed,  as  in  pltnd  or  tipnd,  to  beat.  With  this  we 
may  compare  the  transfer  of  aspiration  in  jhet  for  jith,  mentioned  above. 

NOUNS. 

Gender  and  Case- 

As  in  Hharthi,  masculine  tadbhaea  nouns,  which  in  Hindi  end  in  a,  also  usually  end 
in' <3,  though  a termination  6 also  occurs.  Thus,  while  we  have  child  td,  a son,  and  badd, 
a share,  we  have  also  words  such  as  &und,  gold.  These  nouns  form  their  oblique  cases 
singular  and  the  nominative  plural  in  e,  as  chliote-khe,  to  the  son,  clihdte,  sons.  The 
oblique  plural  of  these  nouns  is  the  same  as  the  singular. 

Other  masculine  nouns  ending  in  consonants  form  the  agent  and  locative  cases  by 
adding  e.  Thus,  from  indnas,  a man,  the  agent  is  manse,  by  a man,  and  from  ghor,  a 
house,  the  locative  is  ghore,  in  a house.  For  the  other  cases  of  the  singular,  the  oblique 
form  is  made  by  adding  a (o)  or  o to  the  noun.  Thus,  pdrdesa-khe,  to  a foreign  country  : 
Idtb-klie,  on  the  foot.  The  nominative  plural  is  the  same  as  the  singular,  as  in  rigor, 
servants,  and  the  oblique  plural  is  the  same  as  the  oblique  singular,  as  in  rlgaro-khe,  to 
the  servants. 

Masculine  nouns  ending  in  vowels  other  than  d,  form  the  agent  and  locative 
singular  by  adding  e.  Thus,  sddve,  by  the  complainant  (Specimen  II). 

Feminine  nouns;  which  in  Hindi  end  in  /,  in  Girlpaiialso  end  in  i,  but,  as  explained 
under  the  head  of  pronunciation,  this  / as  often  as  not  is  written  e.  Thus,  in  the  first 
specimen,  we  have  both  bdr-bauchl  and  bdr-bauche,  fields.  These  and  other  feminine 
nmmg  appear  to  remain  unchanged  throughout  the  singular  and  tho  plural,  except  that 
they  take  e in  the  singular  agent  and  locative. 


480 


WESTERN  PAHAbI. 


Case  relations  (excluding  those  of  the  agent  and  locative)  are  made  with  the  aid  of  . 
postpositions.  The  following  are  the  more  important. 

Instrumental.  - This  case  is  usually  treated  like  the  agent,  and  takes  e.  Some- 
times it  has  the  postposition  re. 

Accusative-Dative. — khe,  ekh,  ge,  to  or  for;  rl  (re)-tax,  for. 

Ablative. — do  (or  da),  from. 

Genitive. — rd. 

Locative. — da,  me,  m&je,  in ; get,  geil,  gdSi,  on. 

We  may  therefore  thus  decline  chhota,  a son  : • 


Singular. 

Plural. 

Horn. 

clihbtd 

chhote 

Agent 

chhote 

chhote 

Acc. 

chhota  or  chhote-klie 

chhote,  chhote-khe 

Instr. 

chhote 

chhote 

Dat. 

chhote-khe 

chhote-khe 

Abl. 

ch  hot  e-do 

chhote-db 

Gen. 

clihoie-ra 

chhbte-rd 

Loc. 

chhote-dd 

chhote-dd 

Voc. 

he  chhota 

he  chhote 

We  may  quote  the  following  examples : — 

Nominative. — jethd  chhota  khechb-db  tliiyd,  the  elder  son  was  in  the  field. 
ekl  chhcic  re-re  du  chhote  ike,  there  were  two  sons  of  a certain  man. 

Agent. — kanchhe  chlidtc  apne  bdbb-khe  bold,  the  younger  son  said  to  his  father. 
(Here  note  that  the  oblique  form  of  bdbd,  a father,  is  sometimes  bdbd,  and 
sometimes  bdice.) 

sadue  er\  jalsdji  kt,  the  complainant  has  made  a causelessly  false  complaint 
(Specimen  II). 

Accusative. — <?  rupayd  es-khe  de,  give  this  rupee  to  him. 

sUrtu-re  chhare  kalekre  khay-ro,  having  eaten  the  husks  left  by  the  swine. 
Instrumental. — pdgetue  ban,  tie  (him)  with  ropes. 
chheltu,  je-re  mb  apne  mitro  sdthe  khuSi  latodd,  a kid,  by  means  of  which  I # 
might  have  rejoiced  with  my  friends. 

Dative. — apne  bdbd-khe  bolb',  he  said  to  his  father. 

mere  latikh  thok  lag 2,  a blow  happened  to  my  foot  (Specimen  II). 
pharado  rokne-ge,  for  stopping  the  complaint  (Specimen  II). 

Dor  re- tax,  see  sentences  103,  etc.,  where,  as  often  happens,  re  is  written  rl. 

Ablative. — kue-du  chti  gdro,  draw  water  from  the  well. 

In  sentences  104,  etc.,  the  postposition  is  written  do. 

Genitive.  —Here  rd  becomes  re  and  rl,  exactly  as  the  Hindostani  kd  becomes  ke 
and  kt.  But,  as  e and  l arc  interchangeable,  we  often  find  rl  instead  of  rd 
and  vice  verad.  Examples  are  : — 

mere  bdpa-ra  ndto  Sddo,  my  father’s  name  (is)  Sadd  (Specimen  II). 
teSl  deSo-re  ikl  nidnSo-rc  sdth,  with  a certain  man  of  that  country,,* 


SIRMAURt  GIRlPARI. 


"481 


dp  tie  rigaru-rl  (for  -re)  sdthi  (for  suthe),  with  one  of  your  own  servants. 
surtu-re  chhdre  Salelere,  the  abandoned  husks  of  the  swine. 

» tes-rl  pitlie-gaH  jin  pdrd,  put  the  saddle  on  his  back. 

In  the  second  specimen  is-ke  (for  is-lcj)  ndlish,  a complaint  of  this,  is  evidently 
borrowed  from  Hindi. 

Locative. — The  termination  da  of  the  locative  is  also  an  adjective  like  rd,  agreeing 
with  the  thing  which  is  on,  as  rd  agrees  with  the  thing  possessed.  Thus : — 
test  deSa-dd  ghdtd  dyd,  a famine  came  in  that  land. 

tedre  bdice-re  ghar-de  keie  clihote  sa,  how  many  sons  are  there  in  your  father’s 
house  ? 

. jo  ghar-gharche  mere  bade-di  djd , the  house-property  (fern.)  which  comes  in 
my  share. 

Examples  of  other  postpositions  of  the  Locative  are : — 

gaw  Kdli-me  roil,  I live  in  village  Koti  (Specimen  II). 

na  dpd-muje  tipaye-ghulaye,  we  did  not  quarrel  among  ourselves  (Specimen  II). 
Sddiie  mo-geS  eri  jalsdji  ki,  the  complainant  made  a causelessly  false  complaint 
on  me  (Specimen  II). 

md-geke  (for  -geSi)  gall  dene-ri  phardd  karni,  a complaint  of  giving  abuse  will 
be  made  upon  me  (Specimen  II). 
tts-ri  pifhe-gdti  jin  pdro,  put  the  saddle  on  his  back. 

Note  that  here  pi  (he  itself  is  in  the  locative. 

ghore  hotdd  blidja,  he  refused  to  go  into  the  house. 

Vocative  — 

lie  baba , O father,  (I  have  sinned). 
he  chhofd,  O son,  (thou  art  ever  with  me). 

Adjectives. — The  rules  arc  as  in  Hindi.  Adjectives  in  d (or  6)  take  e in  the 
masculine  plural,  and  in  the  oblique  cases  of  the  singular  they  take  * (or  e)  in  the 
feminine. 

Comparison  is  also  made  as  in  Hindi.  Thus : — 

tes-rd  dddd  tes-ri  dadi-du  labd  sa,  his  brother  is  taller  than  his  sister. 

'Note  that  the  numeral  ek  has  an  oblique  form  eke  (or  eki)  or  ike  (or  iki),  as  in 
Ski  chheicre-re,  of  a certain  man  (there  were  two  sons) ; teii  deid-re  iki  mdn&o-re  sdth, 
with  a certain  man  of  that  country. 


PRONOUNS. 


There  is  a good  deal  of  confusion  in  the  use  of  the  Personal  pronouns  in 
the  specimens.  The  following  appear  to  be  the  forms 


1MB8T  PeBSOH. 

Singular. 

Nom.  hatoe,  aw,  a,  wd. 

Agent  md,  mo,  mau,  ma,  ma,  mat. 

Obi.  mb,  md,  mft,  mau,  md. 

Cen.  mera. 

vox,,  IX,  PART  TV. 


Plural. 

home,  ame,  lia ice. 
hdme,  ame. 
ha  me,  ame. 
amrd. 


3d 


482 


WESTERN  PAHAlti. 


Second  Pebson. 


Singular. 

Plural. 

Nom. 

til,  tu. 

tu%. 

Agent 

<v  ^ ^ 

the,  toi , ta. 

tiiS. 

Obi. 

tu,  to. 

tdmu. 

Gen. 

terd,  team , tuakd. 

tamrd,  tuard , 

Of  the  above,  the  Agent  forms  mau,  rna,  mat,  ta,  ante  and  tu$  (plur.)  will  bo  found 
in  the  List  of  Words  (Nos.  185  IT.) ; and  ate,  ante,  aim'd,  tu,  tedra,  tuakd,  tu§  (nom. 
plur.),  tuard,  and  tnmrd  in  Nos.  14  and  ff.  The  following  are  examples  of  the  other 
forms : — 

haice  ore  Idicdd  ndyd-thd,  I had  gone  to  fix  the  boundary  (Specimen  II). 
a tern  chhofa  bolne  jogd  nd  rod,  I am  not  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son. 
mb  bhiikhd  mordd  luge  rad,  I am  dying  of  hunger. 
mb  sadii  nd  jhagd,  I do  not  beat  the  complainant  (Specimen  II). 
mo  agll  sadi,  I have  committed  sin. 

sddue  mb-ge&  eri  jdlsdjl  kl,  the  complainant  has  made  a causelessly  false  charge 
upon  me  (Specimen  II). 
jo  mb-klie  aso,  what  is  to  me  (is  thine). 

mb  hi  dpne  rlgaro-ri  sbt hi  rigar  tho,  make  me  also  a servant  with  thy  servants. 
se  mu  de,  give  that  (share)  to  me. 

mukhjo  gdli  ditti,  the  abuse  which  was  given  to  mo  (Specimen  II). 
mere  baba-re  Hue  rigar  as,  there  are  so  many  servants  of  my  father. 
jobe  hdme  sT-kae  hbte,  when  we  arrived  near  the  boundary  (Specimen  II). 
haice  khuSi  hand  porb,  it  is  proper  for  us  to  rejoice. 

sddue  hdmekh  gdli  ditti,  the  complainant  gave  abuse  to  us  (Specimen  II). 

tii  ma  sat  he  desyd  rod,  thou  art  always  with  me. 

tiie  se  kas-dn  gind , from  whom  didst  thou  buy  that  ? 

tbi  mU  cliheltu  bi  nd  ditto,  thou  didst  not  even  give  a kid. 

se  to-khe  thbi-tlio , (whatever  is  mine)  that  was  kept  for  thee. 

terdchhbtd  pitjd,  thy  son  arrived. 

tdmii-de  pdchhe  kas-rd  chhbtd  dj,  whose  boy  comes  behind  you? 

The  Demonstrative  pronouns,  which  are  also  employed  as  pronouns  of  thS  3rd 
person,  arc : — 

e,  he,  she,  this  ; sing.  obi.  es  (or  es)  : plural,  e,  obi.  in  or  ini. 
se,  or  se-je,  he,  she,  that ; ag.  tone,  liniye  or  tenye  ; obi.  tes  (or  teS),  test  (or  teSi), 
tisi  (or  tisi)  ; plur.  se  ; ag.  tenii ; obi.  tin  or  tint. 

The  forms  with  n ( in , ini,  tone,  tiniye,  tenye,  tenie,  tin  and  tini)  should  all  probably 
have  cerebral  n,  but  this  distinction  is  not  observixl  in  writing.  The  forms  with  s (es, 
tes,  tesi,  tisi ) should  all  probably  have  s,  but  in  the  same  way,  no  distinction  is  made  in 
writing. 

Examples  of  these  pronouns  are : — 

e rupayd  es-khe  de,  give  this  rupee  to  him. 
es  gliore-re  kb  umar  sa,  how  old  is  this  house? 
se  tir-gaSi  bdche  char  sa,  he  is  grazing  cattle  on  tho  hill. 


sirmatjrJ  GIRlpARt. 


483 


ae  mU  de,  give  that  to  me. 

tenye  dpqd  badd  beke-chiil  payd,  he  sold  and  gave  away  liis  share. 

tobe  tiniye  site  ho,  then  he  considered. 

tes-re  babe  se  jlieta , his  father  saw  him. 

teSi  deia-dd  ghdtd  dyd,  in  that  country  a famine  came. 

tiai  ktye  bl  nd  dendd-tlid  (anyone)  was  not  giving  anything  to  him. 

There  arc  possibly  (and  probably)  feminine  forms  of  the  above  pronouns,  but  no 
examples  have  been  noted  in  tho  specimens. 

The  Reflexive  pronoun  dpd  or  dpd  has  its  genitive  dpud,  and  its  oblique  plural 
dpd.  Thus : — 

jdbe  dpud  badd  lal  payd , when  (the  younger  son)  had  got  his  own  share. 
nd  dpd-niuje  tlpaye-gliiilaye , we  did  not  fight  amongst  ourselves  (Specimen  II). 

The  Relative  pronoun  is  jo,  who,  agent  jenye.  The  oblique  singular  is  probably 
je6 , but  no  example  occurs.  "VVe  have  : — 

jo  mo-klie  aso,  what  I have  (is  thine). 

jo  ghar-gharche  bdr-bauche  mere  bade-di  djd,  the  property,  fields,  etc.  which  come 
into  my  share. 

jenye  terl  garwechi  khaldl,  (he)  who  caused  thy  property  to  be  devoured. 

The  correctness  is  very  doubtful  of  : — 

je-re  md  dptje  mitrb  sdthe  khu6i  latcdd,  (a  kid)  Avitli  which  I might  have  rejoiced 
with  my  friends.  "We  should  expect  jeS-re. 

The  Interrogative  pronouns  are  kune,  who  ? and  kd,  what  ? The  agent  of  the 
„ former  is  probably  kunid,  but  no  examples  occur  in  the  specimens.  The  oblique  form  is 
ka8  (kos),  as  in  tdmii-de pdchhe  kas-rd  chlibtd  dj,  whose  boy  comes  behind  you?  tdS  se 
kas-dd  gind , from  whom  did  you  buy  that  ? For  kd  we  have : — 
kd  aso , what  is  it  ? 

tumrd  kd  naio  sa , what  is  your  name  ? 

There  arc  no  examples  of  the  oblique  form  of  kd. 
kol  is  ‘any  one,’  ‘ some  one,*  and 
kiye  is  * anything,’  ‘ something.’ 

tisl  ktye  bl  nd  denda-thd,  to  him  (anyone)  was  not  giving  anything. 

VERBS. 

Auxiliary  Verbs  and  Verbs  Substantive. 

Present,  I am,  etc. 

Singular.  Plural. 

1.  8$  or  sd,  so,  as  (os),  aso  (oso)  sa,  so,  as  (os),  aso  (oso). 

2.  sa,  so,  as  (os),  aso  (oso)  ' sa,  so,  as  (os),  asd  (oso). 

3.  sa,  so,  as  (os),  aso  (oso)  sa,  so,  as  (os),  aso  (oso). 

It  will  be  observed  that  sa  (or  so),  as  (or  os),  or  aso  (or  oso)  can  be  used  for  any 
person  of  either  number,  and  are  the  only  forms  for  every  person  except  the  first  person 
singular.  It  is  most  probable  that  aso  and  oso  should  be  pi’onounccd  asso  and  osso,  after 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV.  Q 2 


484- 


western  pahArI. 


the  analogy  of  other  Western  Paharl  dialects,  but  the  written  character  of  the  speci- 
mens makes  no  distinction  between  single  and  double  letters. 

The  past  (I  was,  etc.)  is  thd  {tho)  or  thiyd  (or  thiyo),  plural  the ; feminine  (both 
numbers)  thi.  > 

Examples  of  the  Verb  Substantive  are  : — 

tumrd  kd  ndio  sa,  what  is  your  name  ? 

merS  bebd-re  itne  rlgar  as,  jo  muktiruti  khdne-dene-khe  aso,  how  many  servants 
are  there  of  my  father,  so  that  there  is  for  eating  and  giving  much  bread- 
tedre  bdice-re  gliar-de  kete  chliote  sa,  how  many  sons  are  there  in  your  father’s 
house  ? 

abye  se  durkb  thiyd,  he  was  yet  afar  off. 

eki  chlieuorc-re  du  chliote  the,  of  a certain  man  there  were  two  sons. 
se  to-klie  tlibl  tho,  that  was  kept  for  thee. 

Instead  of  su,  etc.  we  often  find  rad  or  rod,  remained,  used  in  the  sense  of  * I 
am,’  etc.,  as  in  a terd  chhbld  bolne  jogd.  nd  rod,  I am  not  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son. 
In  the  repetition  of  the  phrase,  Ave  have  hod,  became,  used  in  the  same  sense. 

Prom  the  verb  hond  or  ond,  to  become,  avo  have  the  past  tense  hod  or  od,  as  above. 
Active  Verb. — The  Infinitive  or  Verbal  Noun  is  no  doubt  formed,  as  in  other 
cognate  languages  by  adding  nd  (or  no)  to  the  root,  but  as,  in  Avriting,  distinction  is 
seldom  made  betAveen  n and  n,  this  always  appears  in  the  specimens  as  nd  (or  no). 
Thus,  pltnd,  or  pitno  (for  pltnd),  to  beat.  If  the  root  of  the  verb  ends  in  d,  dh,  n,  r,  or 
r,  the  termination  nd  Avould,  as  usual,  be  correct. 

The  oblique  fonn  of  this  infinitive  ends  in  ne  (for  ne).  Examples  are  : — 

teSi  deso-re  iki  mdnSo-re  sdtli  rone  Idgd,  lie  began  to  dAvell  with  a man  of  that 
country. 

niuktl  ruil  khdne-dene-khe  aso,  there  is  much  bread  for  eating  and  giving  away. 
nuchnb  sunb,  he  heard  dancing. 

pharddo  rbkne-ge,  in  order  to  stop  the  claim  (Specimen  II). 

The  Present  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  dd  (or  do)  to  the  root,  as  in  plidd, 
beating.  If  the  root  ends  in  a voAvel,  an  n is  inserted,  as  in  dendd , giving,  onda,  becom- 
ing. Tn  the  specimens,  this  participle  is  sometimes  employed  as  an  infinitive  of 
purpose,  as  in  ghore  hdtdd  bhdjd,  he  refused  to  go  into  the  house  ; hatce  ore  Idicdd  ndyd - 
thd,  I had  gone  to  fix  the  boundary.  This  idiom  is  very  common  in  all  Western  Pahari 
dialects.  Por  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  participle,  we  have  : — 

jabe  tnU-kdi-khe  llpdd  doyo,  when  ho  ran,  beating,  in  my  direction  (Specimen  II). 

Here  we  may  note  the  verb  tlpna,  to  beat,  the  same  word  as  pltnd,  with  the 
consonants  transposed  (see  remarks  on  pronunciation,  above). 

The  Past  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  d (or  o)  to  the  root,  as  in  pita,  beaten. 
There  are  the  usual  irregular  past  participles.  We  may  quote  : — 

Past  Participle. 

karnd,  to  do  kiyd 

dena,  to  give  dittd 

lend,  to  take  littd 


jdnd , to  go 
djnd,  to  come 
mama,  to  die 
laggna,  to  be  attached 


god  or  geyd 
dyd 
mud 
, lagd 


SIRMATJIlf  GIRIPAR!. 


485 


A Future  Passive  Participle  is  tho  same  in  form  as  the  Infinitive,  as  in  phardd 
karnl,  a claim  is  to  be  made,  i.e.  will  be  made  (Specimen  II). 

Tho  Conjunctive  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  * (e)  (or,  after  a,  y)  to  the  root. 
Thus,  fiiti,  having  struck  ; khay,  having  eaten,  but  this  form  is  reserved  for  compound 
verbs.  When  used  as  an  ordinary  conjunctive  participle,  the  suffix  ro  is  added,  as  in 
sUrtd-re  chhdre  Salekre  klidy-rb,  having  eaten  the  husks  left  by  the  swine.  In  horl-de - 
ro,  having  run,  we  have  a compound  verb,  de-rb  meaning  ‘ having  given.’ 

Another  form  of  the  conjunctive  participle  ends  in  iyd,  as  in  oiyd,  having  become ; 
pitiyd,  having  beaten  ; and  with  th.is  we  may  probably  connect  bojye,  having  arisen  (he 
went  to  his  father),  and  badyb,  having  divided ; bedyo,  having  called  (a  servant,  he  asked 
him).  It  may,  however,  be  noted  that  Sindhi  also  forms  a conjunctive  participle  by 
adding  yd. 

A kind  of  Continuative  Participle  appears  to  exist  in  hddre-yudd,  while  going 
(Specimen  II),  a form  which  I am  unable  to  explain. 

The  second  person  singular  of  the  Imperative  is  the  same  as  the  root,  and  the 
plural  adds  b. 

Thus : — 


de,  give  thou  me  (the  share)  ; deb,  give  ye  (beautiful  clothes). 

The  Old  Present,  used  chiefly  as  a present  subjunctive,  is  thus  conjugated  : — 

I may  strike,  etc. 

Singular.  Plural. 

1.  pit  ft,  plte  pitu , pile 

2.  plte  plte,  pit 

3.  pit,  plte,  plto  plte,  pit 

It  will  be  observed  that  plte  may  be  used  for  any  person  of  either  number. 
Examples  are  : — ' 

yaw  Kbtl-me  rim,  I dwell  in  the  village  of  Koti  (Specimen  II). 
jo  gJiar-gJiarc/ie  bar-bauclie  mere  bade-dl  djo,  the  property,  etc.  which  comes 
into  my  share. 

tdmu-de  p&chhe  kas-rCt  chhbtd  dj,  whose  boy  comes  behind  you  ? 

/id tee  khnsi  bond  pdrb,  it  is  proper  for  us  to  rejoice. 

The  Future  is  conjugated  as  follows  : — 

Singular.  Plural. 

1.  pltuld,  pitas,  or  pitied  pltule 

2.  plteld,  pltld  pltele,  pltle 

3.  pltld  pltle 

Examples  are : — 

dp  tie  bated  age  dtuS  lior  boluS,  I will  go  before  my  father,  and  will  say. 
ndlU  komoa,  I will  make  a complaint  (Specimen  II). 

The  Present  is  formed  by  suffixing  the  present  tense  of  the  verb  substantive  to 
the  Old  Present.  Thus : — 

I strike,  etc. 


Singular. 

Plural. 

1. 

pif  u su  (or  sa) 

pltu  (or  plte)  sa 

2. 

pile  sa 

plte  (pit)  sa 

3. 

pit  (or  plte)  sa 

plte  (pet)  sa 

486 


WESTERN  PAHArI. 


Similarly  wc  liavc  : — 

I go,  etc. 


Singular. 

Plural. 

1. 

dew  ft  sU 

deice  sa 

2. 

deice  sa 

deice  sa 

3. 

deice  sa 

deice  sa 

As  an  example,  we  have : — 

se  (ir-gd^i  bitch  e chav  sa,  he  is  grazing  cattle  on  the  top  of  the  hill  (sentence 
229). 

merit  hitbd  fes  chlidti;  ghara-dd  rad  (for  rad)  sa,  my  father  lives  in  that  small 
house  (sentence  233). 

A Definite  Present  is  formed  Avith  the  past  or  perfect  tense  of  l age  (or  Idgi)  rond 
added  to  the  present  participle,  as  in : — 

mdrdd  litge  rad , I am  dying  (of  hunger). 

aw  pit ild  litge  rad  su,  I am  beating  (List  No.  191). 

The  Imperfect  is  formed  by  suffixing  thd  (or  thd),  the  past  tense  of  the  Verb 
Substantive,  either  to  the  Old  Present  or  to  the  Present  Participle.  Thus  : — 

5io  pit®  thd , I was  striking  (List  No.  192). 
ojrd  bhoro  thd,  he  was  filling  his  belly. 

se  to-khe  tliul  (for  thoe)  thd,  that  was  being  kept  for  thee.  In  this  sentence  thol 
exactly  corresponds  to  the  Kashmiri  thaw’, 
tisl  litge  hi  nd  demld-thd,  (anyone)  was  not  giving  anything  even  to  him. 

The  Past  tense  requires  no  remarks.  It  is  made  from  the  Past  Participle,  exactly 
as  in  "Hindi. 

Similarly  the  Perfect  and  Pluperfect  are  made  exactly  as  in  Hindi,  e.g. — 
hdtlid  sa,  he  is  seated,  he  has  sat,  in  sentence  230,  and 
mud- thd,  he  had  died. 

The  Passive  is  formed  with  jdnd,  as  in  Hindi.  Sec  List  of  Words  Nos.  202-204. 

Causal  Verbs  are  made  as  in  Hindi.  As  an  irregular,  we  may  quote  kh aland,  to 
cause  to  eat  (in  the  phrase,  “ thy  son  who  devoured  thy  living  among  harlots”). 

Compound  Verbs  do  not  require  much  notice.  Intensive  compounds  arc  formed 
with  the  conjunctive  participle  in  l,  as  in  achl-jdnd,  to  be  lost. 

In  these  compounds,  the  verb  puna,  to  cause  to  fall,  is  used  when  in  Hindi  we 
should  use  ddlnd.  Thus,  Idl  pdgd,  he  took  away  completely;  beke  (for  blkl)  chtSi  pdgd, 
he  sold  and  gave  away,  and  so  on. 

Inceptives  are  formed  as  in  Hindi,  lioni;  lagd,  he  began  to  dwell.  Note  the  long 
d in  taga,  which  is  the  past  participle  of  laggnd,  with  a short  a and  doubled  g. 


487 


[No.  6.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTEHN  P All  A III  (SIP  MATE  I). 

GikiparI  Dialect. 

Specimen  I. 

nft  t ^ ft z sr  i qr«in§  ^riqft  q^T  % ftft  ir 
ft  qrgfr%  nr  qtir  ft  ^tott  f f f i ff*  WTUft 

«ll*Mr#t  #t£  qMt  ffft  I qp![t  Wt£  ftf  ^Tq^TT  qf^T 

qreT  ft  qtrfsi  ft  ^rqrr  fteT  i ffj  ^tw  qf^T  ff  ftft  m^T  i 

otf  ’snwi  qfsT  ft^rf  ft  qnn  ft  f aft  %ar  ^t  ^t^t  ^iwr  i % 

^cnrnrr^  ft  fmr  i fait  %ft  t *Ht  mqan  f nro  Tt%  ^mr  i 

fft  If  ft  frft  qT  fte  qmf  % ^rgT  i t wt§  *j%qfi 

C\  C\  • C\  Gv  • ♦ 

ft  ft^TT  ftft  m i ftr  ffft  *ftf  ft  *tt  ^t  wt  i ftq 
fflff  fft  i qT  7 ^rff  ftTTf  ft  gqrft  wft  *IT%  %%  ft 
^nft  i ft  w§t  ftrqT  ^nn  T?rr  i qre  qnf  frzf  ftr  m^nf 

C\  C\  C\ 

ft  fr  qf  ftr  tut  ft  ^nf  wift  frit  i ff  fn  #tzt  ft^rf 
ftm  ftm  i ft  ft  ^rq^t  ffrTft  ft  *nft  ftirs  ft  i ftr  qtfr 
^nqf  qfq  qrft  frzr  i ^ f ^rf t ta  fff  qre  f f^T  i fft 
fqrf  q^q  ^rnft  1 ftftqft  ^iTTflf  qTTTT  fir  ftqrft  ffft  I Wt£ 
ft^rr  f qTqr  ft  ff  ^rrf  ^nnft  frit  i fn  wteT  qt^rf  ffn  *tt 
ft^T  i fft  ^nq%  fhTit  fr  fmT  % fft  qnr^iT  qnqT  %ft  i n£t 
fr  WTq  ftr  qrrft  ft  %ft  i *uq  ftf  Tift  ft  % fsr  #rerr 

tjttt  sir  ftft  fmi  i ftft  ft^n  fft  ft^n  u 

?TR  TT  f5T  ft5T  #ft  ^T  fw  I ^T%  f ^ f f | IJorT  ftT 

fftcT  q qpqft  sjft  ft  ftn^  fft  sitst  ^ qn  ^rft  l fsf  fftftoTT 

% fn  qrqi  '*tptt  i ff  qrf  fn  f Trft  ^ft  ftzf  t nff 

t§t%  ft  ^rrqft  ft  i f i ftf  ftsqT  htsit  i f^r  tt  ^rt 


488  WESTERN  TABARI. 

*t#st  Mt  ^tt^t  i wf£  ?rft  ^tr^t 

ztvsr  *ft  i titt  i ^ §wz^  ft  *rr  f^t  *t  f 

*mr%  f*Rret  «rfcr^T  i *rw  ?far  ftzr  tj^rr  ifcit  ?tft 

tf^t  #*rs*t  % ifti  ?rer  ft  ^n^ft  f^ft  i *rrt  % €izr 
<r  ?r  ^t  ft^rr  i sft  w ^€t  % i tR  ^ft 

Vt*TC  qtst  *ff  ^TT  ^T^T  ^ *ft^TT  *?T  ^t  *TfaT  l *rNft  *Nft  f^TOt 
$ZT  *t*t  II 


489 


[No.  6.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAIlARl  (ST  It  MAURI). 

GirIparI  DiALKCT. 


TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 

Specimen  I. 

£kl-chliO wye-re  du  chhdtd  the.  KanchJio-chhote  upiif>-ba!>a-kh,'  bdlo 

One-rnan-of  two  sons  were.  By-the-younger-son  his-own-fathcr-to  it-was-said 

je>  jb  ghar-gharebe  bar-bauelie  liiere-badd-di  ajd,  so  mn  do.’  Tenvf* 

that,  * what  house-property  Jields-ctcetera  my -share-in,  comes,  that,  to- me  give.'  Bi/-him 

apnd  ghar-ghaurchl  bar-baucln  duine-chhdtf*  bsdyd 

his-own  house-property  fiehls-ctcetera  ( to-)both-sons  haring-dirhted  were-giren. 

Kanclihd-chhoto  jbbd  apnu  bft<J;T  lal-paya,  to  pordesa-klid 

By -thc-yon nger-son  when  his-own  share  icas-takcn-completely , then  a-far-count ri/-to 
durka-hota.  Tenye  apna  baeja  boko-chlsi-paya.  Jabo  ;lpna 

By-hint  his-own  share  was- so hl-given-comp tetchy . J1 hen  his-own 

to  tosT-dosa-da  el  tala  aya.  Se 

then  that -country-in  a- famine  came,  lie 

fesi-deSo-iv  Ikl-mansd-iv  sath  rotio 

T hat-con  ntry-qf  one-rnan-of  with  to- remain 

khocho-da  sil  rt  u eharal-klie  chhaya. 

f eed  in  y- for  h c-  w assent. 

saldkiv  khay-rd  djrft  bhord-tba,  hdr  tisl 

hash's  eaten-hariny  thc-bclty  he-Jitting-was,  and  fo-1tim 


fa  r-a  tcay-h  e-went. 
bada  khdlthfwl-paya, 

sh  a / c was-sq  uandered-com  pletely 

dalij  khnnkliamfdl  hd-gdii. 

poor  left- with  out-eating  became. 

laga.  Tegi-manSd  tisT 

he-began.  By-that-man  as-for-him  the-Jield-in  swine 

Snrtu-rd  clthayd 
Th  e-swine-of  aba  ndoned 


klve  bl  nii 

anything  cren.  not 

‘ ntdre-baba-rd  it  no 


Tdbd  tiniyd  sficlid  j,-.} 

Then  by-him  it-was-thonght  that, 

nutlet  t rfiti  khane-ddne-khe 


deiida-tha. 
he-gi  ring- was. 
rlgar  as,  jo 

* my-father-of  so-many  serrauts  are,  so-that  much  bread  eating-giving-fo > 

asd.  Mo  bhukha  mSrda-lagd-raa.  Apne-bawd  age  dtiio  hdr  boliiiy 

is.  I hungry  dying-am. 

“mo  tore  age  hdr  Ram-jl 

“ by-me  of -thee  before  and  God 
bdlue  jdga  ' 11a  rda.  Mi 

to-say  worthy  not  remained.  3L 

thd.”  * Hdr  bdjye  apue-bawe 

make."  * And  having-risen  liis-own-fathet 

VOL.  IX,  PA.KT  IV. 


My-own-fa  th  er 

before  T-will-go  and  I-wilt-say, 

ago 

agli 

sAdl.  A tera  chliota 

before 

sin 

was-connnillcd.  I thy  child 

d bl 

apiie-rlgaro-ri  sathl  rlear 

e also 

thine- 

•own-scrcanfs  with  a-serrant 

l -- 

kai 

to 


lidta. 

he- went. 


Abve 

% 

Yet 


se 

he 


durko 

distant 
3 u 


490  , westeA^t  pah|rI. 

tliiyS,  tgs-re-babe  s6  'jkSta.  , ,TSsl  ^ghin-bSdan  l&gi.  Hpfi-d8-rd 

teas,  by-his-father  he  to  as- seen.  To-him  pity-pain  was-attached.  Bun-having 

kumrai-pay&,  heir  p5kti  ditti.  Ghhote  bOla,,  *h8 

he-was-embraced-completely,  and  kiss  icas-given.  By-the-son  it-was-said,  * O 
baba,  mo  tere  age  agli  sad!.  Tera  cbhot-5-  bolnfi  jogft 

father,  by -me  of -thee  before  sin  was-committed.  Thy  son  to-say  worthy 

na  hoa/  T8ny8  apne-rigaro-kke  bola  je,  * tgsi  banfya 

not  (. T-)was .*  By-him  his-oion-seroants-to  it-was-said  that,  * to-him  beautiful 

parawa  deo.  Guthi-kke  chbap  bor  lato-khe  aulao  deo.  Khao-piwe  raj! 

suit  give.  Finger-to  ring  and  feet-to  shoe  give.  Fat-drink  happy 


bo, 

he. 

ke  mera 

because  my 

chhota 

son 

miui-tka, 

dead-was 

jiwo-goa ; achi-goa, 

, alive-went ; lost-went 

bheto 

got 

goa.’ 

went* 

Tgs-ra 

jetha 

chhota 

khech5-da  thiya.  Jabe 

se 

ghara-re 

Him-of  the-elder  son  fields-in  wets.  When  he  the-house-of 


nere  puja. 

bor 

git  wa 

nachno 

£uno. 

to 

rigar 

near  arrived , 

and 

song  and 

dancing 

was-heard, 

then 

a-seroant 

bedyo 

saya 

ke. 

‘ ka  aso  ? ’ 

Tenye 

tesi 

kola 

having-called  it-was-asked 

that,  ‘ 

■what  is  ? ' 

By-him 

to-him 

it-was-said 

je,  ‘ tera 

dada 

aya. 

Tere-babe 

tes-re 

raji 

kbu£x 

that,  * thy 

brother 

came. 

By-thy-fathe t 

• him-of 

happy  joyful 

bitne-pujne-re 

tSi 

kkane-ri 

adro 

ki.’ 

S8 

ruSwii, 

meeting-arriving-of  for  eating-of  respect  was-made*  He  became-angry, 


gli8re  k6t.da  bhaja.  Tes-ra  baba  baida  aya,  tesi 

in-the-hotise  going  refused.  Him-of  the-father  outside  came,  him 

sarcha-parcbaO.  ChkOte  bolo,  * m3  tori  itni  borso 

remonstrated- with.  By-the-son  it-was-said,  * by-me  thy  so-many  years 

tolial  ki.  Tera.  bol  manO.  To?  mu  chlieltu  bl  na 

service  was-made.  Tliy  word  was-obeyed.  By-thee  io-me  a-kid  even  not 

ditto,  je-ro  m5  apne-mitro  sathe  kkuSi  lawda. 

was-given,  which-by  I my-own-f riends  with  rejoicing  might-have-celebrated . 

Jabe  tera  cbliotii  puja,  jenye  terl  garwechi  radi-chhgwri-kke 

When  thy  son  arrived,  by-whom  thy  property  harlot- girls-f or 

khalai,  to?  t8s-ri  adro  ditti.  ’ Babe 

was-caused-to-be-devoured,  by-thee  him-of  respect  was-given .*  By -the-father 

bolo,  ‘ he  chhota,  tii  ma  sathe  desya  r5a.  Jo  mo-khe 

it-was-said,  ‘O  son,  thou  me  with  always  remainedst.  What  me- to 

aso,  se  to-khe  thoi-tho.  Hawe  khugi  bona  p8ro,  keth-ke 

is,  that  thee-for  being-kept-teas.  W e rejoicing  to-be  it-is-proper,  because 

tera  dadii  mu  goii-tiri,  ji-goa ; Seki  g8yo-thiyo,  beta  geyo.’ 

thy  brother  dead  gone-was,  alive-went ; lost  gone-was,  got  went* 


[No  6.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAHARI  (SIRMAUlll). 

GirIpArI  Dialect. 


Specimen  II. 

$TT  *TR  I ^Tq-TT  •TT3T  WT^T  I STR  3RYiR  I 

*flY ft  * || 

wr^xr  ffa  xrfY  wrwr^  ^Y  i wtwt  *tt  ^ttrY 

?jir  ’srr  i tR  ^Yf  writ  *rr  i srY% 

TTO  *fifxr  ^ ?T%  wr^xr  *TT<fY  f^T?Y  | 5R  4 % 

^hr^T  ^YtfY  €Y%  WRY  | ^T  % ft£  TRT 

Yj^T  ^t#Y  ^reY  ^rY  sY^ff  RTxfY  i ^rrqnr  €fx  %ir 

^sjjr  tY*tt  i xrr^ci  tHY  ihr  3f  5ft  *trY  %%  ft  wrv$  wrrft  i 
urt^Y  ft^iR  xr  ?r  trft  xrcfsro  i r?  ^Y  jtt^Y  f^Y  ?xr% 
««ix«n  ii 


VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


3 a 8 


492 


[ No.  6.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAH  ART  (SIRMAURl). 

GirIpari  Dialect. 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 

Specimen  II. 

Mera  naw  Madlio.  Mere-bapa-ra,  naw  Sado.  Jat  Kdnet. 

My  name  Madlio.  Myfather-of  name  Sddho.  Caste  Kanet. 

Gaw-Koti-me  r5§. 

Village- Koti-in  1-dicell. 

Sadue  m8-ge4  Sri  jalsiiji  ki.  Mo 

By -th  e-complainant  me-upon  causeless  forgery  icas-made.  By-me 

sadii  na  jkiga ; na  apo-niEje  tipaye-ghulaye. 

th e-complainant  not  icas-beaten ; not  ourselces-among  werc-qnarr els- etcetera-made. 

Htwe  apne-daichare  ore  lawda  naya-tha.  Jdbe  hamS 

I {with-)my-own-brethren  the-boundary  ( to-)Ji.ving  gone-icas.  When  we 

si-kae  hfite,  tabs  saduc  haniekli  gall  ditti. 

th  e-boundary-near  arrived,  then  by-th e-complainant  ns-io  abuse  tcas-given. 

Jabc  mu-knl-khS  tipda  doyo  sbbS-jdne  clibraj  inano. 

When  my-direction-to  heating  ran  by-all-people  astonishment  was-experienced. 

Apne-apnc-ka-khc  hSte,  liadre-ybda  dayo-dayo-dayo  mere-latikk 

Our-own-our-own-homes-lo  we-went,  icliile-going  rnnning-running-running  my-foot-to 

tkok  lagi.  Apne-ghore  ckin-de£s  beiuj  r6a. 

a-blow  happened.  In-niy-own-house  for-three-days  senseless  I-remained. 

Sadue  sucho  ' jo  ‘ mo-ge4e  gali  dene-ri  pharad 

By-tlie-complainant  it- was-th ought  that  * me-upon  abuse  giving-of  claim 

karm.’  PharadO  rokne-ge  tene  Sri  nalig  ki. 

will-be-made'  The-claim  stopping-for  by-him  a-causcless  complaint  was-made. 

Mukh  jo  gall  ditti  is-ke  nali4  kftrwa. 

Me-to  what  abuse  was-given  tliat-of  complaint  I-will-make. 


498 


BISSAU. 

The  State  of  Jubbal  lies  to  the  north-east  of  the  State  of  Sirmur,  and  like  that  State 
has  J aunsar-Bawar  on  its  immediate  east. 

Over  the  greater  part  of  Jubbal — in  Jubbal  proper — the  local  dialect  is  reported  to  be 
called  Bi&au,  after  one  of  the  Parganas  of  the  State.  In  the  rest  of  the  State,  to  the 
north,  the  dialect  is  reported  to  be  Barari.  The  figures  for  these  two  dialects,  based  on 
the  Census  of  1891,  are  reported  to  be  as  follows : — 


Bi$$au  . 17,459 

Barari 3,898 

Other  languages  55 


Total  population  of  Jubbal  (1891)  ........  21,412 

In  the  Census  of  1901,  the  total  population  of  Jubbal  was  shown  as  22,242,  of  whom 
21,997  spoke  Western  Pahari,  the  dialects  not  being  defined. 

Of  the  two  dialects,  Bi££au  and  Barari,  the  latter  is  a form  of  Kifithali,  and  will  be 
described  later  on  (pp.  599  fE.).  Here  we  are  only  concerned  with  Bi££au. 

As  specimens  of  Bi££au,  I give  the  usual  list  of  words  on  pp.  531  ff.  and  also  a 
short  extract  from  the  version  of  the  Parable.  These  will  show  that  Bi§£au  is  identical 
with  Giripari.  It  will  be  seen  that  there  are  only  a few  differences  of  spelling,  such  as 
chhdatd  for  chhotd , a son.  We  may  also  observe  that,  in  this  specimen  the  cerebrals  n 
and  l are  carefully  written  where  they  occur. 


nmr  ^4  z fm  \ wtwz  wt%  # f^*tr 

% H 3TRT  3tt  3TP5T  H ^tTT  % I Hfair  HVm 

• 

^4  I Wt^Z  of  4U<PUT  TT  XT 

Tjxft  I sft  XfTWr  I m ilf  TO 

xfrtt  hm  tst  i % *rtw  i ini  ^ t 

Wff  UTO  *TT*T  fafirt  II 


TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 


Ekl-manchhe-re 

dui 

clioate 

thiye. 

One-nian-of 

two 

sons 

were. 

likho  je, 

‘e 

baba, 

3« 

it-was-written  that. 

‘ O' 

father, 

what 

de.’  Tfiniye  apne-badi-gharche 

give'  By-him  his-own-sh  are-property 
Kanchhg-chhoatc  ja  apna  bSda 
By-the-yo nnger-son  when  his-own  share 


Kanehhe-chhoatc  appe-bawe-khS 
By-tli  e-younger-son  his-own- father- to 

mera  l>5da  para  tel  mu  ora 
my  share  falls  that  to-me  here 
barobar  dui-bade-de  bade. 

equally  two-shares-in  was-shared 

bath  laye-pa,  ta  eki-dur-de^a-da 
all  ivas-taken , then  a-far-country-in 


494  WESTERN  RAHARl- 


dfiwa.  J u-kiye  tfis-kS  tho 

he-went.  Whatever  hint-near  teas 

kbarchi-chuka,  tStha  para 

had-8 pent -completely,  there  there: fell 

T8ne  tSs-dg&i-re  cki-basan  sathe 
Hy-him  that-countryof  a-dtceller  with 


bath 

kliarcbo. 

Ja  t6? 

bSth 

all 

was-spent. 

When  he 

all 

ka}. 

Se 

goiya(/or  goa) 

dalij. 

a-f  amine.  He 

went 

poor. 

satb  kiyo. 

accompanying  was- done. 


,495 


BAGHATT. 

The  Baghati  form  of  the  Simla  Hill  dialects  centres  round  the  State  of  Baghat.  It 
is  also  spoken  in  the  Pinjaur  and  Dharampur  Thanas  of  the  State  of  Patiala,  immediate- 
ly to  the  south  and  south-east  of  Baghat,  in  the  States  of  Bija  and  Kuthar  to  its  east, 
and  in  the  Bharauli  Pargana  of  the  Simla  District  to  its  north.  To  its  east  the  dialect  is 
the  Sirmauri  of  the  State  of  Sirmaur,  to  its  north  the  Kinthall  of  the  Srinagar  Thana  of 
Patiala,  to  its  west  the  Handuri  of  Mailog,  and  to  its  south  the  Western  Hindi  of 


Ambala. 

The  number  of  its  speakers  is  as  follows : — 

Baghat  . 7,337 

Patiala 6,000 

Simla  (Bharauli)  4,000 

Kuthar 3,789 

1,069 


Totat.  . 22,195 


Of  the  above  figures  those  for  Patiala  and  Simla  (Bharauli)  arc  only  rough  esti- 
mates, as  no  separate  figures  are  available  for  these  tracts. 

Baghati  is  closely  allied  to  Sirmauri.  Its  principal  point  of  difference  is  the  univer- 
sal use  of  the  letter  a as  the  termination  of  the  oblique  form  of  nouns  ending  in  conson- 
ants, and  the  use  of  de  instead  of  do  or  dd  as  the  postposition  of  the  ablative.  Then*  are 
many  other  minor  points  of  difference,  but  these  are  the  ones  which  at  once  strike  the 
observer. 

So  far  as  the  writer  is  at  present  aware,  the  only  previous  account  of  Baghati  that 
has  been  printed  is  the  short,  but  excellent,  sketch  of  the  dialect  contained  in  the  ltev. 
T.  Grahamc  Bailey’s  Languages  of  the  Northern  Himalayas,  published  by  the  1 loyal 
Asiatic  Society  in  1908. 

In  Avriting  this  account  of  Baghati,  the  task  has  been  materially  lightened  by  the 
help  derived  from  the  grammar  of  the  llev.  T.  Graliame  Bailey.  The  present  notes  are 
based  on  the  specimens  (a  version  of  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son,  and  the  statement 
of  an  accused  person  in  a police  court)  and  on  the  list  of  Avords  printed  on  pp.  5 SI  ff., 
Avith  occasional  help  from  Mr.  Bailey's  Avork.  It  Avill  be  seen  that  the  language  is 
practically  identical  Avith  that  described  by  Mr.  Bailey,  and  that  most  of  the  additional 
forms  are  little  more  than  variations  of  spelling. 

Pronunciation. — The  pronunciation  of  Baghati  does  not  differ  from  that  of  Sir- 
mauri and  other  cognate  languages.  There  is  the  same  confusion  between  a and  6,  i and 
e,  i and  e,  and  u (or  u)  and  6.  There  is  the  same  tendency  to  drop  h as  in  hi  for  hhi, 
also;  di  for  dht,  a daughter;  and  in  some  cases  it  is  even  transferred  as  in  mdhrd  lor 
tnhdrd , our ; gohrd  for  ghord,  a horse.  The  Avord  ghar,  a house,  is  pronounced  gaur. 
There  is  also  the  same  tendency  to  pronounce  6,  where  Hindi  has  s,  as  in  daS,  ten. 
The  letter  t (representing  an  original  tr)  becomes  ch  as  in  kliech  (Hindi,  khet,  Sanskrit 
kshitra),  a field.  As  a special  point,  not  hitherto  noted,  Ave  may  draA\’  attention  to 
the  occasional  pronunciation  of  ch  as  ts  and  of  j as  z as  in  Isarna,  to  graze  (cattle) ; 
t&aza-ra,  good,  beautiful.  This,  as  Avill  be  seen  elseAvhore.,  is  a common  incident  in 
the  pronunciation  of  the  Pi&ieha  languages  of  the  North-West  Frontier,  including  Kush- 


496 


WESTERN  PAHARl. 


miri.  In  this  connexion  we  may  note  the  use  of  the  word  te  for  ‘ and  a word  also 
occurring  in  Kashmiri  under  the  form  ta. 

Declension. — Iu  the  case  of  all  nouns  the  termination  of  the  agent  and  of  the 
locative  case  is  always  d. 

Tadbhaea 1 nouns  in  a change  the  a to  e in  all  cases  both  of  the  singular  and  plural, 
except  the  nominative  and  vocative  singular.  In  the  vocative  the  a is  changed  to  ed  in 
the  singular,  and  to  do  in  the  plural.  Thus,  gdhrd , a horse ; gdhre-rd,  of  a horse  ; goitre, 
horses;  gohre-rd,  of  horses  ; gohrdd , O horse!  gdltreb , O horses! 

All  masculine  nouns  ending  in  consonants,  have  the  nominative  plural  the  same  as 
the  nominative  singular.  In  the  agent  and  locativo  of  both  numbers  they  add  e,  in  the 
vocative  singular  they  add  d,  and  in  the  vocative  plural  d.  For  all  other  cases  of  both 
numbers  they  add  d to  form  the  oblique  case.  Thus,  bate,  a father ; bdwa-rd,  of  a father ; 
bate,  fathers ; bdted-rd,  of  fathers ; bated,  by  or  in  a father  or  by  or  in  fathers ; bated,  O 
father ! bated,  O fathers ! This  oblique  form  in  d should  be  noted,  as  it  is  typical  of 
Baghati. 

Other  masculine  nouns  are  declined  like  those  ending  in  consonants,  except  that 
they  do  not  take  d in  the  oblique  cases.  Thus,  hat  hi,  an  elephant  or  elephants ; lidthi-rd 
of  an  elephant  or  of  elephants;  hdthle , by  or  in  an  elephant  or  elephants ; hathia,  O 
elephant  ! hath  to , O elephants! 

Irregular  is  gaitr,  a house,  which  becomes  gat'd,  gat'd,  etc.,  in  all  cases  except  the 
nominative  plural.  To  put  the  matter  another  way,  tin;  word  is  really  gar,  which  be- 
comes ganr  in  the  nominative  singular  and  plural.  There  is  a similar  change  in  Kash- 
miri, in  which,  o.g.,  bar,  a bracelet,  becomes  koru  in  the  nominative  singular. 

The  declension  of  feminine  nouns  closely  follows  that  of  masculines  except  that  the 
vocative  singular  always  ends  in  e.  Thus  nouns  ending  in  a consonant  or  in  l take  d in 
the  agent  and  locative  and  a in  the  other  oblique  cases  of  both  numbers,  and  take  d in 
the  nominative  plural.  Thus,  bai/nt,  a sister  ; baihttd,  sisters ; baih  nd-rd,  of  a sister  or 
sisters  ; baihne,  by  or  in  a sister  or  sisters  ; baihttd,  O sister  ! baihttd,  O sisters  ! So  dl,  a 
daughter ; did,  daughters  ; did-rd,  of  a daughter  or  daughters ; did,  by  or  in  a daughter  or 
daughters  ; did,  O daughter ! did,  O daughters  ! 

Other  feminine  nouns  take  d in  the  agent  and  locative,  but  arc  not  changed  in  the 
other  oblique  cases.  Odd,  a cow,  is  irregular.  The  nominative  plural  and  the  oblique 
cases  of  the  singular  and  plural  are  gal,  the  agent  and  locative  being  gale. 

It  will  thus  be  seen  that,  except  in  the  nominative  and  vocative  cases,  there  is  no 
difference  between  the  singular  and  plural  in  the  Baghati  noun. 

The  above  forms  arc  succinctly  shown  in  tin;  following  table : — 


Nominative. 

Vocvtive. 

Oblique  Singular 

Agent  and 
Locative 

Singular. 

Plural. 

Singular. 

Plural. 

and  Plural. 

Singular 
and  Plural. 

gdhrcl 

gnhr* 

gfifirtfl 

gfihr&J 

yfihre 

gdhre 

Law 

bdvj 

hiW'% 

h, iu.r> 

Lflli't 

b<iwe 

hat  hi 

h&thl 

hit  hi.  i 

hat  hi 7) 

hathl 

hat  him  ' 

baihn 

baihnd 

i ha  i r.  n* 

! baihnfi 

baihn& 

baihne  i4> 

df 

J.fi 

| di* 

| 

j lifts 

(H% 

da 

1 Seo  note  on  p.  3 1$  ante. 


BA.QHi.Tl. 


497 


The  commonest  postpositions  are : — 

Accusative,  khe. 

Instrumental,  sal,  with. 

Dative,  khe,  to  or  for;  kde  or  kde-khe,  to,  towards ; ri-tfiy,  for. 

Ablative,  de,  from ; me-de,  me-de,  from  in,  from  among. 

Genitive,  rd. 

Locative,  me,  me,  tnanjhe,  in ; de,  in,  on  ; pade,  on  ; par.  on. 

As  examples  of  the  above  we  may  quote  the  following  : — 

Nominative-  chhbtd  bagher  chala  god,  the  younger  son  went  away. 
eki  admi-re  do  hagher  thiye,  of  a certain  man  there  were  two  sons. 

Accusative. — This  takes  khe  where  in  Hindi  kb  would  he  used.  Otherwise  it  is 
the  same  as  the  nominative.  Thus  : — 

> dpnd  pet  bharnd  chdb-thiyu,  he  was  wishing  to  fill  his  belly. 

rotl  paled,  they  cook  bread. 
sUr  tsarne  bhejyd,  sent  him  to  feed  pigs. 

— /v 

moe  tea-re  bagherd-khe  khub  tlpd,  I have  well  beaten  his  son. 

Instrumental. — 

rassi-sdl  ban,  bind  him  with  ropes. 

au  majl  sal  khdndd,  T might  have  eaten  with  pleasure. 

sal  also  means  ‘together  with’,  as  in — 
tu  sadd-t  md-sdi  bssb,  thou  art  ever  with  me. 

Dative.— 

do je  nmlkd-khe  chald-god,  he  went  away  to  another  country. 
dpne  dpne  gard-khe-  clible  goe,  they  went  away,  eaeh  to  his  own  house. 
bated  dpne  nbkrd-khe  bolyd,  the  father  said  to  his  servants. 
tna-khe  fane-rl  fat , for  stopping  me. 

Ablative. — 

kue-de  pdnl  an,  draw  w ater  from  the  well. 
itve  barsd-de,  from  so  many  years. 

gharchi-me-de  jo  merd  hisd  o,  (that)  which  may  he  my  share  from  in  \i.c.  of)  the 
property. 

tea  mulkd-re  rauneicdle-me-de,  (with  one i from  among  (*.<?.  of)  the  inhabitants  of 
that  country. 

Genitive. — The  postposition  rd  is,  of  course,  an  adjective.  Feminine  n ; masc. 
sing.  obi.  and  plural,  re.  Thus : — 

mere  chache-rd  bag  her  tes-rl  baihnd-sdi  byd  od,  the  son  of  my  uncle  is  married  to 
his  sister. 

mere  bapu-rd  nSw,  the  name  of  my  father. 
kitne  liall-re  khaye-de,  from  the  food  of  how  many  servants. 
r eki  adml-re  do  bagher  tliiye,  of  a certain  man  there  were  two  sons 
frs  mulkd-re  raunewdle-me-de,  (one)  from  among  the  inhabitants  of  that  country. 
bdje-rl  gaye-ndchye-rl  todj,  the  sound  of  music,  of  singing  (and)  dancing. 
dhaule  gbhre-ri  jin  gare  ossb,  the  saddle  of  the  white  horse  is  in  the  house. 

VOL*  IX,  paet  iv.  ^ 8 


498 


WESTERN  PAHArI. 


The  postposition  ra  is  often  added  to  adjectives  and  participles  without  affecting 
their  meaning.  See  under  Adjectives. 

Locative.— 

■k 

luchpane-me  din  gujarde  gujarde,  passing  his  days  in  debauchery. 
tennye  se  dpne  khechd-me  bhejyd,  he  sent  him  into  his  fields. 
jet  ha  beta  khecha-de  tlid,  the  elder  son  was  in  the  field. 

hdthd-de  chhdpd , paird-de  jora  panyao , put  a ring  on  his  hand,  shoes  on  his 
feet. 

hamS  sab  admi  si  ted -pa  de  pdche,  we  all  arrived  upon  (i.e.  at)  the  boundary. 
se  gohye  pde  chare  rod , he  is  seated  on  a horse. 

The  postpositions  pde  and  pade  are  often  added  to  the  locative  in  e,  as  in : — 
jin  pithe-pde  rdkhd,  put  the  saddle  on  his  back. 
se  Ubbe-pade  dangrd  tsaro,  lie  is  grazing  cattle  on  the  hill-top. 

Vocative. — The  only  examples  are  bawd,  O father,  (I  have  sinned),  and  be  fed, 
O son,  (thou  art  ever  with  me). 

Adjectives. — All  adjectives  except  those  ending  in  a arc  indeclinable.  Those 
ending  in  d exactly  follow  the  rules  of  Hindi.  Thus,  changd,  good ; masc.  obi.  sing, 
and  all  cases  of  the  plural  change ; fern,  throughout  both  numbers  changi.  These 
adjectives  sometimes  take  the  suffix  of  the  genitive  without  change  of  meaning.  Thus, 
t&azd-rd,  good,  beautiful ; mase.  obi.  sing,  tsazd-re , and  so  on.  This  termination  will 
also  be  noted  in  Kifithali,  and  we  may  recall  the  fact  that  the  Khas-kura  of  Nepal  also 
adds  the  termination  kb  of  its  genitive  to  adjectives  and  participles  in  a similar  way. 

The  same  principle  is  perhaps  followed  in  the  Pi4aclia  languages  of  the  north- Avest 
frontier,  in  Avhich  some  form  of  ka  or  (its  derivative  ga)  is  often  added  to  adjectives  and 
participles,  as,  for  instance,  the  Pashai  hani-k,  struck  ; the  Khowar  gani-ka,  taking ; 
the  Shina  sliide-go,  struck  ; and  the  Veron  pesumtio-go,  struck. 

It  may  be  noted  that  the  nuuier.al  ek,  one,  has  an  oblique  form  eki,  as  in  the  first 
sentence  of  the  Parable. 

Comparison  is  formed,  as  usual,  Avith  the  ablative,  as  in  tes-rd  bdyyd  ies-ri  baihnd- 
de  labd  osso,  his  brother  is  taller  than  his  sister  ; sabbhi-de  tsaza-re  tdlkhu,  the  clothes 
better  than  all,  the  best  clothes. 


PBONOUNS. 

The  Personal  Pronouns  are  declined  as  follows : — 


I. 

Thou. 

Sing.  Nom.  au 

tit 

Ag.  md$ 

m 

Obi.  mb,  mS 

td,  ta 

Gen.  mera 

tera 

Plur.  Nom.  hatni 

tuvn% 

Ag.  hami 

tumi 

Obi.  liarnma 

tummd 

Geu.  mar  a,  mahra 

tdra,  tahrd 

BAGHATI. 


499 


There  is  no  special  form  for  the  locative,  the  oblique  forms  ma,  td,  etc.,  being  used 
with  the  appropriate  postposition.  Mr.  Bailey  reserves  the  forms  ma  and  ta  for  the 
locative  singular,  giving  ma  manjhe  and  ta  manjhe.  Md  and  td  he  gives  to  the 
dative-accusative,  as  in  md-khe , to  me,  with  md-khese  and  td-khese  as  alternative  forms. 
The  ablatives  singular  are  man-de  and  tan-de,  respectively.  The  following  are  examples 
of  the  use  of  these  two  pronouns : — 

au  bhukhd  maru,  I die  hungry. 
mb$  pap  kiyd,  I have  sinned. 

md-khe  bl  dpne  kull-me-de  eki  bardbar  samjhe,  consider  me  also  as  one  of  thy 
coolies. 

se  md-klie  dee-de,  give  that  to  me. 
man-de-doka  hand,  walk  before  me. 
jo  merd  hied  o,  what  may  be  my  share. 
hamM  khau,  let  us  eat. 

tu  sada-i  md-sdl  ossa,  thou  art  ever  with  me. 

tod  md-khe  ek  chhiltu  bl  nl  dittd , thou  didst  not  give  me  even  a kid. 
ta  khuSl  and  chdyo-thd , it  was  proper  for  thee  to  become  happy. 
jb-knch  h merd  ossb,  sab  terd  ossb,  whatever  is  mine  is  all  thine. 
tdhrd  bdyyd  de-ro , tare  bawe  tsazd-rd  khdne-khe  pakde  rdkhd,  your  brother  having 
come,  your  father  has  cooked  a good  (feast)  for  eating. 

The  Pronouns  of  the  third  person  and  the  Demonstrative  Pronouns  are 

as  folloAVs.  In  the  oblique  cases  they  have  feminine  forms, — thus,  tes-rd,  of  him ; ted-rd, 
of  her. 


He,  slie,  it,  this. 

He,  she,  it,  that. 

! .. 

Mas. 

Fem. 

1 

i 

Mas. 

Fem. 

Sing. 

Nom.  ih 

eh 

se 

se 

Ag.  £nne,  &nnye 

iS 

t&mie,  t€nnye 

teS 

Obl.  es 

t s 

t&s,  ty&$ 

ted 

Plur. 

Nom.  eh 

eh 

se 

se 

Ag.  innS 

inni 

tinne 

tinni 

Obl.  tnnd 

innd 

timid 

linnd 

Mr.  Bailey  gives  inne  and  tifine  as  optional  forms  of  the  locative  plural,  beside 

innd-me  and  tinnd-me.  He  also  notes  the  use  of  jand,  as  a mere  expletive  .after 

these  pronouns,  as  in  se  jaye  rupayye , those  rupees ; tes  jane  gard-manjhe,  in  that 

o 6o 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


500 


WESTERN  PAHARl. 


house.  We  may  compare  the  jb  of  the  Jaunsari  sojo,  that.  The  following  examples  of 
the  use  of  these  pronouns  are  taken  from  the  specimens : — 
eh  kdh  osso,  what  is  this  ? 

se  rupayye  es-de  15,  take  those  rupees  from  him. 

es-ri  ndlaS  ab  karue,  I will  now  make  a complaint  of  this. 

jabbe  se  sab- kuchh  dubde  mukyd,  when  he  had  completely  squandered  everything. 
se  md-khe  dee-de,  give  that  to  me. 

tennye  tinnd-khe  dpnl  gharchl  bade-ditti,  he  divided  to  them  his  property. 
bbicd-khe  tes  dekhe-ro  dayd  di,  to  the  father,  having  seen  him,  compassion 
came. 

tes-khe  kbl  k/tohh  nd  deo-thiyd,  no  one  was  giving  anything  to  him. 
tes-rd  bate  tes-klie  mandne  Idgyd , his  father  began  to  advise  him. 
tes  mulka-de  bard  kdl  pare-god,  a great  famine  fell  in  that  country. 
meed  bap d tea  (fern.)  chhbti  chhbnia-de  raub,  my  father  lives  in  that  small  house 
(sentence  233). 

se  khnSl  be,  they  became  happy. 

tinnd-mS-de  chhote,  from  among  them  the  younger  (said  to  his  father). 

The  Reflexive  Pronoun  is  probably  dp  a,  self,  but  no  example  occurs  in  the 
specimens  or  is  given  by  Mr.  Bailey.  Its  genitive  is  dpnd,  which  is  of  frequent  occur- 
rence in  the  specimens,  and  is  used  exactly  as  in  Hindi. 

The  Relative  Pronoun  is  jb,  sing.  ag.  jet uie  or  jennye,  obi.  jes;  plur.  no m.  jb, 
ag.  jin  tie,  obi.  jinnd.  No  feminine  forms  (sg.  ag.  jeS,  obi.  jea,  plur.  ag.  jinni)  corre- 
sponding to  the  feminine  forms  of  se  occur  in  the  specimens  or  are  given  by  Mr. 
Bailey,  but  they  are  probably  used.  The  following  are  examples  of  the  use  of  this 
pronoun : — 

chhiltii , jb  au  dpne  sathi-me  majl-sdl  khdndd,  a kid,  which  I might  have  eaten 
pleasantly  with  my  own  companions. 

eh  chhokrd  jennye  terl  daulat  khuldl,  jes-i  balehtd  dyd,  this  son,  who  caused  thy 
wealth  to  be  eaten  up,  at  what  very  hour  he  came  (at  that  time  thou 
preparedst  a feast). 

The  Interrogative  Pronouns  are 

lain,  who  ? and  kdh,  what  ? "The  sg.  ag.  of  kun  is  kuitie  and  its  obi.  kos ; plur. 
nom.  kun,  ag.  klnne,  obi.  klnna . Kdh  has  its  sing.  obi.  kanni. 

Examples  of  these  arc  : — 

tare  pachhkd  kos-rd  bagher  do,  whose  boy  comes  behind  you  ? 
se  tumS  kos-de  lod,  from  whom  did  you  buy  that  ? 
tdrd  kdh  naw,  what  is  your  name  ? 
eh  kdh  osso,  what  is  this  ? 

The  Indefinite  Pronouns  are  kbl,  anyone,  someone ; kuchh,  anything*,  something. 
Kbi  has  a sing.  ag.  kuitie,  and  an  obi.  kos.  Kuchh  does  not  change  in  declension.  Jb 
kbi  is  ‘ whoever  ’,  and  jb  kuchh,  whatever.  Examples  of  these  are : — 

tes-khe  kbl  kuchh  nd  deo-thiyd,  no  one  was  giving  anything  to  him. 
jb  kuchh  meed  osso,  sab  terd  osso,  whatever  is  mine  is  all  thine. 


SOI 


BAGHifl* 

VERBS. 

A.  Auxiliary  Verbs  and  Verbs  Substantive. 

The  Present  tense  of  the  Verb  substantive  is  conjugated  as  follows 


Sing. 

Flor. 

« 

1. 

OSSU 

088U 

2. 

0880 

0880 

3. 

0880 

0880 

The  Past  is  thd  or  thiyd,  fem.  thl;  plur.  the  or  thiye,  fem.  thi.  It  does  not  change 
for  person,  being  treated  exactly  as  in  Hindi. 

There  is  a negative  verb  substantive  nihai,  I am  not,  not  changing  for  person  -or 
number.  Mr.  Bailey  also  gives  mh  at  hi,  used  in  the  same  way,  with  which  we  may 
compare  the  Jaunsiirl  dtht  not,  I am  not. 

Examples  of  this  verb  are  : — 

tu  sadd-i  md-sdi  dsso,  thou  art  ever  with  me. 
jo  kuchh  merd  dsso,  whatever  is  mine. 

tes-rd  jethd  held  khechd-de  thd,  his  elder  son  was  in  the  field. 
se  dur-hi  thd,  he  was  still  afar  off. 
do  hagher  thiye,  there  were  two  sons. 

The  past  tense  rod,  of  the  verb  ratuyi,  to  remain,  is  often  used  in  the  sense  of  * is  ’, 
as  an  auxiliary  verb  ; and,  as  will  bo  seen,  luge-rod  is  used  to  form  a present  definite. 

Corresponding  to  the  Hindi  hand,  we  have  ond,  to  become,  to  be.  Its  past  parti- 
ciple is  bd,  .and  its  present  is  : — 


Sing. 

PJur. 

1. 

oit 

on 

2. 

b 

b 

3. 

b 

o 

Thus:  — 

mere  chdche-rd  hagher  tes-ri  baihnd-sdi  byd  da,  the  marriage  of  the  son  of  my 
uncle  with  his  sister  has  taken  place. 
table  se  khuSi  be,  then  they  became  happy. 

nd  marl  kabbe  lardi  bi,  no  fighting  ever  took  place  of  (i.e.  between)  us. 
jo  merd  hisd  b,  that  which  may  be  my  share. 

B.  Active  Verb.  The  Infinitive,  or  Verbal  Noun,  is  formed  by  adding  nd  to 
the  root. 

If  the  root  ends  in  n,  r,  or  r,  nd  is  used  instead  of  nd . Thus,  fipnd,  to  strike  ; but 
baynd,  to  become  ; tsarnd,  to  graze ; parnd,  to  fall. 

Examples  of  the  use  of  the  infinitive  are  : — 

«9tr  tsdrne  bhejyd,  he  sent  him  to  feed  swine. 

au  terd  put  banne  jogd  nihai,  I am  not  worthy  to  be  made  thy  son. 
gdne  ndchne-ri  tedj,  the  sound  of  singing  and  dancing. 
md-khe  tipne  aya,  he  came  to  beat  me. 
ma-khe  tdne-ri  tai,  in  order  to  stop  me. 


602 


WESTERN  PAHARl. 


The  Present  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  dd  to  the  root  as  in  tipdd,  striking. 
If  the  root  ends  in  a rowel,  an  n is  inserted,  as  in  ondd,  being ; khdndd,  eating.  When 
put  in  the  oblique  form  and  repeated,  this  participle  implies  continuous  action. 

Thus : - - 

luchpane-me  din  gnjdrde  gnjdrde,  passing  his  time  in  debauchery. 
nathde  nathde  mere  paira-de  pir  lag 2,  as  I ran,  I hurt  my  foot. 

A similar  force  of  the  present  participle  is  observable  in 
jabbe  se  dunde-bd re  gat'd  nere  pochyd,  when  he,  as  he  came  along,  arrived  near 
the  house. 

Mr.  Bailey  also  gives  forms  corresponding  to  tlpde-i  or  tipde-isdr,  in  striking,  and 
tipde,  while  striking. 

.Vs  in  other  neighbouring  dialects,  the  oblique  present  participle  may  be  used  as  an 
infinitive  of  purpose. 

Thus 

tes  cheicd-rl  sue  Idttde  bandar  lee  gdd-tlul,  I had  gone  with  the  neighbours  to  fix 
the  boundary  of  that  wall. 

The  Past  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  d or  yd  to  the  root.  Thus,  tipd  or  tipyd , 
struck.  Mr.  Bailey  does  not  mention  the  form  tipya,  which  is  probably  borrowed  from 
Panjabi.  It  is,  however,  much  the  most  common  form  in  the  specimens.  Mr.  Bailey 
also  gives  a form  equivalent  to  tlpd-dd,  fern,  tipi-di,  in  the  state  of  having  fallen.  This 
form  of  the  participle  has  its  subject  in  the  genitive,  not  in  the  agent  case,  as  in  tee- re 
kitdb  rakkhidi  ossa  yd  nth  dtla,  as  for  his  (affair)  has  the  book  been  placed  or  not?  i.e. 
has  he  placed  the  book  or  not?  The  same  construction  is  followed  in  the  future  passive 
participle. 

Numerous  examples  of  the  past  participle  will  be  found  under  the  head  of  the  past 
tense. 


The  following  Past  Participles  are  irregular: — 


karnd,  to  do. 

Past  participle  kiyd. 

detta,  to  give. 

n 

99 

dittd. 

latittd,  to  take. 

» 

99 

Ida,  lawn. 

jdtid,  to  go. 

» 

99 

gad. 

raund,  to  remain. 

)) 

99 

rod. 

mama,  to  die. 

M 

9f- 

mud. 

aund,  to  come. 

99 

99 

dyd. 

The  Puture  Passive  Participle  is  flic  same  in  form  as  the  Infinitive.  Thus, 
tiptui,  it  is  to  be  beaten,  i.e.  (I,  you,  he)  must  (or  will)  beat. 

Its  subject  is  put  in  the  oblique  genitive,  not  in  the  agent  case ; as  in  the  case  of 
the  past  participle  in  dd. 

Thus : — 

mere  ....  dpne  bdiee-fcue-khe  jdnd,  tes-klie  bdlt.id,  I must  {i.e.  I will)  go  unto 
my  father,  and  will  say  to  him  ; lit.  as  for  my  part,  it  is  to  be  gone,  etc. 

The  Conjunctive  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  e to  the  root,  but  this  form  is 
only  employed  in  compound  verbs.  When  used  alone,  rd  is  added,  thus,  tipe-ro,  having 
struck.  Bantja,  to  remain,  makes  rde-ro,  and  autfd,  to  come,  ae-ro. 


baghatI. 


503 


Examples  arc : — 

aab-kuchh  katthd  kard-ro  duje  mulkd-khe  chala-gda,  having  collected  everything, 
he  went  to  a far  country. 
tetti-de  jad-rd,  having  gone  from  there. 

bdwd-khe  tea  delche-rd  dayd  dl , hor  daure-ro,  tea-re  gald-de  lapetd-rd,  to  his  father, 
having  seen  him,  compassion  came,  and  having  run,  having  embraced  him, 
(he  kissed  him). 

tdhra  bay  yd  de-ro,  your  brother  having  come  (your  father  has  given  a feast). 

Note  that  the  conjunctive  participle  does  not  necessarily  refer  to  the  subject  of  the 
sentence,  as  is  the  rule  in  Hindi.  • 

The  Noun  of  Agency  is  formed  by  adding  lodld  to  the  oblique  infinitive,  as  in 
tipne-wdla,  a striker  ; raune-wdln,  an  inhabitant. 

The  Imperative  singular  is  the  same  in  form  as  the  root.  Thus,  tip , strike  thou. 
Its  plural  takes  a.  Thus,  tipd,  strike  ye.  There  arc  a few  irregular  forms,  which  will  be 
found  in  the  examples  following  : — 

jo  rnerd  htsd  d,  ae  tnd-khe  ded-de,  give  the  share  which  falls  to  me. 
tea  khiib  mar,  hor  raSSi-sdi  ban,  boat  him  well,  and  tie  him  with  a rope. 

aabbhi-de  taazd-re  tdlkhii  tds-khe  paindo paird-de  jord  panydo,  dress  ye 

him  in  the  best  garment put  ye  shoes  on  his  feet. 

eli  rupayyd  tds-khe  do,  give  ye  this  rupee  to  him. 
se  rupayye  ds-de  ldf  take  ye  those  rupees  from  him. 

In  md-khe  hi  dp  tie  knli-me-de  eki  bardbar  samjhe,  consider  me  also  as  equal  to  one 
of  your  coolies,  samjhe  is  probably  an  honorific  imperative,  equivalent  to  the  Hindi  sam- 
jhiye. 

The  Present  Indicative,  also  used  as  a Present  Subjunctive,  is  thus  conju- 
gated : — 

I strike,  T may  strike,  etc. 


Sing. 

Plur. 

1.  tipd 

ftp  a 

2.  tipd 

tipd 

3.  tipo 

tipd 

Some  verbs  have  slightly 

irregular  forms. 

We  may  quote  : — 

1 Sing. 

3 Sing. 

ova,  to  become, 

od 

o 

rautf  d,  to  remain, 

roil , ranii 

ro,  raud 

launa,  to  take, 

laii 

lo 

Tho  following  are  examples  of  the  use  of  this  tense  : — 

au  bhukhd  mdru,  I die  of  hunger. 

qe  tibbe-pade  dangrd  tsdrd,  he  is  grazing  cattle  on  the  top  of  the  hill. 

Yficrd  bdpu  tea  chhotl  ch hdujd-dd  raud,  my  father  lives  in  that  small  house. 
tare  pachhkd  kda-rd  bagher  do,  whose  boy  comes  behind  you  ? 
khanS-de  jade  roti  pdko,  they  cook  bread  more  than  (sufficient  for)  eating. 


604 


WESTERN  PAHARl. 


A more  distinctly  Definite  Present  is  formed  with  the  oblique  infinitive  and  lagS- 
ot  Idge-rod,  as  in  off  itne  barsa-de  terl  sewu  karne  lage-rod , I,  from  so  many  years,  am 
doing  (and  have  all  along  been  doing)  thy  service. 

The  Imperfect  is  formed  by  adding  tho  past,  tense  of  the  Verb  Substantive  to  the 
Present,  as  in  : — 

dpnd  pet  bharnd  chno-thiya , hor  tes-klie  lcoi  kuchh  nd  deo-thiyd,  he  was  wishing 
to  fill  his  belly,  and  no  one  was  giving  him  anything. 

Or  we  may  say : au  tlpne  Idge  rod-thd , I was  striking. 

The  Past  Conditional  is  formed  from  the  Present  Participle,  as  in  Hindi. 

Thus : — 

au  dpne  sathl-me  maji-sdl  khdndd,  I might  have  eaten  in  happiness  among  my 
friends. 

The  Future  is  conjugated  as  follows  : — 

I shall  strike,  etc. 


Singular.  Plubal. 


Ma*c. 

Fein. 

Muse. 

! 

I 

Fein, 

1.  tip  as 

tipae 

j tipue , tipme 

tipvii 

2.  tipla  j 

tipli 

! tipi* 

tipli 

3.  tipli  j 

tipli 

tiple 

! 

tipli 

As  examples,  we  may  quote  : — 

es-ri  nalaS  ab  karue,  I will  now  make  a complaint  of  this. 
merl  gdli-ri  ndhts  karld , lie  will  make  a complaint  of  my  abuse. 

The  Past  is  formed  exactly  as  in  Hindi,  the  Past  Participle  being  used  for  all  per- 
sons, with  appropriate  changes  of  gender  and  number.  In  the  ease  ol'  transitive  verbs, 
the  construction  is  passive,  with  the  subject  in  the  Agent  case.  Thus : — • 

A.  Intransitive  verbs  : — 

gave  tin  dere  pare  rod,  (I)  remained  lying  down  in  the  house  for  three  days. 
au  dz  bahut-hi  hand  a,  1 walked  a long  way  to-day. 

chhoid  bagher  duje  mntkd-khe  chald-god,  the  younger  son  went  to  another 
country. 

tea  mulkd-re  raunewdle-me-de  ekt-re  thee  ratine  Idgyd , he  began  to  dwell  with  one 
of  the  inhabitants  of  that  country. 
jabbe  se  pbcliyd,  when  he  arrived. 

jabbe  hame  sab  ddml  stum-pade pdche,  when  we  all  arrived  at  the  boundary. 
tab  ddml  dare-goe,  dpne  dpne  gara-khe  chdle  goe , all  the  men  became  afraid,  (and) 
went  each  to  his  own  house. 

bdwd-khe  tes  dekhe-ru  dayd  di,  compassion  came  to  the  father  on  seeing  him. 
mere  paird-de  pie  lagl,  a hurt  happened  to  my  foot. 


baghAtL 


505 


B.  Transitive  Verbs  : — 
vnoS  pap  kiyd , I did  sin. 

moe  tes-re  bagherd-khe  klnib  tipd,  I beat  bis  son  well. 
chhote  dpne  bdwd-khe  holy  a , the  younger  said  to  his  father. 
se  turne  kos-de  Ida,  from  whom  did  you  buy  that  ? 

temiye  tinnd-khe  dpiii  gharchi  bade  ditti,  he  divided  out  his  property  to  them. 
gd ne-  ndch ite-ri  tedj  iniit,  (he)  heard  the  sound  of  singing  and  dancing. 
jhiitlii  jdlsdjl  hi,  (he)  has  made  a false  forgery. 

The  Perfect  is  formed  as  in  Hindi.  Thus,  mol ? tipd  osso,  I have  struck,  but  no 
instance  occurs  in  the  specimens, -the  simple  Past  being  always  used  instead  of  it. 

The  Pluperfect  is  also  formed  as  in  Hindi.  Thus,  moe  tipd-thd  (or  thiya),  I had 
•truck.  So : — 

bah  at  din  nd  oe-thiye,  many  days  had  not  passed. 

‘ n ittd-thd,  he  had  died. 

Stic  lande  bandar  lee  god-thd , I had  gone  with  the  neighbours  to  fix  the  boundary. 

Causal  Verbs  are  formed  as  in  Hindi.  Thus  : — 

hindnd,  to  cause  to  hear  ; mama,  to  beat.  Irregular  is  khuldnd  or  khldnu,  to  give 
to  eat,  to  feed. 

Compound  Verbs. 

Intensives  are  formed  with  the  Conjunctive  Participle  as  in  Hindi.  Thus  : — 
dee-dead,  to  give  away. 
pare-jana , to  fall,  to  happen. 
lee  jd yd,  to  take  away. 
chare-ravnd,  to  be  mounted. 

Completives,  as  in  dnbSe  antic  yd,  he  had  squandered  completely. 

Desideratives 

a pile  pel  bharnd  chdo-thiyd , he  was  wishing  to  fill  his  belly. 
ta  kliuSi  bad  chdyb-thd,  it  was  proper  for  you. 

Inceptives 

ramie  lagyd,  he  began  to  dwell. 
m and  lie  lagyd,  he  began  to  advise. 


3 x 


TOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


5oe 


l No.  7.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAlIlRl  (BAGHATl). 

> 

Specimen  I. 

tot  tr^#  ft  to t fto  i ton-W#  to  trw  tot-#  tom 

tot  TRwt  toft-##  #t  #TT  f^TR  #t  % ITT-#  to  # i n#  fn«p 

< 

ton-#  TRCpft  TO5#*  wfl#  f^?ft  I W^? I ff*T  *TT  #tn  fa#  # toT 
W#T  nW  TOT  to-Tt  WTOT-#  ’TOT  ton  I #*ft  WfTO#-# 
ffn  Tpnr#  Tntot  wtot  <§to:  ff*ft  i to  % to  ^wnr 

TpWTT  7#  to  nTOT#  W^T  TOB  Wl%  ton  TO  % nffa  #fa  #tr  I 
tot#  TOTt  to  TJTOT-T  Tt#WT®-##  tot#  Sn!  ft#  WTTCIT  I 
fh#  % TRW  TOT  # TO  TRT#  #5€R  I % ton#  TO  faTOR  TIT# 

C\  • C\ 

trwt  mz  towt  nr#  ftoT  itr  to  # #tf  wrw  wt  ##  to  i 
to  to  # ftn  tr£  crt  fas#  ston  to  tot#  f#to  m«##  wr## 

TO  #ft  TOT  TO  Wf  TO3T  TO  I St  <3ifs-ft  TRW  to  WRW-# 

ft*. 

orw  to-#  town  tot  to  to*tt#  wto  to  to  to#  to  farm 
ttT  to  w wto  ton  i to-#  wt  wrw  tot  # % tot  wttwt 

'A  sJ 

TO#  I TO  % ^fS-Tt  TRW  TO  WTOI-#  #WR  | WT  t ^T-ft  TO 

far  to  t wtwt-#  to  %f##t  to  TRt  to  <ftfar-Tt  to#  tobt# 

tofe-ft  to-WT  tot  mwf  i S£  to-#  wtwm  tot  to  toto# 

tow  to:  to  tow#  to  ftoj  i to  to  H?r  wro  ton  #t%  i m 

to  trw  tom-#  toaT  tot#  to#  stto  to  # §m#  to 

©\ 

to#  tot#  mm  wtt#  #tro  tot#  i to  to  *ro»  tfe#t  to 
to  i tor  # tot  wet  tjtr-to  to#  ton  mfn  ton-WT  to#  fron  i 
to  # to  to  n * 

to-TT  #3T  #£T  #TO#  TO  I to  % TRto-to  tot  to  wfan 
to  tot-#  nr#  nm#-ft  wro  tot  1 to  fa#  trw#  wTwttt-S# 

wwr  TOTO-ft  WWT  TO  WTO  tot  I t##  #OT  TTTTOT  TOT  torft 

to  to  tottt  *3T#-%  wwrnr  trwt  to#  # to^r  TR^-ntm  1 wr  fto 


BAGliATI.  607 

3TT  I 3^-TT  ^3  *TT  I tRft-cTli  ?R-T?  - 

*R  ^TfT  *TT*-Tt  TO-#  TOTO  5TR3T  I , fTOT  5RR  f^TT  ^cR 
TOrc-t  wu  «r  ^rr  ^r  f*TOT-%  srrsr  #rsrr 
*rr-#  fmtz  *ft  sft  f^crr  ^r  *r#t  *rrt 

^ft^T  I <$*T  TO  Wt^TT  fSRJ  ^Et4  TOm 

*TOT  7T^  TO-#  TORT  RTWT  f^RT  I WTt  TO-#  ^t^JT  TOIT  <X 
SjT  *n4  TO*  I #t  $TT  Wf  TO  TO  TOT  I ?tT  *pft  TOlT 

^Tfr-m  to  ^rt  g^rr  m to%  #Htt  TTf%  tt^tt-^  to# 
te  ii 


VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


508 


[No.  7.] 


INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


Central  Group. 


WESTERN  PAHA  III  (BAGllATl). 

Specimen  I. 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 

Note. — hi  this  and  the  following  specimen , so  far  as  was  possible , words  have  been  spelt  as  in  the  Rev.  T.  Grahame 
Haileys  account  of  Raghift,  in  his  “Languages  of  the  Northern  Himalayas?'  For  this  reason , many  consonants  will  be 
found  to  be  doubled , which  are  written  as  single  consonants  in  the  version  in  the  Sdgart  character . It  is  not  usual  to 
indicate  the  doubling  in  writing  in  that  character.  Moreover , in  that  character , there  is  no  means  for  representing  the 
short  6,  or  for  representing  the  short  6.  The  first  is  sometimes  written  as  i,  and  sometimes  as  e,  and  the  latter  as  a or  e. 
In  such  eases,  e and  6 have  been  written  in  the  transliteration  instead  of  i or  6 .or  a or  6,  respectively . 


bolya, 

it-was-said, 


Ekl-adnri-re  do  1 Higher 
One-man-of  two  sons 

apne-bawa-khc  bcilya,  ‘b, 

his-own  father-to  it-was-said,  \fa 

hisa,  6,  se  ma-klie  dee 

share  may-be , that  me-to  girt 

gliarchl  bade-dittl.  Bahut. 

property  was-divided-ont.  Many 

sab-kuchh  kattlia  kare-ro 

everything  together  made-having 


gher  thiye.  Tinna-me-de  clibote 

ons  were.  Them-inf rom  by-the-younger 

‘bawa,  apni-glmrclii-me-de  jo  merj 

l,  ‘ father,  you  r-own-property-in  from  what  my 
lie  dee-de.’  Tabbe  tennye  tlnna-khc  apni 

'o  give-up .’  Then  by-him  them-to  his-owi 

Bahut  din  na  oe-tliive  ke  eh  hot  a baghe 

Many  days  not  become-had  that  the-younger  son 

ire-ro  dii  j e- mul  k a-k  lie  clmla-goa.  Tetti 

?- having  another-counlry-to  went-away.  Theri 


were. 


Tin  na-me-de 
Them-in-f  rom 


‘bawa, 

1 father , 


ma-klie  dee-de.’ 
me-to  give-up. 


mera 


apni 

his-own 

bagber 


luckpane-me  din  gujarde-gujarde  apni  gharclil  dubae-dittl. 
debauchery-in  days  a-passin  g-a  -passing  his-own  property  was-squandered. 


se  sab-kuchb  dubae 

he  everything  squandert 

paye-gbii,  hor  se  gai 
fetl-down , and  he  po 
raune-Avalc-me-de  eki-re 
inh  abitan  ts-inf rom  on  e-  of 
sbr  tsarne  bhejya. 

swine  to-feed  was-sent. 

chao-tbiya,  hor  tes-klie 
tcishing-was , and  him- to 


dubae-mukya,  tabbe  tes-mulka-de  lmyii  kaj. 

squandered-complelety,  then  t hat-conn  try-in  a-great  famine 

se  garlb  oe-goa.  Tetti -do  jae-rb,  tes-mulka-re 

he  poor  became.  Therefrom  gone-having , that-country-of 

thfig  raune  lagya.  Tennyo  se  apne-kbeeba-me 

near  to-dwell  he-began.  By-him  he  his-own-fields-in 

Se  tin  mi-re  j lithe-chli ilka-sal  apna  pet  bbarna 

lie  them-of  left-husks- with  liis-own  belly  to-fill 

kbl  kuebh  11a  deo-tliiya.  Jabbe  tes-kbe 

any-one  anything  not  giving-was.  TV  hen  him-to 


Tetti 

There 

Jabbe 

When 

kaj 

famine 


sense  came , 

khang-do 
food- from 


tabbe  tennye  bblya, 
then  by-him  it-icas-said, 
jade  roti  pako, 

superfluous  bread  they-cook, 


* mere-bawa-re  kitne-hali-rS 

* myfather-qf  how-many-servants-qf 

hor  nu  bbukha  maru. 

and  I hungry  am-dying. 

jana,  tgs-khe  bbb^a, 


!Mere  uthe-ro  apne-bawe-kae-khe  jana,  tgs-khe  bob^a, 

By-me  arisen-having  my-ownfalher-neor-to  is-to-be-gonc , him-to  it-is-to-be-said, 
“ bawa,  moe  siu-ga-re  b.'  irodh  Lor  tore  samne  pap  kiya ; an 

“ father , by-me  heacen-of  against  and  of-thee  before  sin  tcas-done ; I 


BAGHATI. 


509 


tera  put  banne  joga  nihai.  Ma-khe  bi  apne-kuH-me-de 

thy  son  to-be-made  worthy  not-am.  Me  (ace.)  also  your-own-coolies-in-from 

Ski  barabar  samjhS.”  ’ TabbS  so  fithS-ro  apne-b&we-kad-khd  goa. 
one  like  consider .”  ’ Then  he  arisen-having  his-own-fatlier-near-to  went. 
Par  so  dur-hi  tha,  ke  tds-rc  bawa-khd  t?s  dekhd-ro 

Silt  he  distant-even  teas,  that  him-of  the-father-to  him  seen-having 

daya  ai,  h6r  daurd-ro  tds-rd  gala-do  lapete-ro  tes-da 

compassion  Came,  and  run-having  him-of  neclc-on  wrapped-having  him-of 

pliaya  lays.1  Bete  tes-khe  bolya,  1 bawa,  mod  snrga-re 

kisses  were-taken.  By-thc-son.  him-to  it-was-said , ‘ father , by-me  heacen-of 

barodh  hot*  tore  samne  pap  kiya.  Au  tera  put  banne  joga 
against  and  of- thee  before  sin  was-done.  I thy  son  to-be-inade  worthy 

nihai.’  TO  bit  wo  apne-nokra-kho  bolya,  * sabbhi-do  tsaza-rc 

not-am Then  by-the-father  his-own-sercants-to  it-was-said,  ‘ all- than  good 

talkhu  tds-khd  painful ; hor  tes-rc  hatha-do  ehhapii,  paira-de  jura 
garments  him-to  put-on;  and  him-of  hand-on  ring,  feet-on  pair -of -shoes 
panyao.  Tabbo  liaml  kliau,  baithd-ro  chain  karu.  Kie-kd  mera 

put-on.  Then  we  may-cat,  sot-having  ease  may-make.  Because  my 

beta  mua-tlia,  naiyo  jiii ; radio  goii-tha,  taiyd  ntila.’  Tabbe 

son  dead-was,  now  lived;  having-been-lost  gone-was,  now  teas -got'  Then 

se  khu£i  be. 

they  happy  became. 


TSs-ra 

jetha 

beta 

khecha-dd 

tha.  Jabbo 

sc  a undo-bard 

Him-of 

the-ehler 

son 

the-field-in 

was.  When 

he  coming-at-timc 

gnra-ndrd 

pocbva, 

tabbo 

bajd-rl 

gand-nachnd-rl 

waj  £uni. 

the-house-near 

arrived, 

then 

music-of 

singing-dancing-of 

noise  was-heard. 

Or  tennyc  apne-nokra-mc-do  ok  balyae-ro  pfichhya,  ‘ eh 

And  by-him  his-oicn-sercants-in-from  one  called-having  it-was-asked,  ‘ this 
kah  6ss0?  ’ Tennyd  tds-kad  bolya,  ‘tiilira  bayyii  ad-ro, 

vchat  is?'  By-him  hint-near  it-was-said,  * your  brother  come-having, 

tare-bawd  tsaza-ra  khand-klid  pakae-vakha,  kie-ke  sc 

by-yonr-father  good  (feast)  eating-for  cooking-was-caused-to-be-done,  because  he 
jiunda  ae-gba.’  Par  tennyd  bura  manya.  Bihtre  jane-khe 

living  arrived But  by-him  bad  it-was-  thought.  IVitliin  going-for 

tds*ra  jiu  nit  bolya.  Ette-ri  tai  tes-ra  baw,  biihre 

him-of  the-soul  not  was-said.  Here-of  for  him-of  the-father,  out 

ae-ro,  tSs-kho  nmniine  lagya.  Tdmtyd  jawab  ditta,  “an 

come-having , him-to  to-adcise  began.  By-him  answer  was-gicen,  ‘ T 

itnS-barsit-de  tori  sdwa  karne  lage-roii ; kabbln  toro-hukma-do  balm'* 
so-ma ny-years-f rom  thy  service  to-do  continued ; ever  thy-order-from  outside 

1 The  l&st  three  words  appear  to  bo  corrupt  Panjabi. 


BIO 


■WESTERN  PAHARl. 


ni  goa ; h5r  to!  ma-khe  ek  ckhiltu  1)1  ni  ditta,  36  ail 

not  I-went ; and  by-thee  me-to  a kid  eoen  not  was-given,  that  I 

apne-sathi-me  majl-sai  khan  da.  Tera  eh  chhokra  jSnnyS 

my-own-friends-with  pleasure-with  might-have-eaten.  Thy  this  son  by- whom 

terl  daulat  r5da-de  kliulal,  jSs-I-bakhta  aya, 

thy  wealth  harlots-on  was-caused-to-be-eaten,  at-what-very-time  he-came, 
t6bbu  tes-kho  tsaza-ra  khana  kiya.’  Bawe  t8s-khe  bolya, 

then-even  him-for  good  food  tcas-made.’  By -the- father  him-to  it-was-said , 

‘ bStSa,  tu  6ada-i  ma-sai  5ss6.  Jo-kuchh  mera  5sso,  sab  tera 

* son,  thou  altvays-even  me-icith  art.  Whatever  mine  is,  all  thine 

ftsso.  Ta  khuSl  ona  chayo-tha,  kie-ke  tera  bayya  mua-tha,  naiye 

is.  For-thee  happy  to-be  proper-teas,  because  thy  brother  dead-toas,  now 

jia ; rachft  goa-tha,  taiye  inila.’ 

lived ; having-been-lost  gone-teas,  now  was-got ' 


511 


[No  8.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  IMUAltf  (BAOUATI). 


Speoimen  II. 

to  to  tot  i wi^tj  to  ^RT^r  i to-tt  *gto  i to 
#t#-TT  f^r^rr  fsjTT^n  i 

TfT  TO  TOP*  T fw  I TO-#  # ’STHTT  «TT 

ttt#  to  ^T^ri:  i t?*#  to  to  TOTt  i to  to-# 

*fhc  to  tok  %q-  #ttoit  i to  to  to  to^  ^Nt  to  #%  to 
Trr^q;  *r*?t-#  *tp#  f^ft  i *rr-#  #q*r  toh  i #1%-#  to  to*?! 
^fr  #cr  i *nm  to  # tot  #cr  i ^rt  # 

*Tt*TT  l TO  §TT-%  | TO  <?fa  Rff  #^TT  l 

TTT^-#  TO  wft  1#  R#  TO#t-#  TOTO  *TO*TT  l TO#  31%-# 

Trrt  w#  wt^t-tit#  *#  i %W  to-#  to#  to-#  totoi  to 

Cv 

TOTT  II 


512 


[No.  8] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAHARl  (BAGHATl). 


Specimen  II. 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 

[See  Note  at  the  head  of  the  Transliteration  of  Specimen  /.] 


Mera 

naw 

Madiio. 

Mere-bapu-ra 

naw  Sadho. 

Jate-ra 

Kanet. 

My 

name 

Mddho. 

My-father-of 

name  Sadho. 

Caste-of 

Kanet. 

Gaw 

Koti-ra, 

Jila 

6imla. 

Village 

Koti-of  District 

Simla. 

Sadue  mii-pae  chaiiak  jhagra  kiya.  Mo? 

By -the- complainant  rnc-on  causeless  quarrel  icas-made.  By -we 

t6s-klie  ni  ghayii,  na  marl  kabbe  larai  61.  Eki-cliewa-pSde 

him-as-f or  not  it-was-beaten , not  of -us  ever  fighting  became.  A-wall-npon 

larai  61.  Tes-chewa-ri  sTw  lande  bandar  lee 

fighting  became.  That-wall-of  boundary  to-put  the-neighbonrs  having-taken 
goa-tha.  Jabbe  ham?  sab  admi  sTwa-pade  pficlie,  tabbe 

(I)-gone-tcas.  When  ice  all  wen  the-bonndary-upon  arrived , then 

sadue  sabbhi-klie  gall  ditti.  Ma-khe  tipne  aya. 

by-the-complainant  all-to  abuse  tvas-given.  Me-to  to-beat  he-came. 

Daure-r6  sab  adml  dare  goe.  Apne-apne-gara-khe 

Bun-having  all  wen  being-afraid  icent.  Th  eir-own-own-houscs-to 

ch<ile-g6e.  Ail  1)1  <jare-r6  nathe-g6a,  nathde-nathde 

they-icent-away . I also  feared-having  ran-away , a-running-a-  running 

mere-paira-de  pir  lagi.  Gare  tin  dere  pare 

my-foot-on  pain  happened.  ~ In-lhe-house  three  days  having-fallen 

r6a.  Sadu-khe  eh  stick  pari  ke,  * ineri-gali-ri 

(T-)  remained.  The-complainant-to  this  thought  fell  that , * my-abnse-of 

nalaS  karla.’  Ma-klie  tane-rx  t5i  jhuthi  jal-saji 

complaint  he-icill-make .’  Me  {acc.)  stopping-of  for  a-false  forgery 
ki.  Kie  ma-khe  gall  ditti,  6s-ri  nala4  ab 

voas-wade.  Because  me-to  abuse  was-given,  this-of  complaint  now 

karde. 

1-will-make. 


513 


PATIALA  BAGHATT. 


As  further  specimens  of  Baghatl  it  will  be  sufllcient  to  give  those  received  from  the 
Patiala  State.  This  State,  the  main  portion  of  which  is  situated  in  the  plains  portion  of 
the  Panjab,  has  an  outlying  tract  extending  into  the  heart  of  the  Simla  hills.  This 
tract,  a portion  of  Nizamat  Piujaur,  has  to  its  east,  on  the  south,  the  State  of  Sirmaur, 
and,  further  north,  the  State  of  Kconthal.  A number  of  smaller  hill  states  run  along 
its  western  side,  of  which,  for  our  present  purposes,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  mention 
Baghat. 


This  tract  consists  of  three  thanas  named,  from  south  to  north,  Piujaur,  Dharampur 
and  Srinagar,  respectively.  Pinjaur  and  Dharampur  have  Sirmaur  to  their  east  and 
Baghat  to  their  north  and  west  and  in  them  the  language  spoken  is  Baghatl.  Tn  Sri- 
nagar, with  Kconthal  to  its  oast,  the  language  is  Kiuthall.  To  the  south  of  Piujaur 
thana  the  language  is  the  Hindi  of  Ambala. 

The  State  returned  the  language  of  all  these  thanas  as  simply  “ Paharl  ” or  Hill- 
language,”  with  a total  number  of  speakers  (in  1891)  of  9,000.  No  materials  are 
available  for  stating  the  number  of  speakers  of  this  “ Paharl”  in  each  tliana,  but  it  will 
be  a fairly  accurate  estimate  to  put  the  Pinjaur  and  Dharampur  speakers  of  Baghatl  at 
6,000  and  the  Kiuthall  speakers  of  Srinagar  at  3,000. 

Two  specimens  wore  received  from  each  thana,  and  the  four  in  Baghatl  are  given 
below'.  They  are  not  very  satisfactory,  owing  to  their  being  written  in  the  Persian 
character,  the  reading  of  which  leaves  several  isolated  words  doubtful  as  to  form  or 
meaning,1  hut  they  are  sufficiently  clear  to  be  good  examples  of  the  local  Baghatl.  In 
the  case  of  each  thana,  the  subjects  of  the  specimens  are  the  same, — a version  of  the 
Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son  and  a short  description  of  the  day’s  work  of  a peasant  of  the 
country.  For  the  first,  in  each  case,  the  original  copy,  as  forwarded,  is  printed,  with  a 
transliteration.  It  has  not  been  thought  necessary  to  give  an  interlinear  translation.  In 
the  case  of  the  second,  the  same  procedure  has  been  followed,  but  a tentative  interlineai 
translation  has  been  given  with  the  copy  that  comes  from  thana  Pinjaur. 


1 One  grave  omission  is  that,  throughout,  no  distinction  is  made  between  the  cerebral  n and  the  dental  n , or  Ictwtcu 
the  cerebral  l and  the  dental  l. 


8 u 


vt.l*  IX,  part  !V. 


614 


PATIALA  (PINJAUR)  BAGHATT. 

The  dialect  of  this  thana  is,  as  might  bo  expected,  a good  deal  mixed  with  Hindi, 
but  on  the  whole,  the  Baghati  forms  are  well  exhibited.  The  most  prominent  Hindi 
idiom  is  the  occasional  use  of  led  (ke,  kl)  for  ‘of.’  The  frequent  use  of  ke  instead  of  khe 
for  the  postposition  of  the  dative  is  probably  caused  by  the  common  dialectic  Hindi  use  of 
ke  in  the  same  sense. 

There  is  a good  example  of  the  dropping  of  an  intervocalic  l in  the  word  kiybkar,  a 
husk,  which  may  be  compared  with  the  Sirmauri  salekar.  Other  reminders  of  Sirmauri 
are  gilt  cite,  evidently  the  same  as  the  Sirmauri  geSi,  and  the  occasional  use  of  e instead 
of  a as  the  sign  of  the  oblique  form  (e.g.  tlibrl  rate-de). 

Owing  to  the  specimens  being  written  in  the  Persian  character,  no  attempt  is  made 
to  show  tin;  existence  of  the  cerebral  « and  l.  The  letter  .<•  is  represented  by  sh,  and  the 
frequent  interchange  of  s and  s is  shown  by  the  occasional  use  of  she  instead  of  se  for 
‘ he.’ 

The  h which  is  regularly  dropped  in  Baghati  is  here  often  written,  as  in  hand  for 
ond  and  hu  for  au. 

With  the  exceptions  above  mentioned,  the  Baghati  oblique  form  in  d is  well  repre- 
sented, and  so  also  the  ablative  postposition  de.  Less  regular  is  the  use  of  re  to  mean 
‘ with  ’ in  khauddnd-re.  (he  stayed)  with  a man  of  good  family. 

In  the  pronouns,  the  usual  agent  singular  of  the  third  person  is  the  regular  tennye, 
but  we  also  meet  taT,  tehnS  and  unite! . Similarly  instead  of  jennye,  by  whom,  we  have 
jehe.  Es,  the  oblique  form  of  eh,  this,  is  regularly  represented  by  e. 

In  the  verbs,  assb  appears  under  the  form  asb,  and  the  first  person  of  the  present 
tense  is  nasalized,  as  in  bolE  for  boliL  The  suffix  of  the  conjunctive  participle  is  regu- 
larly ro,  but  sometimes  Ave  find  re,  as  in  ae-re,  having  come.  We  may  note  also  the 
idiomatic  use  of  the  genitive  for  the  subject  of  the  future  passive  participle  in  meri  jand% 
1 must  (i.e.  I will)  go  (to  my  father). 


515 

[No.  9.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Groufv 

WESTERN  PAHARl  (BAGHATl). 

Pinjaur  Dialect.  (Patiala  State.) 

Specimen  I. 

Vyt  4-  y>b  Ay**  e—y~3  4_  V5  «=--)  Si) 

)})  Lo  JU  ^ c_,>jO  £_  J^X*  JOAJ  fc  JU 

qL  c-ybj0  ^i)  y A.  s? — 4-  <=b«*  u° 

ju  Ujj  ^ jy  iu 

^-XjJ  c_-jiybo  ^5  l$J  «L-jo  )yi  j£  )y>  l^XLc 

t*v*j  •i-jA*  * '—  by*1  v^°  <£-  AS*  by  W* 

s±^J;j  y*T  jj-4*'  <£-  c_JjyyA  UjJ  e/*^> 

C_^e  ly  c—j  Ji*  wJ  1$j  &i  jjA  L/**j 

<=-;4^  uj>y  uy**y&  \jyA  k.  <J*y  4-  AAf  ^-j  Jj4 

UL«.j  vjy®  byAi  c-~)  ^W-  Sr  ^~~  c— ; 

u3^y  Uj^  ^ «^-  *— c^j  w->j  ^l*  c_-jaj 

^ 4-  4—  J)V?  <flj  >er^l  ^ ^4^“  cr^J  c — ^ <±J 

*=— j^j  (^-^J  WJ  <£-  c-j*^  4dJ  j^J 

c -j  *^-  4-  ^ ^ 4^®  *-r^ 

VOL.  IX,  part  iv.  3 v 2 


516 


■WESTERN-  PAHllii. 


^ 6— 1>JJ  ^ £o\jm  Jjj  )j  UU*»J 

'-'?  JjJ  y & t-J<S  <£:)«.  <£:)  »y  4-  )/y  a } ojj^/ 

-y>  ibtf  v^’-  jjI  s^b*  w**  «— j“? 

b/  sb  a b4^  Uj  b*  i4>  b1-^  ^ ujj/  jjj  3>/  ^ 

* £L  *b>*  v°'  £_  *■>•  >-»/  Uj 

jj)  *^-K  y =-3**  ^-jb^  '-r'%  W ii^  jjv  Ir*’  jj) 

Uj~J  K «_j  Wji  <£-  b6;  i*I  V*  ^ jb  <±5>U 

£ <-£»■  i_yjv  *— Jjb  Jjj  b/  f Sr^1^  b4*"  **  ^ 

**  ji  .s-4/  wvy  **>  M s^4  **"  «_>  «_<>ij 

b1'  )J  <£I  j*b  -i-jb  <i-  uj4-  yi«  l^U. 

Jjl  Uj/  crM*  y/  *_>4»*  Ojt-  <jj)  ««Cj  iljv  ^ 

yw  b <=£»  yy  b/  ja^  <±j* 

^ «i 

*—J  b^’  S-*^  JjJ  Uj*  *— J £_J  ^ boj 

*•  ••  II  y Cm- 

U/4V  j^U-  ^Tt  &y  4-  J&[)  Jb®  )jxi  LJ 

£_  <£&***  »J*>"  y c J itT  ily  Z_  t_ju uj 

^ b^  ^ b^'  Wi  Uy  Jjj  Uj>  Jj  J^-  ^ 


* ^ v!  W b/  eb  .yi  b*  i^y*-  v>J 


517 


X No.  9.], 

1NDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAHARl  (BAGHATl). 

PlNJATJB  DlAXECT.  (PATIALA  StATB.) 

Specimen  I. 

TRANSLITERATION. 

Ekl-admi-re  do  bets  the.  Tes-rc  chhote-no  bapu-khe  bola  ki,  ‘ bapu, 
mal-ka  banda  jo  mera  hai  mai-ke  de-de.’  Teb  tennye  mal  tin5-khe 
band-diya.  Aur  there  din  pachhc  chhote  bete-no  sab  kuchh  le-ro  ek- 

dura-re  mulkha-khe  chala-goa,  tSnnye  apna  mal  bad-chall-mi  barbad  kar- 
diya.  Aur  kahe  na  roa,  tSs-mulkha-mS  bara  kal  para.  Teb  se  bhuka 

marne  laga.  TSb  tes-mulkha-re  ekl-khandana-re  ja-roa.  TSnnye  tes-khe 
apne-bagai-mi  sura-ko  tsarne  bhSjja.  Tgs-ke  jlwa-ml  thl  * tlnna-6iy  ok  ra-de 

jina,  (for  jinna)-khe  sur  khao  h3  pet  bhar3.’  Koi  tes-ke  ded-na-tha. 

Teb  ‘aql-ml  ae-re  bola,  * merc-bawa-re  kitne  mehnatl-kho  bhautl  roti  hai 
as8  bhukhS  marO.  Mere  uth-ro  apne-bawa-ke  chale-jana,  tes-ke  bolfi,  “ re 

bapuwa,  m3  asmana  aur  tere  s&nme  gunah  kiya,  aur  eb  e-de  joga  ne 

ki  phir  tera  beta  kuha3 ; apne-m§hnati-mi-  do,  eki  jaise  bana.”  ’ Teb 
utli6-ro  apnS-bawa-ke-kahe  chala.  Aur  she  ( for  se)  Sbbhe  dur  tha  tes-ke 
d6kh6-ro,  tSs-ro  bawa-khe  dia  al,  aur  daure-ro  tgs-ke  milne  laga,  aur 

|>ahut  pape  lae.  Bete  tes-ke  bola,  * re  bapu,  m3  asmana-ra  aur  tore 

samne  gunah  kiya,  e-de  joga  ne  ki  taf  tera  beta  kuhaS.’  Bad-ne 

apne-naukara*kho  bola  ki  ‘ achchhe-se  achchhe  kapre  gad-lo,  aur  tSs-ke 
pahra-do ; aur  tes-re  hatha-mS  mudi,  aur  paira-mS  jutt  pahrao ; aur  ham 

khao,  aur  moja  kar3,  kyoki  mera  beta  in 6a  tha,  eb  java  hai ; rack* 
goa-tha,  6b  mila-hai.*  Teb  se  razi  hone  lage. 

Aur  tSs-ra  bara  beta  bagai-mi  tkiya.  Jgb  ghara-re  nepe  aya,  gane 

.aur  nachne-ri  waz  sunl.  TSb  ekl-naukara-klie  bula-ro  puchha  ki,  ‘ re, 
ka  asS  ? ’ Ta¥  tSs-ke  bola  ki,  * t§ra  bhal  a-goa,  aur  tere-bab-re  bap.  jag 
kai,  6-de-re  khafcir  ki-  she  ( for  se)  shar  bhala  chang'd  dekha.’  Unhl  khije 
6 na  chaha  ki  'bhitar  ja3.’  TSb  tSs-ke  ba5-ne  bahir  ae  6 manaya. 

T8nny6  bawa-khe  jawabd-m6  bola,  ‘ dekh,  itne-barsa-de  mh3  tere  kahno 
mai-ne  kar3,  aur  kabhl  tere-bolne-de  bahir  n6  goa,  tu-ne  kablii  eki- 
bakri-ra  *chh6li-o  mai-khe  na  diya,  ki  apne-satM-ro  gaile  razi  hS ; aur 


518 


WESTERN  FAHlRl. 


j8b  tSra-r8  beta  aya,  ]8h5  tera  mal  rada-khe  lutaya,  tfi  t8s-r8  kbatir 
bar!  jag  karl.'  TShnl  tfis-kS  bola  ki,  * ai  bete,  tu  sada  mb!  gihchS 
roa ; 36  kuchh  mai-g§  as8,  sS  tSra ; par  razi  liona,  aur  razi  hona  (sic), 

chahig-tha,  kySki  tSra  bbal  moa-tha,  8b  jiunda  boa ; aur  rach-g5a-tha, 
8b  mila  hai.* 


519 


c No.  10.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  CSIroui* 

WESTERN  PAHARl  (BAGHATl). 

Pinjaub  Dialect.  (Patiala  State.) 

Specimen  II. 

,jjy-  ‘ ya&O 

of y ^ ^ 

••  ^ It  «• 

L9J  LeJ^f  c_j  c—)y*>  y^)  yy^-  £ 

£-jy*  '-r^  |^)  W-  y^)  yJ  ^ |t>L  »JA 

La  b U?  «L_  faij  yJ  Jyf  <L-  Ua  ^yyfc  y JJ  &y> 

^_>L  <£_  JjJj  y*j  &5a.  yJ  LL*^  y^  y?y^  *^L»  <^_) 

f4^  ^ Sr5^  y^  S-^L«  jAj  yj  y"  j.|j  y^  y?  ^L  ^ 

jy^  ^ y^J  y y^  c—{ aA^a  y y by 

l&y°  ]y^  y^)  y^  <L-  '&•*  y *p  c=H*^-  £jy  s^ 

y>  y *6j6jXiy6  L UT  c/I  ‘^-jJ^  yJ  J)U^  <=— <SAj 

«-y  c=r^l  y^  j1^  y;  yy*3-  yy*^-  jt)  y* 

C— JJo  c— Oi)y«J  «£_  &A.Jj  ^ O-w  c— ;L*J 

* C/V 


TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 

DekliO,  dero-lmtka-re  kcli-awi  dab-raklu-kai,  soa-liiith-dc 

See,  tli  e-l eft-haml-in  'plough-handle  pressed-kept-is,  right-hand-in 

jsti  kai,  saiivno-dall-hCtko  hajri  (?  jajrl)  aur  pani-ra  gkara  rakk-rakka-kai. 

ox-whip  is,  in-front-tree-under  thc-hnqqa  and  water-of  jar  placed-is. 

£k  ckkoto  baitk-rako.  Zimindar  bechara  tkori-rate-de 

(There)  a log  scated-is.  The-cultirator  poor-fellow  in-a-litlle-of-thc-niglit 

utka-tka.  Hal  aur  balda-kO  lavO-raliO.  Blialke-bkalko 

risen-had.  Plough  and  bullocks  hacc-bccn-brought.  Early -in-th  c-morning 

bagai-me  ja-raho-a.  Jeb  suraj  mail  ao,  to  bayyar 

the-Jield-in  lie-lias- gone.  When  the-sun  (over) -head  comes,  then  thc-wife 

rotl  lo-ro  ai.  Yikc  kala-ke  kliol-diyo,  baldo-ke  glm 

bread  token-having  comes.  By -him  tlic-plough  is-opencd,  the-bullocks-to  grass 

pa-diya,  ape  katk  muk  dhoyo-ralio,  sasta  liyo.  Hot! 

is-caused-lofall,  by-himself  hand  face  is-icashed,  coolness  is-taken.  Bread 

kkao,  liuqqa  plo,  balda-kc  pan!  pi  la,  tkori 

he-eats  lntqqa  hc-d  rinks,  the-bullocks-to  water  hacing-causcd-lo-drink  a-little 

barl  par-raho,  ram  kar-liyo.  Bayyar  sag-pat  layo-rako,  chali-jjio. 

tchile  lie-reclines,  rest  takes.  The-wife  vegetables  takes , she-gocs-away. 

Kam  bubta  ko,  to  becliara  se-te-dhande-mO  din  kat-diyo, 

Work  much  is,  therefore  the-poor-fellow  that(?)-occnpalion-in  the-day  passes, 
nalil-to  auro  kam  _karo.  Jeb  suraj  ckkipne  lago, 

or-else  anotlier-also  work  he-does.  When  the-sun  to-be-concealed  begins, 

to  kala-ko  aur  balda-ko  layo-rako,  ghara-ke  ao,  . mSda-ke 

then  the-plougli  and  the-bullocks  lie-takes,  tlie-liouse-to  comes,  head-of 

pande  gkara  layo,  balda-re  age  gka  pa-diyo. 

upon  a-bundle  he-takes,  the-bullocks-of  before  grass  he-causes-to-fall. 
Bayyar  dudk  do-rako,  rotl  pakao.  £ razi  ko-rako,  apne-ckhoto- 

The-wife  milk  milks,  bread  bakes.  He  happy  becomes,  his-own-little- 

chkoto-me  baitk-rako  kkao.  Phir  aise-maze-mS  khute  pasare 
children-among  sits  eats.  Again  such-pleasure-in  legs  having-spread 
sut-jao,  ki  raja-kc  phO  la-do  biclikaone-pande  bhi  naslb  nahT. 

he-goes-to-sleep,  as  a-king-of  floicers-of  bed-on  even  fortune  is-not. 


621 


FREE  TRANSLATION  OF  THE  FOREGOING. 

Sec,  carrying  in  his  left  hand  his  plough-handle,  and  in  his  right  hand  his  ox-whip, 
the  cultivator  has  laid  down,  under  the  tree  in  front  of  him,  his  liuqqa  and  his  jar  of 
water.  A little  boy  is  seated  there  (to  look  after  them).  The  cultivator,  poor  fellow, 
had  got  up  while  it  was  still  night.  He  has  collected  his  plough  and  his  bullocks,  and 
is  already  at  the  field  by  dawn.  When  the  sun  is  overhead,  his  wife  brings  him  some 
bread.  He  unyokes  his  bullocks  and  throws  some  grass  before  them.  Then  he  washes 
his  face  and  hands  to  copl  himself.  He  eats  his  bread,  has  a smoke  at  his  liuqqa,  gives 
the  bullocks  water,  and  then  takes  a short  rest.  The  wife  collects  wild  spinach  and 
carries  it  home.  He  has  much  to  do,  and  so  the  poor  fellow  passes  the  whole  day  at 
this  work  of  ploughing  or  else  occupies  himself  on  some  other  task.  At  sunset,  he  comes 
home  with  the  plough  and  the  bullocks,  carrying  a bundle  on  his  head,  no  gives  fodder 
to.,  the  bullocks,  while  his  wife  milks  the  cows  and  bakes  the  bread.  Then  In?  seats  him- 
self happily  amid  his  little  children  to  take  the  evening  meal,  and  at  last,  he  stretches 
his  legs  and  goes  to  sleep  with  a pleasure  that  is  not  the  lot  of  even  a king  to  find  upon 
a bed  of  flowers. 


3 x 


VOL.  IX,  PA*T  IV 


522 


PATIALA  (DHARAMPUR)  BAGHATT. 


The  Dharampur  dialect  ol’  Baghilti  is  practically  the  same  as  tliat  of  Piujaur,  except 
that  the  Hindi  influence  is  not  so  strong.  AVe  have,  however,  one  instance  ol!  ho,  used 
instead  of  hhe,  and  once  or  twice  tie  is  added  (without  any  need  for  it)  to  the  case  of  the 
agent,  as  in  jennye-ne,  hv  whom. 

There  are  some  curious  words  in  the  vocabulary.  AVe  may  note — 

hadt'it,  great,  elder. 


ho  Jit  i i,  a son. 
hamdnit,  to  clothe. 
chhyiiri,  a wife. 
mat  it  no,  to  bo  found. 
moth rit,  younger. 
rack  no,  to  be  lost. 


A lost  of  the  peculiarities  noted  in  regard  to  Piujaur  will  also  be  observed  here.  AVe 
may  quote  the  following  peculiarities  not  found  in  the  Piujaur  specimens  : — 

As  in  Sirmauri,  nouns,  adjectives,  and  participles  sometimes  end  in  0 instead  of  it, 
as  in  suni),  heard  ; ditto,  given.  The  word  for  both  ‘ I ’ and  ‘ by  me  ’ is  mbit.  Por  * is  ’ 
wc  have  a so,  instead  of  osso,  which  is  merely  a matter  of  spelling.  In  sund-d,  it  is  heard, 
we  have  the  Kiutball  word  it  for  { is.'  The  past  participle  of  dinit,  to  give,  is  sometimes 
dind,  and  sometimes  ditto,  and  the  past  participle  of  mama,  to  die,  is  mddwd. 


523 

[No.  II.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAHARl  (BAGHATl). 

Dha.ba.mpub  Dialect.  (Patiala  State.) 

Specimen  I. 

<£_  c__j-qjUo  gj  y*  c~~) 

JU  JSJ  c — O to  <=—) 

£>)  J^°  w-—  c-jjdc  ulio  ^ 4- 

^ y$  J^°  ^ ^ j**1  bV^  ^-jby* 

&)  *L  y&>  )yj  Ix^Cc  LjXLo  y 

\>y»  £?*  £-  }y^*j  jfy*  *^b  c—}^jC 

lij}  yy»  y^-  & I^j  <hl  j y]  «i-^- 

c—jX*>  sS  Vy  y)  $**■  ^ UJ“  y!^  ^ ^ c~y+* 

ux“  y° ^ jj>  jH  stA>  / I#  ^ b^ 

ly-vy  ujt^  )W  <=-)  ^ v^y  ^ J3>  •*-  bu  4-'  jjj  **bf 

^ySy  ^ yj  y»4  Jy>'  iy5  ^ ^y  ?—)  't'I  y)  ^ !y  y> 

yi*  *5  yi  iy  4-  iy  ii  y ^ y-^  i}y  <=- 
UjJ  K)  Jl  J tjy  y|  )/J  _y  y <4-  1)4  <£->'  " W y*> 

!y  J,l  Hy  < ty4  Hy  <£-’  y*4  ,_yy  o^b 
VOL.  IX,  TAUT  IV. 


524 


WESTERN  TAHA.R1. 

y?  ly*  ^ e/V*  ^--f  s-^  jy  y *f 

y)  jU>  &?*  y)  *J&  SrD^6^  ^ ^y  ^ ~ 

)y*  &yf  jy  \±y+*  jy  y*  t^oiii)  jy 

julc  ^_>j  i$j  jy  j y j*t)  W bb*  y*^ 

\ 

*£  j-y 


J_M  L)  ^ e/^®  y4^  [)&  )jy  j>y 

JS3  y»)  6 ^_jj|  d^U^j  jfy  <£>J  oo  Jy£  »oU»  y'  ^ 

<£-  ty®  c-_ y c__jaj  j>y  J<>jy  y ^ 

y^»  e/!^®  <£-  ^®  <y*\)  ^ u/^  c~yJ  <^-*^ 

j^lj  c_ -j  /xaj  IjLvc  ^*£  ^y  )^,<>jlj  c__^L)  /X*«j  ^ lita. 

^y  j yp  ^y  «-*>  ^’i  ^ y 

&^L-®  ‘■M?!  ys^  &y  yi  )^f  (j/V  ^y  c-yj 

/Xxa.  y y*>W  y?  |y  '-r^“  y$  ^ y~y  Jy®  <£-J  ^ Ujjj 

y £r-'  <y  rUo  ^3^  sO4*0  c/y  4-  J&)  j^®  jy 

Jy  y J c^^®  j»y  e^^®  <=—  ^ y y^-i  <=— J 

^ W»  Jjjy®  t^yf  <3^  j^J 

*^lie  ^j  ^ Ui  )J  gj  ]y  )^y^ 


525 


I No.  II.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  J>AHART  (BAGHATl). 

Dharampxjr  Dialect.  (Patiala  State.) 

Speoimen  I. 
transliteration. 

Eki-adml-re  do  bahtu.  the.  Math  r 5 bahtu  apne-bawa-khe  bola  ki,  * re 
bapua,  mala-ra  bada  jo  mera  bait  ho  ma-kh  de.’  Teb  tennye  mal 

tina-khe  bat-dita  (for  ditta).  Thbre-dinS-mg  mathre-bahtu  sab  mal  jor-ro  ckl- 
dura-re  mulkha-ra  safar  kiya,  aur  ^ tennye  apna  mal  bad-chalni-me  kho-dita. 
Jeb  sabh  klio-muka,  tgb  tes-mnlkha  mukhta  kal  para ; aur  se  gharib  hone 

laga.  Teb  tes-mulkha-re  raja-re  uaukar  rah-goa.  Se  tes-ke  apnl-bagal-mg 

sura  chugane  bhejja,  aur  se  chaho  tha  ki  unli  cbhilka  sathi  jo  sur  khao 

apna  pet  bhare,  ki  koi  tes-ke  na  deo-tha.  Teb  ‘aqla-mg  a-ro  bola  ki, 
‘ mere-bawa-re  mukhte  nauknra-ko  mukhti  roti  aso,  aur  mho  bhukha  maru. 
Mhu  uth-ro  apne-bawa-khe  jawe,  aur  tes-ke  bolue  ki,  “ ai  bao,  mho 
Parmesrxi  aur  tera  gunai  asu ; eb  ate  joga  nahi  ki  tanliae(?)  tera  bahtu  banu ; 
apne  naukar5-mg-se  eki  jehra  banao.”  ’ Teb  uth-ro  apne-bawa-khe  goa- 

Aur  w5h  hebbo  dur  tha  ki  tes-ke  bawa-khe  dekh-ro,  tars  a-goa,  aur  daura 
wa  tes-ke  gal  laga-lina,  aur  bahut  pampi-mui.  Bahtu  tgs-ke  bola,  ‘bapua, 

mhn  Pannesra  aur  tera  gunai  asu,  aur  eb  ate  joga  nahi  ki  tanhe(r) 
tera  bahtu  banu.’  Baft  apne-naukara-khe  bola  ki,  ‘chijari  tabhi  nikal  liyao 
aur  tes-ke  bamao ; aur  tes-re  hatha-dl  chliap,  aur  lata-di  pahf  lao ; aur 
haing  khau,  aur  khushi  manaii,  kyO  mera  bahtu  moawa-tha,  ab-liu  jiunda 
lioa ; rach-goa-tha,  5b  niata-e.’  Teb  se  khushi  karne  luge. 

Aur  tSs-ra  badra  bahtu  hagai -mg  tha.  Jeb  gliara-re  neve  aya,  gane  wa 
nacline-ko  sadli  suno-a.  Teb  eki  naukar  bula-ro  puchha  ki,  ‘ andhi  ka  ash  r ’ 
TSnnye  tgs-ke  bola  ki,  ‘tera  bhai  aya-hhda,  aur  tere-bawe  moka-khe  bar!  dliani 
dini,  at-ri  ta¥  ki  tes-ke  razi  baji  mat  a.’  Se  rosha-mg  ho-ro  bhitar  jana  na 
chaho-tha.  Teb  tes-ke  bawe  bad!  a-ro  kasne(?)  manaya.  Tennye-re  bawa- 
khe  jawaba-mi  bola  ki,  ‘dekli,  itne-barsa-de  mhn  teri  tahul  karu,  aur  keb-hi 
tere-bola-de  bahar  nahi  goa,  par  tog  k8b-ku  ek  cliheli-o  ma-kli  na  dma, 
ki  apne-mitra-suthi  khushi  manau;  aur  jeb  tera  eh  bahtu  aya,  jenny  e-ne 
tera  mal  randa-khe  dina,  tog  tes-rl  ta?  bar!  dliam  din!.’  Tennye  tes-ke 


626  WESTERN  PAHAHi. 

bola,  * 6 balitu,  tu  sada-de  m5-gS  raho,  aur  jo  kuchh  mf-ge  aso,  tera. 
aso ; par  kkushi  manana,  aur  khushi  Ilona  chahiye,  kyOki  tera  bhai 
ruuawa-tha,  s5  jiunda  boa ; rach-goa-tlia,  sc  6b  mata-e.* 


627 


£ No.  12.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY*  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAHARl  (BAGHATl). 

Dharamptjb  Dialect.  (Patiala  State.) 

Specimen  II. 

viy  Sr^>  <Jf  j&\jb 

jj  ^_)L  jjl  &fta.  2JJj  A>cLw  vj^ol^a. 

v b^  j ^ i.  *-«bt  «-<>  *-y  ji^!3  ijj 

's'jjj**9'  y / Jri  s-*  Jyj  u/i* 

M 

aLo  ^ &^>U  ^XJ  4-  IoJjj  j ^»o  jU^.  a^j  Jil 

s^jy  jdJN  y ^ aT  ^ ^ y |<W 

y y r1*  aT  y x>  v-^Jj^  so^'  y rb 

y y*®/  y ^ y **  y°  y ^ 

>°  ttf  gf  JoAj  ^ J&y>  JjS  J]  ^ <J_  Jjij  Ja 

*«4»  (^v°  iy»  ,£J  V y s^X)  y^°  ^)y* 

gf  ^UUob  yy»  jj  jl W c-^°  <SiL.J  S^°"  JJ 

* ly  *»  <=-J  Vi^°  VaO  c;V^ 


52$ 


[No.  12.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAIlARt  (BAGHATl). 

Dhauamptjr  Dialect.  (Patiala  State.) 

Specimen  II. 

TRANSLITERATION. 

DekliO,  dere-kalko-satki  art  je.k-rakki,  soe-katka-di  jkat  aso,  samne-dala- 

hetlie  kuqqa  aur  panl-ra  ghara  rakka-konda.  Teji  ek  kaktu  lmitk  roa.  Ziinlu- 

dar  heckara  tarke-de  utka-liai.  Hal  wa  baldwa-khe  le-ro,  bkalke-bkalke  bagal- 

me  a-goa.  Jeb  dd-pakar  ko,  to  tes-ri  ekkyurl  rot!  lad.  £k  kal  ckkad 

diyO,  Ava  bolda-kke  glias  si  to.  Apne  kath  wa  mull  dlio-ao,  tkamla  lio-jao. 
Kotl  kliao,  kuqqa  pio,  balda-klie  pani  pilao,  par-ro  tkori-gkarr  ram  karo. 

Tes-rl  jawanas  sag  pat  le-ro  gliara-klie  jao.  M ukkta  kam  ko,  to  heckara 

esi  kamS-md  diu  kko-ditto,  na-to  oka  kam  karo.  .Teh  din  clikipo,  to  kal 

aur  balda-kke  le-ro  gkar  ao.  Gkara-gada  mUda-palian  lao,  balda-kkc  gata 
diyo.  JaAvanas  dudk  dolio,  roti  pakaO.  £k  kkuskl-satki  apue-bagker5-me 

baitk-ro  kkao.  Teh  ise-maze-satln  kkQte  pasar-ro  soto,  ki  badskaliS-kke 
pkula-rl  sejd-mg  e nasib  na  koa. 


529 


LIST  OF  STANDARD  WORDS  AND  PHRASES  IN 
JAUNSARI,  SIRMAURT  AND  BAGHAjI. 


LIST  OF  STANDARD  WORDS  AND  PHRASE8 


Kngli 

sh. 

j 

Jauna&rl 

Slrmaurf  (Dh&rthf}. 

1.  One  • 

. 

• 

Ek,  OkO  . 

• 

• 

fik 

• 

• . 

2 Two  . 

• 

Dili 

• 

• 

• 

Dft 

* 

a . 

3.  Three 

• 

• 

Tin 

• 

• 

• 

Tin 

• 

• • 

! 

4.  Four  . 

• 

Char  • 

• 

• 

• 

Ch&r 

• 

I 

• • 

5.  Five  . 

• 

• 

Pach 

• 

• 

• 

Pgj 

• 

• . | 

6.  Six  . 

• 

• • 

Chbau  . 

• 

. 

• 

Chhau  • 

• 

. 

7.  Seven 

• 

V • 

Sat 

« 

• 

• 

Sat  . 

• 

• 

8.  Eight 

• 

e 

Ath 

• 

• 

• 

Ath  • 

• 

• 

9.  Nine  < 

• 

• . 

No 

• 

• 

• 

NO 

. 

• • 

10.  Ten  . 

• 

• . 

DM 

• 

• 

• 

Dad  . 

• 

• 

11.  Twenty 

• 

• • 

Bitf 

• 

• 

• 

Bid  • 

• 

• . 

12.  Fifty 

• 

• • 

• • 

... 

Pajad  • 

• 

• . 

13.  Hundred 

• 

• 

So  . 

• 

• 

• 

Sau 

• 

. » 

14.  I 

m 

• 

H&8 

• 

- 

• 

A . . 

• 

» . 

15.  Of  me 

t 

• 

MerO  (dat.  muhS  mSjhfj 

• 

Mara,  msh-ra 

• 

• . 

16.  "Mine  • 

• 

■ . 

MfirO 

e 

• 

e 

M0r&,  mSh-ra 

• 

! 

• • 

17.  We 

• 

• • 

Am 

• 

• 

• 

Ham,  h&mfi 

. 

• » 

18.  Of  us 

• 

• 

Amaro  (dat.  am 3 mSjhf) 

• 

M&c& 

• 

• 

19.  Our  . 

• 

• . 

Amaro  . 

• 

• 

• 

M&r&  . 

• 

• • 

20.  Thou  . 

• 

. • 

TO 

• 

• 

• 

Tft 

• 

• 

21.  Of  thee 

m 

• . 

TOrO  (dat.  ta3  mSjhi) 

• 

! T«r* 

| 

» 

• 

22.  Thine 

• 

« . 

Tgrfl 

• 

• 

• 

T8r& 

. 

• • 

23.  Ton  1 

m 

• . 

i'ura  . 

• 

• 

r 

Turn 

■% 

• 

24.  Of  yon 

* 

• . 

TumarO,  tuharO  (dat.  tumfl 
mSjhf). 

Tnm&rft 

• 

• 

25.  Your  • 

• 

• 

Tum&ro,  tBhftrO 

• 

• 

Tnm&ra  . . 

• 

'en* 

* -1# 

£30  -.TatmsIrT.  r 


IN  JAUNSART,  sirmaurt,  and  baghati 


1 

| Sirmaurt  (Girlp&rt  and  Biffau). 

B&gb&tf. 

fik 

• 

• 

Ek 

Da 

• 

• 

.Do 

ChOn 

• 

4 

Tin 

• 

1 Char 

j 

• 

t 

• 

Chfir 

• 

; Paj 

• 

• 

PSj 

• 

• 

Chhau 

• 

a 

ChhS 

m 

| Sit 

i 

# 

• 

Sat 

• 

i Ath 

• 

• 

Ath 

| 

Nau 

a 

Nau 

• 

Dai 

• 

• 

Dai 

Bit 

« 

• 

• 

Bii 

• 

' Ad  ho  £au 

• 

• 

• 

Paja 

* 

• 

Sau  , 

• 

• 

a 

Sau 

• 

Aw 

• 

• 

• 

Au 

• 

Mora 

• 

• 

• 

Mora 

• 

Mora 

• 

• 

• 

MOra 

• 

AmO 

■ 

• 

• 

Hamg 

• 

AmrS  • 

• 

• 

• 

Mahrii 

• 

Amra 

• 

. 

• 

Mara, 

xn&hra 

• 

t a 

• 

• 

• 

Tu 

a 

TuakS,  t8&r& 

• 

• 

• 

TOra 

• 

Tuakft,  tS&rft 

• 

• 

• 

Tora 

• 

Tog 

• 

• 

• 

TumS 

• 

Tuarft,  tumrft 

• 

• 

Tarft,  tBhrS 

• 

. TuSrft,  tumrft 

w.  * , 

% 

• 

• 

■ 

1 

T&r&t 

t&hr& 

• 

▼OLr  tz,  PAST  *r. 


English. 

1.  One. 

2.  Two. 

3.  Three. 

4.  Four. 

5.  Five. 

6.  Six. 

7.  Seven. 

8.  Eight. 

. 9,  Nine. 

. 10.  Ten. 

. 11.  Twenty. 

. 12.  Fifty. 

. 13.  Hundred 

. 14.  1. 

. j 15.  Of  me. 

. ' 16.  Mine. 

I 

. 17.  We. 

i 

. 18.  Of  us. 

. 19.  Our. 

. 20.  Thou. 

. 21.  Of  thee. 

. 22.  Thino. 

. 23.  You. 

. 24.  Of  you. 

. 25.  Your. 


531— Jauna&fl. 
3 r 2 


* 

Bnglifh* 

*- 

Jawia&iie 

* 

11  a 1 ' < r 1 

Birman*!  (Dhirfhl)* 

26.  He  . 

• 

• 

So,  s5jo  . 

* 

• 

• 

SB  e • 

• 

• 

e 

27.  Of  him 

• 

• 

• 

T8s-kd  (dat.  t&8  mSjh?) 

Tes-rft  . 

a 

• 

• 

28.  His  . 

• 

• 

• 

T«e-ko  . 

• 

Tes-r* 

e 

• 

a 

29.  They  . 

• 

• 

• 

S8j0 

• 

S«  . 

• 

• 

e 

30.  Of  them 

• 

• 

• 

Tl3-k0  ( dat . tiu  mSjh?) 

Tin-rS  . 

• 

• 

• 

31.  Their  . 

• 

• 

• 

•na-ko  . 

• 

Tin*rft  . 

• 

• 

• 

32.  Hand  • 

e 

• 

• 

Hath,  &tha 

• 

Ath 

9 

• 

• 

33.  Foot  . 

• 

• 

• 

Go46,  bSgnl,  l&t 

• 

Lat 

• 

• 

34.  Nose  • 

• 

• 

• 

Nak 

• 

Nak 

■ 

a 

• 

33.  Bye  • 

• 

a 

• 

Akh 

• 

Akh 

• 

• 

• 

36.  Month 

• 

e 

• 

Mfihu,  khab  • 

• 

M3 

• 

e 

• 

37.  Tooth 

• 

• 

• 

Dad 

• 

Dad 

9 

e 

38.  Ear  . 

• 

• 

KSn 

e 

KSn 

a 

• 

e 

39.  Hair  . 

• 

• 

• 

Baw,  mScJaO 

• 

B&l 

• 

a 

• 

40.  Head  • 

• 

e 

• 

Mad 

e 

Mttd 

• 

• 

• 

41.  Tongne 

• 

• 

• 

Jibh 

• 

Jib 

• 

• 

• 

42.  Belly  . 

« 

e 

• 

Pot! 

• 

Ojri 

• 

e 

e 

43.  Back  • 

• 

• 

• 

Pith,  pachhafid 

• 

Pith,  pi  (hi 

• 

• 

a 

44.  Iron  • 

• 

• 

• 

LohO 

• 

Loa  . 

• 

• 

a 

45.  Gold  . 

• 

• 

• 

SnnnO  • 

• 

Sfkai 

• 

e 

• 

46.  Silver 

• 

e 

• 

ChSdl,  rfipa  • 

• 

Chado  . 

• 

• 

a 

47.  Father 

■ 

• 

• 

Baba  # • 

« 

Bab&,  bSw, 

b&p,  btpft 

• 

48.  Mother 

a 

• 

• 

ljji 

• 

Ami  . 

• 

• 

a 

49.  Brother 

e 

• 

• 

Bbai  (| general  term), 

lads 

Bajrfc  , 

• 

• 

• 

50.  Sister 

• 

• 

(elder),  bhay&  (younger). 

B6h£n  (general),  dad! 

Bobo  • 

• 

• 

• 

51.  Man  • 

« 

a 

• | 

m 

(elder),  bhai(i. 

Admi,  morod, 

belkftrft, 

M&oaohh.  mipai 

• 

• 

52.  Woman 

a 

a 

9 

kawgsa. 

B^l-mtankb,  bfykflji 

• 

Jaw&nas  . 

• 

• 

a 

532 — J&nnaSrt. 


Sirxnauvi  (CHrfpIri  and  fittfau). 

BaghitS. 

• 

• • 

S§ 

• 

• 

• 

26.  H«. 

TBa-rft  . 

• 

a • 

TBs-rft,  tfti-rft  (f.) 

• 

A. 

27.  Of  him. 

T8s-rft  • 

• 

• • 

TBs-rft,  tBi-rft  (f.) 

• 

a 

28.  His. 

S«  . 

• 

• • ’ 

Sg  i • • 

• 

• 

• 

29.  They. 

Tin-left  . 

• 

• • 

Tinna-ra 

• 

a 

• 

30.  Of  them. 

Tin-k& 

• 

• • 

Tlnnft-rft 

• 

• 

• 

31.  Their. 

Hftth 

• 

« • 

Hftth 

• 

• 

• 

32.  Hand. 

Bftgvft  . 

• 

• • 

L&t 

• 

• 

• 

33.  Foot. 

Nftk 

• 

• • 

Nftk 

• 

• 

• 

34.  Nose. 

Akh 

• 

• • 

Akkhl  . 

• 

• 

a 

35#  Eye. 

Khftb  . 

• 

• • 

MSh 

• 

• 

• 

36.  Month. 

Did 

• 

• • 

Ditd 

• 

a 

a 

37.  Tooth. 

Kan  • 

• 

• • 

Kftn 

• 

• 

• 

38.  Ear. 

Madftl  . 

• 

• • 

BftJ 

• 

• 

• 

39.  Hair. 

M«4 

• 

• • 

Mttd 

• 

• 

• 

40.  Head. 

Jib 

• 

• 

Jibh 

• 

a 

• 

41.  Tongne# 

Pat 

• 

a • 

Pat 

a 

• 

a 

42.  Belly. 

Pith  . 

• 

• • 

Pith 

• 

• 

a 

43.  Baoke 

Lab  . 

• 

• • 

Labft  • 

• 

a 

• 

44.  Iron. 

Sftna  . 

• 

• • 

Sunft  • 

« 

• 

• 

45.  Gold. 

KftpO 

• 

• • 

Chid! 

• 

• 

• 

46.  Silver. 

Bftbft 

• 

• • 

Bapfl,  b5a,  bftbft 

• 

• 

47.  Father. 

Mas 

• 

• 

A mm3  • 

e 

• 

• 

48.  Mother. 

Oftdft 

■ 

• • 

Dftdft,  bftyyft,  bfti 

a 

a 

49.  Brother. 

D&da,  bap* 

• 

• 

Babba  {elder), 

(younger). 

baili? 

50.  Sister. 

Mjiohh  • 

• 

• • 

Adml,  japft 

V 

i 

51.  Man. 

ChhBwjfl,  obhftwfft 

• • 

Juanas,  ju&Qsft 

a 

, 52.  Woman. 

533 — JanneSrl 


Bogliih. 

JauntarL 

Sirmaurl  (DMrtht). 

53.  Wife  • 

• 

• 

• 

Jorn,  chheiifi  . . 

• 

Jflru  . , # 

• 

• 

54.  Child 

• 

• 

• 

LarkSttd,  chhe?fi 

• 

Clihofcfl,  ohhaiffl 

• 

• 

55.  Son  • 

« 

• 

• 

Beta 

• 

Bay»ffl,  b«ta,  ohhfltfl 

• 

56.  Daughter 

• 

• 

• 

Bdti,  dill 

• 

Bets,  batl 

• 

57.  Slave 

* 

• 

Haii,  kimln 

• 

Chakar  . 

» 

• 

58.  Cultivator 

• 

• 

ICh^ful  ... 

• 

Jlmldar  . 

• 

59.  Shepherd 

• 

• 

Bhedawa 

• 

Barhajft  . 

• 

• 

60.  God  . 

• 

• 

BliBgwan 

• 

Narayfcn  • 

• 

61.  Devil. 

• 

• 

♦ 

SBitan 

• 

Blifit  . 

• 

62.  Sun  . 

• 

• 

Dus  • • • 

• 

Sflraj 

• 

• 

63.  Moon  . 

• 

• 

• 

Tikianl,  jhfln,  jfiu 

• 

Chid  . 

• 

64.  Star  » 

. 

• 

• 

1 ill'll  • . • 

• 

Tar& 

• 

• 

65.  Fire  . 

• 

• 

• 

Ag . 

• 

Ag 

• 

• 

66.  Water 

• 

• 

• 

Pan! 

• 

Chid  « 

• 

r 

"l 

67.  House 

• 

• 

• 

i 

GhSr,  kilrfl 

• 

G&r,  ghor,  gaur 

» 

l 

63.  Horse 

• 

• 

• i 

Ghflra 

• 

Gauj-a  . . 

* 

* i 

1 

69.  Cow  . 

• 

• 

i 

*•  i 

i 

Gfiw  • * • 

• 

Gaw  . * 

• 

1 

1 

1 

i 

70.  Dog  . 

• 

• 

i 

i 

• i 

1 

I Kukur 

1 

• 

Kuta 

. 

71.  Cat  . 

• 

• 

• i 

l 

Dharu,  biral  (male)  ; 

: hi  rail  (female). 

bind, 

Baral 

• 

72.  Cock  . 

• 

a 

Kfikbdfi  • 

• 

Krtk*ra  . 

* 

73.  Duck 

• 

• 

i 

B5d5k  . 

• 

Batakh  • • 

■ 

• 

71.  Ass 

• 

1 

Gudhft,  gadlulfi  • 

* 

Gada  . • 

• 

« 

75.  Camel 

• 

• 

• 

U t • • • 

• 

TJt  * • • 

• 

• 

76.  Bird  . 

• 

• 

Char!,  chalkhur!  , 

• 

Chirii  • • 

• 

• 

77.  Go  . 

• 

• 

i 

Ja,  n5th,  hay  . . 

• 

Ja  • • • 

• 

• 

78.  Eat  . 

• 

• 

Kha 

• 

Kha 

• 

• 

79.  Sit  . 

• 

• 

• 

B5s,  betb,  b5th 

• 

Bith  • • 

• 

• 

J 

034-rJauuiSii. 


Siramuri  (GMpiri  and  Biiiau). 

BagM^t. 

English. 

ChhBwfl,  ohhtfwfd 

ChhSop  ... 

53.  Wife. 

NOokfi  • • • • 

BMtfl  .... 

54.  Child. 

Chhota  . , 

Baghev,  baggr  • 

55.  Son. 

Dhitu  * • • « 

Bdti,  dl  . 

56.  Daughter. 

Baithfi  • • • • 

Nfikar  .... 

57.  Slave. 

B&snfi  .... 

Dhy&lta 

58.  Cultivator. 

• • • • 

Gual  .... 

59.  Shepherd. 

Pa?££ur  • • • 

Pa^mAsur 

60.  God. 

Bhut  .... 

Lucha  .... 

61.  Devil. 

Surj  ii.. 

Suraj  .... 

62.  Sun. 

JU9  • . • 

Chad,  jup 

63.  .Moon. 

, Tara  • . 

Tara  .... 

64?.  Star. 

Ag  .... 

Ag  .... 

65.  Fire. 

Chi  4 • 

Pap!  .... 

66.  Water. 

Gh&r  . 

Gaur,  gkar 

67.  House. 

GhOfa  «... 

Gobfa  .... 

68.  Horse. 

(jSiW  • • • • 

; 

GaO,  ga6 

69.  Cow. 

Kfikar  . . , . 

KuttA  . 

70.  Dog. 

1 

Barfel  • 

BaryA}  (ra.),  baryali  (f.)  . 

71.  Cat. 

i 

Kukhrfc  • . 

Kukfa,  murga 

! 

72.  Cock. 

Batak  • 

73.  Duck. 

| GadhS  • • • . 

Gada,  gadha 

74.  Ass. 

ftt  . 

. . • ■ 

75.  Camel. 

Chayfl  . 

Panchhl  . 

76.  Bird. 

P6w  . 

Ja  • 

77.  Go. 

Kb&  . . . . 

Kha  • . 

78.  Eat, 

B64 

Bdth  . 

79.  Sit. 

535 — Jaunsffrl, 


* Snflbh. 

Mrauanrl  (Dblrthl). 

80.  Come 

• 

• 

A,  u 

A . . 

a 

a 

• 

81.  Beat 

• 

a 

JSl,  mftr,  pit,  jhig  . 

Tip 

• 

• 

a 

88.  Stand 

• 

# 

Ujhu,  thftfO  ha 

Khar  • 

a 

a 

• 

88.  Die  . 

• 

t 

M«r,  khSp 

Mar  • 

a 

• 

a 

84.  Give 

• 

• 

D$  .... 

Ds 

a 

• 

• 

85.  Run  • 

• 

• 

itaur,  dhaw 

Dan? 

a 

• 

• 

86.  Up  • e 

a 

• 

Sihado,  SohhOrij  uprft  • 

G&4 

• 

a 

a 

87.  Near 

a 

NfifOj  dh&y&  a a a 

NlrS 

• 

a 

a 

88.  Down  • 

a 

• 

Toi,  ts&ta,  mgla 

Tfii 

a 

a 

a 

89.  Far  . 

• 

• 

DurS  . 

Dflr-ka  . 

a 

a 

a 

90.  Before 

• 

• 

P5il6,  agafift 

Pails,  SgS 

• 

• 

• 

91.  Behind 

• 

• 

Pachhf,  pachhafo,  pithl- 
poohh. 

Paclihai  . 

• 

a 

a 

92.  Who 

• 

• 

Kuna  , . . . 

Kflo  . • 

a 

• 

• 

93.  What 

• 

Ka,  kah  .... 

Ka 

• 

• 

. 

94.  Why 

. 

Kai,  kahi,  kaikh,  kftthn- 
waetS. 

Kadi-khg 

. 

• 

. 

95.  And 

• 

• 

Or ..... 

TaiyS,  hflr 

• 

a 

96.  But  . 

a 

• 

P8r  .... 

Par 

• 

a 

a 

97.  If  . 

• 

f 

Ekaje  • • 

Je  . • 

• 

. 

98.  Yes  . 

• 

• 

O,  lu>,  lia,  aha  . 

Aha 

a 

. 

a 

99.  No  • • 

• 

e 

IS  a . a a • 

Na  • 

• 

a 

• 

100.  Alas. 

• 

• 

H6e-rS,  chah5-b5 

Hai 

• 

a 

a 

101.  A father  . 

. 

e 

Baba  • . • . j 

| 

Ek  b&p  a 

a 

a 

a 

102.  Of  a father 

• 

• 

Baba-ka  . 

Eki  bSptt-r& 

a 

a 

. 

103.  To  a father 

a 

e 

Baba-kh  . . 

% 

Eki  b&pfl-kh© 

a 

a 

• 

104,  From  a father 

a 

• 

Baba-bhfir?  ... 

Eki  bftpft-dft 

• 

a 

. 

105.  Two  fathers 

• 

• 

Dui  b&ba  . • 

Dfl  b&pfl 

• 

a 

. 

lO^.Fatbera  « 

• 

• 

Babi  . • • • 

’ V. 

Babd 

a 

530—  J annaSri , 


r, — 

t* 

vxr 

Sirm&uri  (Qirip&ri  and  Bitfau).  j 

English  ■ 


“j j j 

Pl$  . . . . i War,  tip  . . . ' 

81.  Boat. 

Oba  ho  . 

Khapa-O  .... 

82.  Stand. 

Mar  .... 

Mar  .... 

83.  Dio. 

De  .... 

De  .... 

84.  Give. 

6flt  . . . . i 

Daup 

85.  Han. 

Ga£,  gdd  .... 

tJpar,  lmbb&  . 

86.  Up. 

Naujik  .... 

87.  Near. 

Nltha  .... 

T51,  liunda  . . . , 

1 

88.  Down. 

DttrO  .... 

Dur  .... 

89.  Far. 

Agu  s . 

AgS,  aoka 

90.  Before. 

Pachhtl  . • . 

PachliS,  pachhka 

91.  Behind. 

Ku^O  «... 

Kuo  .... 

92.  Who. 

Ka  .... 

Kali  .... 

93.  VVliat. 

Kail  .... 

1 

Kanni-khg  . . 

94.  Why. 

Aj  .... 

H5r,  5r,  tft 

95.  And. 

Jo  . a • 

Pair!  .... 

Par  .... 

96.  But. 

97.  If. 

An  • 

.*T. 

A.  . . . » . 

i 

98.  Yes. 

Ka  . . . • j 

Na  .... 

99.  No. 

15  ra  « « « • 

Dukh  • » 

100.  Alas. 

B&b&  .... 

Bfio  .... 

101.  A father. 

B&bS-ra  .... 

BaO*r&  . . • • 

102.  Of  a father. 

BSbS-rl  tii  . . . 

BaO-kh3  « • 

103.  To  a father. 

Bibj-dfl  . . . • 

BSO*dO  • • • • 

104.  From  a father. 

Dflb&bS  . 

DO  baO  . 

105.  Two  fathers. 

B&bfi  . 

B&O  • • • • 

106.  Fathers. 

j V?  ? 

1 nM  TJi_ . * 

VOL.  IX,  PAST  IT. 


3 Z 


English. 


107.  Of  father* 

108.  To  fathers  . 

109.  Prom  fathers 
HO.  A daughter 

111.  Of  a daughter  . 

112.  To  a daughter  . 

118.  Prom  a daughter 

114.  Two  daughters  . 

115.  Daughters  • 

116.  Of  daughters 

117.  To  daughters 

118.  From  daughters 

119.  A good  man 

120.  Of  a good  man  . 

121.  To  a good  man  . 

122.  From  a good  man 

123.  Two  good  men  . 

124.  Good  men 

125.  Of  good  men  • 

126.  To  good  men 

127.  From  good  men  . 

128.  A good  woman  . 

129.  A bad  boy 

130.  Good  women 

131.  A bad  girl 
332.  Good 
133.  Better 


Jannt&rl. 

Sirmaurl  (Dh&rthl). 

BabaS«ka 

Babfi-rft  .... 

m 

Baba3-kh  • • . 

B&bS-khS  • • • 

BabaS-bhfir?  . 

B&bS-d&  . . i . 

Bgti  • • • • 

Ek  bS^i  . • • • 

Betiya-ka  • • • 

fild  bStl-ri 

Bstiya-kh  . « 

ffikl  bStl-khfi  . 

Bgtiya-bhSri 

fiki  batt-da 

Dui  bStiyl  • . • 

Du  bfifi  . 

BetiyS  .... 

Beti  .... 

Befciy3-ka 

Batl-rJ  .... 

Betiy3-kh  • • 

B5ti-kh8  .... 

BStiy3-bh«rI  . 

Bfiti-da  .... 

Ek  bh5l0  ad  mi  • • 

Bhal&  manad  . . 

Eks  bh51S  adml-ka 

BhalS  mapafi-ra 

RkS  bh51S  admi-kh  . 

BhalS  magag-khS 

. RkO  bhttld  admi-bhfirf 

BhalS  magad-da  . 

, Dni  bh6l6  admi 

Dfl  bhalS  m&Q&6 

. BhSle  ad  mi  . 

BhalS  mfti?afi  . 

. BhSlS  admf-ka  . » 

BhalS  m&paS-rS  « 

• BhttlS  admf-kh  • 

BhalS  m&pafi-khs  • 

. BhblS  admi-bhSr? 

BhalS  ra&paS-dft 

i 

. Ek  bh8H  bStt-manukh 

i 

BhalS  baiyar  . • 

. Ek  kfi&Qi  ohhau$&  . 

Rk  jh&l&  chhotfl  • • 

. Bhttli  bsti-manukhi  . 

Bhali  baiyar  • • • 

. Ek  kufi8pi  chhauti  . 

Rk  burl  bStl  . . 

• Bh&ls,  achhO  • • . 

Bhaflft  « 

, I3Sgf  &chho 

Achha  • • • 

538— Jauus&ri. 


Sirmauri  (Qirlparl  and  Bittau). 

Bagh&tf. 

English. 

• • . • 

B&S-rft  • • • . 

107.  Of  fathers. 

BabS-rl  ttf 

BftO-klifi  .... 

108.  To  fathers. 

BabS-dft  .... 

Bao-da  .... 

100.  From  fathers. 

Dhi(fi  . • 

Di-  .... 

110.  A daughter. 

Dhitfl-rft  . • • 

Dia-ra  .... 

111.  Of  a daughter. 

Dhltfl-rl  ts!  . 

Dia-kba  .... 

112.  To  a daughter. 

Dhitfl-da 

DK-dfi  .... 

113.  From  a daughter. 

Dat  dhita 

Do  dia  .... 

114.  Two  daughters. 

Dhitft  .... 

Dia  .... 

115.  Daughters. 

Dhitfi-ri  • • 

Dia-ra  «... 

116.  Of  daughters. 

Dhltu-ri  tat  . 

Dia-khS  .... 

117.  To  daughters. 

Dhltft-dS 

Dia-d8  .... 

118.  From  daughters. 

Nika  machh 

Chauga  ja^a 

119.  A good  man. 

Nik©  mSohh-ra  . , 

ChangS  ja^o-ra 

120.  Of  a good  man. 

Nikd  m5chk-khs 

ChangS  ja^S-khS  • 

121.  To  a good  man. 

NlkS  mSchh-da 

Change  janS-dG 

122.  From  a good  mau, 

Du  nikS  mSchh 

DO  changS  jaijS  • 

123.  Two  good  men. 

Niks  mSckh  • 

CbabgS  ja$8 

1*24.  Good  men. 

Niks  ipSohli-ra  • 

ChangS  ja^e-ra 

125.  Of  good  men. 

Niks  mgchh-ri  tai 

CbangS  ja^S-khS 

126.  To  good  men. 

Niks  michh-da 

Change  ja^S-dS  • • 

127.  From  good  men. 

NikS  ohh8w?i  . 

SshQt-juaQ&s  . 

128.  A good  woman. 

Bura  ohhsta 

Chaudra  (or  bura)  bagbSr  • 

129.  A had  boy. 

NikSchbSwfS  . . • 

S0I19I  juSpsS  . • 

130.  Good  women. 

Burs  dhitft  . . . 

Chaudri  obhsti  . 

131.  A bad  girl. 

AohhO  • . , * . 

CbangS,  sShgS,  bhala 

132.  Good. 

BSgi fiohhs 

Chaiiga  ( than  this,  Ss-dS)  • 

133.  Bettor. 

TOL.  IX.  PART  IT. 

539 — Jaunsari. 

3 z z 

English. 

i 

! 

Jaunsftri. 

Sirmaurf  (Dhirthi). 

134.  Rent 

• 

. SabhS-ti  achho 

• 

• 

1 

, S6-bi-d&-&ohh& . 

I 

• 

135.  High 

• 

. i UglO  • • 

• 

• 

i 

Uch& 

136.  Higher 

. 

i „ 

• | Bog!  uglO  • 

• 

• 

TTohii 

i 

137.  Highest 

. Sabhfi-tl  uglO  . 

i 

• 

■ 

| SobI-dft*flcba  . 

138.  A horse 

l 

1 

• G . • 

• 

• 

Rk  ganr& 

139.  A mare 

. GhOfi 

• 

Rk  goyi  . 

140.  Horses 

. GhOyft 

• 

• 

GauyS 

141.  Mares 

. GkOriyS  . 

• 

• 

Goyi  • 

142.  A bull 

| 

. Baurh 

• 

• 

15k  gaurft 

143.  A cow 

i 

. | Gaw 

i 

i 

• 

• 

Rk  gaw  . 

144.  Bulls 

• 

i 

- Banyh 

i 

I 

• 

• 

GaurO 

145.  Cows 

• 

1 <* 

• : Gawl  . • 

i 

! 

• 

• 

GayO 

146.  A dog 

• 

[ 

• : Kukur 

• 

• 

Rk  kufcT  . 

• ! 

| 

147.  A bitch 

• 

. Kukri 

• 

• 

Rk  kutl  . 

. i 

148.  Dogs 

. | Kukur  . 

I 

• 

• 

KutO 

149.  Bitches 

i 

• | Kukariya 

1 

* 

• 

Kuti 

1 50.  A he  goat 

j 

• Bakra 

i 

• 

• 

Rk  l£kr& . 

151.  A female  goat 

i 

• Bttkri  . . 

• 

• j 

Rk  b&kri  • 

152.  Goats 

. Bakrfl  . • 

• 

B&krg 

153.  A male  door 

. 1 HBrna 

; 

• 

• ! 

Rk  irao,  ©k  ral 

• 

151.  A female  doer 

j 

. II5rin 

• 

i 

i Rk  irpe  . 

i 

9 

155.  Deer 

. H8rin  " • . 

• 

_! 

j 

Ral 

1 

156.  I am 

. Hfcu  fl, &. 

• 

1 

• 

% ash  (osfl)  . 

• 

157.  Thou  art 

• 

. Tflg 

• 

• 

Tfl  asg  . 

• 

158.  He  is 

• 

. j So  an,  0,  ho 

j 

. 

• 

SO  a*  i 

s 

159.  Wo  are 

• 

I 

• Am  £ . 

• 

• 

H&m  asa 

• 

160.  You  are 

• 

. Turn  au,  0 

• 

»» 

Tam  asa  • 

• 

640 — Jauasari, 


Sirmaurl  (Girlp&rl  and  Bidfau). 


BaghStf. 


English, 


Bagdl  fichho  . 

I 

. Sabbhi-da  ohanga 

134.  Best. 

ffcho 

. j Uchohft  .... 

135.  High. 

Begi  ftcho 

. ( fis-de)  uchcha 

136.  Higher. 

Bagei  ttoho 

i 

. j Sabbbl-dS  uchcha 

, 137.  Highest. 

GhOfa  • , • 

. ; GflbpS  .... 

138.  A horse. 

Ghflpi  . . 

. Gcbpi  .... 

139.  A mare. 

GhOfS  • 

. GohpS  .... 

140.  Horses. 

Ghaji 

. G&hria  . 

i 

141.  Marcs. 

Dlinlundar 

. B»ld  ... 

142.  A bull. 

Gaw  • • 

1 

. Gad,  ga6  , , 

1 43.  A cow. 

; Dlinlundar 

. B81d  . 

144.  Bulls. ^ 

Gawl 

s • 

• 

• 

Gal 

• 

145.  Cows. 

Kflkar 

• • 

• 

• 

Kutta 

• 

• ; 

140.  A dog. 

Kiikre 

• 

• 

• 

Kutti 

• 

• ; 

147.  A bitch. 

j Kflkar 

• 

• 

• 

Kntte 

. i 

| 

148.  Dogs. 

! Kukri 

• 

• 

• 

Kuttia 

• 

! 

149.  Bitches. 

B&ktea 

• 

• 

• 

Bakra 

• 

1 

' 

150.  A he  goat. 

BaktC 

. * 

Bakri 

• 

151.  A female  goat 

Baksts 

• * 

BnkrS 

• 

. 

152.  Go  fits. 

Arln 

• * 

• 

Hirap 

• 

. j 

153.  A male  deer. 

Arln 

• • 

• 

Harjd  • 

• 

• 

1 54.  A female  deer 

Arln 

• • 

t 

Hara?  • 

• 

• 

155.  Deer. 

X.W  stt, 

or  sa 

• 

• 

AS  ftsstl  . 

• 

• 

156.  I am. 

Tg  sa 

• 

• 

Tfl  8ssO  . 

• 

157.  Thou  art. 

Ss  sa 

• • 

• 

• 

S3  5sbo  . 

• 

• 

15S.  He  is. 

AmS  sa 

• • 

• 

• 

HamS  Sssft 

• 

• 

159.  We  are. 

T&g  sa 

• • 

• 

• 

Tuin§-8ss5 

• 

. 

160.  You  are. 

541 — Jnnnsaii. 


English. 

Jftuns&rL 

Sirmaur!  (Dhir(hl). 

161.  They  are  . 

• a 

S5j§  an,  0 

• 

a 

a 

SO  asa 

a a 

a 

162.  I was 

• • 

Hau  tha 

• 

• 

• 

it  thlyft  • 

1 • 

• 

163.  Thou  wast 

• • 

Tfl tha  . 

• 

a 

a 

Til  thlyft . 

• » 

• 

164f.  He  was 

• • 

So  tha  • 

• 

a 

SftthlyS  . 

• • 

165.  We  wcro  . 

• • 

Am  thO  • 

• 

a 

Ham  thlyo 

• a 

a 

166.  You  were  . 

• • 

Turn  th3  • 

• 

• 

a 

Tam  thiyd 

a • 

a 

167.  They  were  . 

• • 

S5j8  the 

• 

a 

a 

SflthlyS  . 

• ft 

a 

168.  Bo  . 

• • 

HO 

• 

• 

a 

0 . 

a a 

• 

169.  To  be  . 

• * 

Hflno  • 

• 

• 

a 

Oq&  a 

ft  • 

a 

170.  Being 

• • 

... 

• • • 

• 

Onda 

• a 

m 

171.  Having  been 

• • 

... 

... 

• 

Oi-i0 

Ste. 

a 

• 

172.  I may  be  . 

• • 

... 

• 

A.  on 

a a 

a 

173.  I shall  be  . 

174.  I should  be 

. • 

• • 

Hau  liOma 

• •4 

• 

... 

• 

a 

— 

A Owe  • 

• ••  • 

a • 

• 

175.  Beat 

• 

Mar  • 

• 

• 

• 

Tip 

a a 

♦ 

176.  To  beat 

. • 

MarnS 

a 

• 

a 

Tlp'pa  , 

a a 

. 

177.  Beating  . 

! 

Mardfl  . 

• 

• 

a 

Tlpdft  . 

t • 

a 

178.  Having  beaten 

i 

* • 

Mari  k&ri 

• 

» 

a 

Tipl-rO  . 

a . 

a 

179.  I beat 

• . 

Hau  marS 

• 

• 

a 

A tipfl  • 

— a . 

* 

180.  Thou  beatest 

• • 

TO  marl 

a 

a 

a 

TQtipS  . 

a a 

a 

181.  He  beats  . 

. * 

So  maro  • 

i 

a 

a 

a 

SO  tap ; flpo 

a a 

• 

182.  We  beat  . 

• • 

Am  marll 

. 

» 

a 

Ham  tipfl 

a a 

a 

183.  You  beat  . 

• . 

Tam  m&rO 

• 

a 

a 

Turn  #p ; tip? 

> • a 

a 

184.  They  beat . 

• • 

S8j3  marl 

a 

a 

a 

Se  tip ; $Ip5 

a a 

a 

185.  I beat  ( Past  Tente ) . 

Me  mara 

• 

a 

a 

MS  tips  • 

• • 

ft 

186.  Tbon  beatest 

Tente). 

(Past 

Te  mara  . 

• 

a 

a 

®s 

s 

a a 

a 

187.  He  beat  (Post  Tente)  . 

TinO  m&rft 

• 

a 

a 

Tetfyfl  fipa 

a a 

a 

542 — Jaunsfirl. 


Sirmaurl  (Girlpftrl  and  Bif  fan). 


Baghitl. 


English. 


L 

L 

S«  sa 

• 

m 

sa  6bso  . 

• 

• 

• 

161.  They  are. 

Aw  thft  • • 

• 

m 

Au  thR  . 

• 

• 

162.  1 was. 

Ttt  th&  . 

• 

• 

Tfi  thS  . 

a 

• 

163.  Thou  wast. 

Sft  th&  . 

a 

« 

Se  thS  . 

• 

• 

164.  Ho  was. 

AmS  tbfi 

• 

• 

Hamg  thfi 

• 

165.  We  were. 

Tflg  the  . 

• 

• 

Turn?  thfl 

• 

9 

166.  You  were. 

Sd  thO  • , 

• 

• 

Sa  tha  . 

• 

m 

167.  They  wero. 

0 < • « 

• 

• 

0 . 

• 

• 

168.  Be. 

09&  • • 

• 

« 

0?S,  Oh$a 

• 

« 

169.  To  be. 

Onda 

• 

OndS 

• 

• 

170.  Being. 

Oi,  OiyS  . 

a 

• 

Oi-rO,  ©5-rO 

• 

• 

171.  Having  been. 

Au  Oil  • 

• 

• 

172.  I may  be. 

Ouia 

• 

• 

An  Ofle  . 

• 

• 

173.  I shall  bo. 

Au  onda 

• 

• 

174.  I should  be. 

Pit 

• 

• 

Mir 

• 

• 

175.  Beat. 

Rtn& 

• 

• 

TipnS  , 

• 

• 

176.  To  beat. 

Pltda 

• 

• 

Tipda  . 

• 

• 

177.  Beating. 

Pitt,  pitiya 

• 

• 

Tipfi-rO  . 

• 

• 

178.  Having  beaten. 

Aw  pita  eft,  or  ea 

• 

• 

Au  tipu  . 

• 

• 

179.  I beat. 

TS  pita  sa  . 

• 

• 

Tfl  tipO  . 

• 

• 

180.  Thou  beatest. 

Sa  pit  ea,  pita  sa 

• 

• 

Sa  ttpO  . 

• 

• 

181.  He  beats. 

AmS  plttt  ea,  pltd  sa  * 

• 

Hamg  tipu 

• 

• 

182.  Wo  beat. 

Tflg  pit  sa,  pi{6  sa 

• 

• 

Tflirtg  tipa 

• 

• 

183.  Yon  beat. 

S6  pit  sa,  pita  sa 

• 

a 

Sa  t4>a  . 

• 

• 

184.  They  beat. 

Mau  (or  m%,  maY)  pita 

• 

Mag  tips  (or  tipya) 

• 

185  I beat  (Past  Tetue). 

; TS  pits  . 

• 

a 

Teg  tipi  (fipyR) 

• 

186.  Thou  beatest 
Tense). 

(Pail 

Tana  pita 

• 

a 

TSnua  tipa  ($Ipya) 

187.  Ho  beat  (Pati  Ten*). 

548— Jaunslrl. 


English. 

188.  We  beat  (Vast  Tense)  . 

189.  You  beat  ( Past  Tense). 

190.  They  beat  ( Past  Tense) 

191.  I am  beating 


192.  I was  heating 

193.  I had  beaten 

194.  1 may  beat 

195.  I shall  bent 

196.  Thou  wilt  l**at 

197.  He  will  beat 

198.  We  shall  beat 

199.  You  will  beat 

200.  They  will  beat 
2*>1.  I should  beat 
202.  I am  beaten 

208.  I was  beaten 

204.  I shall  be  beaten 

205.  1 go 

206.  Thou  goes! 

207.  He  goes 
20^.  We  go 

209.  You  go 

210.  They  g«>  . 

211.  I went 

212.  Thou  wenfe*d 

213.  He  went  . 

214.  We  went  • 


Jauusart. 

A me  mava  • 

Tflo  mar  a 

i 

j Tlwe  mara 

! 

• Hau  inarb 

• Hau  niarH  tha  . 

. Me  mara  tha 


Hau  marma  • 

. Tfl  marda 

i 

. j So  marda 
. Am  marine 

. Turn  marde 
. Sflje  marde 

• •••  • - 

. Hau  mara  janda 
. Hau  mara  gfift 
. Hau  mara  janda 
. Hau  jaO,  nr  n5thil 
. Tu  jii^,  not  he  . 

. Sft  jao,  not  bo  . 

! 

. j Am  jaO,  nothil 
. Turn  juft,  nflthfi 
. S8j6  jao,  n5tho 

# Ilan  goa,  nStlia 

. Tu  g6ii,  nKtha  . 

. So  g&a,  ntttba  . 

* Am  g5e,  nbtbg  . 


Sirwaurl  (Dk&rthi) 

. Hame  tlpa 
. Tumfc  tlpa  • 

. Tine  tlpa 

i — 

. 1 A tlpuG-lag-rOa 

1 

. . A tlpne-lag-rOa-tha 

. MS  tip-diyS-tha 

I 

I £L 

! A tlpu 

j 

• j A tipue  . 

. Til  tipla  . 

. Sfi  tipla  • • 

. Ham  tipSgs 

. Turn  tuple 

. So  tiple  . 

** 

A tlpue  . 

m* 

. A tlpa 

A 

. A tip-diya 

. Mi  tip*le  . • 

A JHU 

j 

. Tu  jiT6  • • 

i 

i 

. 86  jao 

. Ham  jau  • 

. Turn  jawo 

. 86  jSwo  . « 

. A gauS,  gOB,  guwa 
. Tu  gftua  • 

. S$  gaua  . 

. Ham  gau£  • 


544 — Jaunsari. 


Sirmauri  (Girlplrl  and  BMi&n). 


Bagh&tt 


Knglish. 


Amfi  pl$a  . . . | JJamS  tipa  (tlpyR)  • . 188.  Wo  beat  (Fast  TenFe). 


TdS  pita  . . • . j Tume  tipa  (tipyR)  . , j 181).  You  beat  (Past  Tense). 


TeniS  pita  • . . , 

rrinn5  tipa  (tipya)  • 

. 190.  They  beat  {Fait 

Ten  so). 

■ V 

Aw  pitda  lagd  raft  sft 

Au.iipne  lagfi  rfia  • 

i 

. 191.  I am  beating. 

Aw  pitffc  tlia 

An  tipnfi  lagfi  rfia-tha 

1 

. | 192.  I was  beating. 

Mau  pita  tha  • « 

Mfie  tipa-tha 

. 193.  I had  beaten. 

i 

1 Au  tipn  . . • 

1 

. ! 194.  I may  l^eat. 

I 

Aw  pitiila  • 

Au  tipiifi  . . 

. 1 195.  T shall  beat. 

Tit  pitfila  . . * 

: Tu  tipla  . 

. 1!)G.  Thou  wilt  lieat. 

Sfi  pltla  .... 

' So  tipla  . 

. 197.  He  will  >>eat. 

Amfi  pitule  • • 

Ha  me  tipufi,  tTpmS  . 

. 198.  We  shall  lieat. 

Trie  pit  file 

Tmnfi  tiple  • • 

. 199.  You  will  beat. 

Se  pltlfi  . 

Sfi  tiplfi  . . • 

. 200.  They  will  heat. 

1 

1 

Afl  t ipi  hi 

. 201.  T should  beat. 

i 

i <\  w 

Aw  pita  goa  su  • 

Au  tipa  jail  . • 

. 1:02.  L am  beaten. 

Aw  pita  g5a  tha 

Au  tipa  gfia 

. 203.  1 was  beaten. 

Aw  pita  jaii la  . 
Aw  clC'wu  sii 
Tu  dewfi  sa 
Sfi  dewfi  sa 
Ame  ijfiwfi  sa  « 
Tu§  dfiwfi  .sa 
Sfi  dewe  sa  • 

Aw  dfiwa  • 

Til  dfiwft 
Sfi  dew  a 
Ame  dfiwfi 


. 204.  T fchall  be  lieaten, 
. ' 205.  1 iro. 

..  i 20G.  Thou  goefifc. 

i 

I 

. | 207.  He  goes. 

i 

! 

. J 208.  We  go 
. 209.  You  go. 

. ; 210.  They  *ro. 

. 211.  I went. 

• 212.  Thou  wen  tost. 

. 213.  He  went. 

. 234.  We  went. 


VOL.  IX.  PART  IT, 


545— Jaunsari 
4 A 


English. 

J auusaii. 

Sirmaurl  (Dharfh!). 

215.  You  wont,  . 

Turn  g5e,  nfithO 

Turn  gauO  ... 

216.  They  went 

S5je  g&e,  nOthe 

So  gaue  .... 

217.  Go  . 

»)  si,  n5t  h • • • • 

1 

Jii  . . * . . 

218.  Going  . 

j 

Jan  do,  n5thdu  . . . 

Jada  .... 

219-  Gone  . 

G5a,  gwa,  n5th;i 

Garni,  gAa 

220.  What  id  your  name  ? . 

Tuhfu'O  naw  kii,  hf>  ? . 

TOra  n Sw  kfi  ? . . . 

221.  How  old  is  this  horse  ? 

15s  gliAro-kl  kii  limar  0 ? 

15s  gaurO-ri  umar  k&,  (or) 
ai  gaura  kitnO  din-ra  ? 

222.  How  far  is  it  from  lien: 
to  Kashmir  ? 

K5smlr  etki  kochliA  d fire  6 ? 

Kasmir  a<3-di  kaifcni  ddr  ? • 

228.  How  many  sons  nre 
there  in  your  father’s 
house  ? 

224.  I have  walked  a loag 
way  to-day. 

T Share  biibiL-ke  k6ti  be  to  a ? 

Hau  el  a dure  lag  n5tka-tha 

Tore  biiw-rS  glior-dO  kaitne 
b6te  ? 

A ilj  bukflt  chala 

1 

225.  The  son  of  mv  undo  is 
married  to  his  sister. 

220.  In  the  home  is  the  Sad* 
die  of  the  white  horse. 

Mere  kaka-ke  betO  tes-ke 
bohnl-ke  sfitk  bia  kiya. 

llhitrasi  sukle.  ghAre-ki  jin 

bhi  A. 

Mere  chaehO-rO  bete-rit 
bay  ah  t os- rl  bobo-sath 6 
hAil. 

Saped  gaupj-ri  jin  ghor- 
inA  ssi. 

227.  Put  the  saddle  upon 
his  back. 

Jin  poeraw 

Tes-ri  pit  hi-padi  jin  pa  . 

228.  I have  beaten  his  son 
with  many  stripes. 

Me  tes-ke  bete-kh  ehfibnkA- 
lei  pita. 

Man  t*r%s-r«“*  chliAte-dO  bbhte 
chliit  e 150. 

229.  He  is  grazing  rattle  on 
t he  top  of  the  hill. 

Sa  a pnl  gAru  dSde-ke 
mudiyarc-chh  lo  charo. 

So  libO-pflde  dagar  char 

i 

230.  He  is  sitting  on  a horse 
under  th-it  tree. 

Sa  ghore-chli  rOhfi  bet  hi 
trthfl  bQtrt  ttff. 

Se  gaure-prble  tes  pair-  j 
hO  the  asa. 

231.  His  brother  is  taller 
than  his  sister. 

Tos-ka  J)hal  apni  b5hui-te 
liege  labii  A. 

Tes-ra  bliai  tes-ri  bAbA-da, 
barii  asu. 

232.  The  price  of  thati.*  two 
rupees  and  a half. 

Tethfi-ke  d:\iu  dhal  rupaiye 

A. 

Tet  i-ia  inAl  dhal  rupaysi 

I 

283.  My  father  lives  in  that 
small  house. 

Merit  baba  tethii  nandre 
krtre  pilda  rftliA. 

Mora  bapu  tes  ehliautO-sO 
ghor-da  rau-sa. 

234.  Give  flu’s  rupee  to  him 

Kja  rupaiya  t&se- kh  do 

Ai  rupaya  tes  do  • • 

235.  Take  those  rupees  from 
him. 

Tea  bherl  s5je  rupaiye 
sambhal. 

: So  rupayO  tBs-dO  la  . 

286.  Beat  him  well  and  bind 
him  with  ropes. 

Tes6-kh  kliiib  mar  or 
pagAie  lei  badh. 

| 

| Tub  khub  tip  liAr  pagui-da 
bad. 

237.  Draw  water  from  the 
well. 

1 ^ ^ 

Kfic-dl  p&nl  khaech  . 

j 

i BaO-dii  chls  khnich  . . 

i 

i 

238.  Walk  before  mo  . 

i Mere  samni  udii-pOda  hitd  . 

; Ml- de  ago  ckal  • 

I 

289.  Whose  hoy  comes  ) e- 
hind  you  ? 

i 

K&s-ka  Ififkdtta  ao  t&u 
pachh ? 

Tiii-pSchhO  kas-rfi  clihAtu 
itw  ? 

240.  From  whom  did  you 
buy  that  ? 

Tume-  sa  kBs-bhOrt  mOlO 
gadA  ? 

SO  kas-da  lAa  ? 

241.  From  a shopkeeper  of 
the  village. 

fiko  g5wA-k6  baniye-bh8r? . 

G5w-r0  buniyO-dA 

546  — Jaunsari. 


1 

1 Sirtnanrl  (GirlpArl  and  14i££aii). 

Eaglmtl. 

Tuo  dfcwe  . • 

Tume  god 

j 

So  dOwe  . . • • 

i 

So  gde 

i 

i .Dfiw  .... 

Ja  • « • . 

j Dfiwdii  .... 

Jaudfi  . . . . i 

i 

! J)<5wa  .... 

i 

Gda 

i 

Turn  lib  ka  nuw  sa  ? . 

Tara  kali  n&w  ? . . ; 

i 

i 

; fis  ghdre-re  ka  umar  sa  ? . 

! 

Se  gdhra  kai  barsa-rfi  ? . j 

Eti-dfi  Kasmlr- keti  dur  sa  ? 

Kasmlr  ai-dd  kitni  dur  ossO? 

Teard  biYwS-re  ghar-do 
ketd  chhdte  sa  ? 

Tore  bapfi-re  gare  kited 
bagher  ? | 

Mai  aj  bhari  bat  hade 

An  uK  bahut-hl  banda  . j 

i 

Mere  kiike-ra  eh  hilt  a tes-ri  , 
Blue  sat  hi  gfidar  ud.  1 

Mere  chfiehe-ifi  hagher  tes- 
ii  haihna-sai  by  a da.  ; 

Chite  ghdre-re  jin  ghar 
bin  taro  sa. 

Dhanh?  gdhrd-n  jin  garf* 
ossd. 

TeH-ri  plthc-giisi  jin  pafd  . 

Jin  plfhe-pae  riikhrt  . 

Mai  tes-ril  chlidta  chliite 
po  p i l a. 

Aide  tds-rd  baghera-klio 
klmb  tipa. 

Sr?  tir  gfisi  bachO  char  sa 

So  tibbe-pndd  dangra  [said  . 

SO  tes  bikli  nit  ho  ghdre 
gasd  bbthii  sa. 

So  tds  da  la  Liethd  gdhiv- 
pad  chard  rda.  j 

Tes- tii  da  da  tes- rl  dadi-du 
lfiba  sa. 

Tcs-ril  hayya  tcs-ii  hriihna-  j 
tie  Ifiba-ossd. 

i 

Tes  nil  mdl  dluii  rupaya  sa 

1 

Tes-ra  mrd  dal  rtipayd  ossrt  . 

i 

Meiii  baba  tes  clihdto  gluira- 
da  rail  sa. 

j 

Merit  bapfl  tea  chhdtl  i 
, chhanla-do  raud.  ' 

, ; 

E rupaya  ea-khd  do  . 

10  h rupayya  tes-klie  dd  . j 

Se  rupavii  tes-du  dru  kar  . 

! 

Se  rftpayye  ds-d$  Id  . . , 

Tes  aclilhi  pit  tya  pagetue 
| ban. 

i 

Tds  khub  mar  li5r  rassi-sai  , 
ban.  1 

i Kue-du  chis  gayd 

Kud-de  pan!  fiji  • • ^ 

Mfl-da  Sign  chal  • . 

Man-de  a Oka  hand 

Tamu-dd  pftehhS  kas-ra 
chhOta  ai  ? 

TarO  pachhka  k5s-ra  baglier 
ad  ? 

Tfle  so  kas-du  glni  ? 

Se  tume  k5s-d<3  Ida  ? 

Gftwo-rd  bai^iyS-du  . 

GSw-rO  baniyd-dd  • 

i 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


English. 


213.  You  went. 


210.  They  went. 
217.  Go. 


218.  Going. 
210.  Gone. 


220.  What  is  your  name  ? 

221.  How  old  is  this  horse  ? 


222.  How  far  is  it  from  here 

to  Kashmir  ? 

220.  How  many  sons  are 
then-  in  your  father’s 

house  ? 

224.  I have  walked  a Jong 
way  to-day. 

223.  The  son  oC  my  uncle  is 

married  to  iiis  sister. 

226.  In  the  house?  is  the  sad- 

dle of  the  white 
horse. 

227.  Put  rlie  saddle  upon 

his  back. 

228.  I have  beaten  liis  son 

w ith  many  stripes. 

221).  lie  is  grazing  cattle  on 
the  top  of  the  hill. 

2 ‘‘»0.  He  is  rdttiim  on  a horse 
under  that  tree. 

261.  Ilia  brother  is  taller 

than  h is  sister. 

262.  The  j rice  of  that  is  two 

ru}  ees  and  a half. 

266.  My  father  lives  in  that 

small  house. 

264.  Give  this  rupee  to  him. 

265.  Take  those  rupees  from 

him. 

260.  Beat  him  well  and  bind 
him  with  ropes. 

267.  Draw  water  from  the 

wel  1 . 

268.  Walk  before  me. 


269.  Whoso  hoy  comes  fce» 
hi  rid  you  r 

240.  From  whom  did  you 

buy  that  ? 

241.  From  a shopkeeper  of 

the  village. 


547— Jauusari. 
4 a 2 


549 


The  Kiujhali  Group. 

The  Simla  llill  States  are  hounded  on  the  North  by  the  Hiver  Satlaj.  Speaking 
roughly,  the  southern  half  of  the  whole  tract  is  occupied  hy  Sirmur,  Baghat  and  the 
adjoining  parts  of  Patiala.  The  Northern  half  has  in  its  centre  the  State  of  iveonthal 
and  the  Srinagar  thana  of  Patiala.  Here  the  language  is  ICintliali,  reaching  from 
Baghat  and  Sirmur  right  up  to  the  State  of  Bhajji  lying  along  the  south  hank  of  the 
Satlaj. 

West  and  East  of  this  central  Kinthali.  tract  other  Western  Pahari  dialects  are 
spoken,  all  of  which  are  closely  connected,  and  which  may  conveniently  he  classed 
together  as  the  Kinthali  group.  On  the  west,  in  the  State  of  Nalagarh  is  Handuri,  and 
to  the  east,  in  order  going  eastwards,  spoken  in  Eastern  Keonthal,  Kotkkai,  and  several 
adjoining  and  less  important  States,  are  Simla  Siraji,  Barari,  Klrnl,  and  SoraehiSli. 
Pinally  belonging  to  the  same  group  is  the  Kochi,  spoken  in  the  western  part  of  the  State 
of  B.ishahr,  immediately  to  the  North  and  North-East  of  Barari  and  Sorfielioli.  The 
number  of  speakers  reported  for  each  of  these  dialects  is  as  follows 


Kinthali 4:»,.’>77 

Hapdflri  ......  ......  50,-11 

Simla  Siraji  ............  -8,800 

Barap  .............  7,891* 

Soracholl  .............  - J-S 

Kirin  .............  M.9o8 

Kochi 51,8s- 

Total  for  Kiut hali  Group  . 18s,7gM 


A glance  at  the  map  will  sliow  that  these  occupy  the  whole  of  the  Northern  half  of 
the  Simla  Hill  States  except  the  north-east  corner,  near  Kotguru  (Kotgarh).  The 
language  here  is  more  closely  connected  with  that  of  the  Outer  Siraj  of  Kulu  on  the 
north  side  of  the  Satlaj,  and  I have  classed  it,  as  will  he  seen  subsequently,  as  a member 
ol‘  what  I call  the  Satlaj  Group. 

Details  regarding  these  dialects  will  he  found  fully  given  in  the  following  pages, 
and  it  is  here  imnccessary  to  refer  to  them.  All  the  dialects  of  the  Simla  Hill  States 
closely  resemble  each  other,  and  the  common  main  point  of  distinction  is  the  method  of 
forming  the  oblique  case  of  masculine  nouns  ending  in  a consonant.  Tn  Sirmaur! 
these  end  in  e or  o,  in  Baghat!  in  a,  and  in  the  languages  of  the  Kinthali  Group  in 


0 or  6. 

For  further  particulars,  especially  to  the  phonetic  changes,  reference  should  he  made 
to  the  separate  account  of  each  dialect. 


550 


kiuthalT. 

Kinthall  is  properly  the  language  of  the  State  of  Keonthal  (KiSthal)  and  is  the 
prinoipal  language  of  the  Simla  Hill  States.  It  is  the  vernacular  language  of  Simla  itself. 

The  State  of  Keonthal  is  scattered  in  various  detached  portions  over  the  middle  of 
the  Simla  Hills,  and  has,  moreover,  various  subordinate  States,  such  as  Theog,  Koti  and 
others.  Kinthall  is  spoken  in  the  main  portion  of  the  State  immediately  to  the  south- 
east of  Simla,  and  also  in  the  subordinate  state  of  Koti.  It  is  also  spoken  in  the  Srinagar 
thana  of  Patiala  (see  Bagliati,  ante  p.  513  If.)  and  in  the  States  of  Dhami  and  Bhajji 


as  well  as  in  the  headquarters  of  Simla. 

The  number  of  its  speakers  is  as  follows  : — 

Keonthal 21,71:, 

Simla  ...  . . • ......  2, 74?1 

Patiala  (Srinagar)  ...........  11,00(1 

Bhami  ............. 

Bhajji  ..............  12,107 


Total 


To  its  east  Kinthall  has  Sirmaurl,  Simla  Siraji,  Bnvari,  Klrni,  and  Sodhoehi,  to  its 
south  Bagliati,  to  its  west  Ilanduri,  and  lo  i;s  north  Suketi,  all  of  which  are  closely 
allied  to  Kinthall. 

The  most  striking  peculiarities  of  Kinthall  are  the  termination  u of  I lie  oblique  form 
of  masculine  nouns  ending  in  consonants,  as  compared  with  the  a of  Bagliati  and  the 
e of  Sirmauri,  and  the  use  of  hage  as  the  postposition  of  the  dative. 

A sketch  of  Kinthall  is  given  in  the  Rev.  T.  Cirahame  Bailey’s  Languages  of  the 
Northern  Himalayas.  Colonel  Sir  Richard  Temple  has  given  several  excellent  examples 
of  KiSthali  poetry  on  pp.  367  ff.  of  Arol.  !.  of  bis  Legends  of  the  Punjab,  to  which  he 
has  prefixed  a very  useful  Vocabulary,  and  IMr.  li.  A-  Rose,  I-C.S.,  lias  published  two 
KiOthali  ballads  (both  Text  and  Translation),  entitled,  respectively,  Suhdl  ki  Nd/i,  a 
1‘ahdri  Pore  Song  from  Keonthal  [ Indian  Antiquary,  Vol.  xxxviii  (190!)!,  p-  32SJ,  anil 
Mohiy e ki  Tlar,  or  Bar  [ib.  Vol.  xxxvii  (1!)0S),  pp.  2t)t)  fE„  and  Vol.  xxxviii  ( 1 DO*.)),  pp. 
1-0  ff„  60  ft'.],  Much  information  regarding-  the  language,  not  in  the  following  pages, 
will  be  found  in  these. 


As  tin*  language  of  these  Western  Paluivi  dialects  contains  many  words  not  found 
in  the  usual  dictionaries,  and  as  good  materials  are  available  for  KiSthali,  there  is  here 
given  a Kinthall  vocabulary,  containing  those  words  which  T have  selected  from  the 
above  mentioned  works  and  from  the  specimens  to  he  found  below,  us  being  words  that 
are  likely  to  bo  strange  to  the  student.  Such  words  will  form  a contribution  towards 
ascertaining  the  original  form  of  the  ancient  Kliasa  language  once  spoken  in  these  hills — 


agayd, 

ah, 

a ini,  innt , 
akhtl,  aklchi, 
akleala, 
alcra, 
ale  diuile , 
d/i,  hali, 


an  order,  command. 

yes. 

a fight.. 

the  eye. 

wise. 

arrogant. 

round  about. 

a slave,  a servant. 


kiuihalI. 


5B1 


alo. 

a brass  pot,  lota. 

dmd. 

a mother. 

aadku, 

on  this  side. 

dnnii. 

to  bring,  to  draw  (water). 

ant  In, 

this  much. 

aigd. 

eighty. 

O 9 

anhl. 

a plough,  anhl  bdhnd,  to  plough. 

anna, 

to  come. 

£ 

bad. 

a complaint  in  a hvw-court. 

badd. 

all,  the  whole. 

badd. 

a share. 

baddla, 

a shepherd. 

bad  dr d. 

brotherhood,  caste-fellows. 

badd  dead. 

to  divide  out  into  shares. 

bd  dud. 

to  obey. 

badra. 

a bay;. 

badd. 

the  complainant  in  a law-case. 

bdedd,  baindku, 

outside. 

bagehr , 

son,  boy. 

hdgur. 

wind. 

bdhrd. 

a load. 

bat,  bald. 

a brother. 

baindku,  bdedd. 

outside. 

bdf. 

hair. 

ha  (dad. 

to  not.  made. 

bat  ad. 

to  become,  be  made. 

bdlud. 

to  make. 

hallo, 

a bracelet. 

bdmnu. 

to  put  clothes  on  some  one  else. 

bdmd. 

clothes. 

haul. 

clot  liing,  ap  pea  ran  ce. 

band. 

to  begin. 

bad,  bdpd. 

a father. 

bdraktsdri. 

a feast. 

bail, 

rain. 

bastard. 

a cultivator,  a peasant. 

bat  ad. 

to  knead. 

bank  a. 

jungle. 

bank  nd, 

to  tl()AV . 

bebl. 

a sister. 

bedrid. 

penetrated. 

beglie,  bege , 

very,  much,  very  much. 

»r  ' ' ► 

btihd. 

sheep. 

bed , bid,  bod. 

poetical  for  dd,  was.  Cf.  bhuld. 

552 


WESTERN'  VAHARI. 


bent. 

flock  of  cotton. 

be  Sudd, 

senseless,  unconscious. 

bhdjuu, 

to  refuse. 

bhalrd* 

much. 

bhdlafe. 

oxen. 

bhdtri. 

an  arrow.  1 

bliavri. 

much. 

bh  dik'd. 

parched,  lia  tf-eooked. 

bhtiidd , 

down  (adv.) 

bb  ft  Id, 

poetical  for  ad,  was.  Cf.  bed. 

bi. 

even,  also. 

bid  uft. 

io  call,  summon. 

bighd. 

broad. 

bid, 

see  bed. 

bided. 

a change  ill  music  (time  or  tune). 

bit'. 

a city. 

bir. 

village  lands. 

bird. 

an  exehanue- 

bit' nil. 

to  bind. 

bit  re. 

within. 

bod. 

see  bed. 

bold  or  buld. 

ox. 

bod  i'd, 

<*reat,  larue. 

bruili. 

pussy-eat. 

bii/iu, 

sister. 

c 

chdmbd. 

copper  ( fdiitbd ). 

chdnchakh , 

gratuitously,  for  no  reason. 

chat-kit. 

a bird. 

chaiid, 

silver. 

chann, 

three. 

chant'd  (1), 

a vera  n da  h - p lat  form . 

chant'd  (2), 

a little  (Ihot'd). 

chedri, 

wife. 

chhdngtu. 

a son. 

chhd  itf/li. 

a daughter  (East  Kiflthali). 

chhd  p,  < 

a riiiu. 

chhdrnu. 

to  pus,  place,  leave. 

chheltii. 

a kid. 

chh/ji. 

fulfilled. 

chija,  chid,  or  chijrd, 

third  ^e/nrd). 

chivied. 

a babv. 

chi  6, 

water. 

Child, 

r.  blow,  a stripe. 

chohla,  chdhtu. 

a son,  a bov. 

dagdsd, 

daggd, 

dalie, 

ddhro, 

dal, 

daihru, 

dal, 

dallchd, 
dalidri, 
dalle/, 
ddnd, 
ddphi , 
dar, 
dau, 
des, 
dd  nail, 
dhdcliiiu, 
dli fit  (1), 
dial/  (2),  dhdk, 
dhardti, 

(Huso,  dhi§d, 
dingo, 
d/ngiiu, 
dokltar, 
dote, 
dulke, 
dnrdgi. 


ebho, 

ebi, 

ete,  ethid, 

ethio, 

emit, 

ga, 

gddkd, 

gat, 

ghdl-mathol. 
ghand , 

ghin, 

TOL.  IX,  I'All'f  IT. 


kiutkalL  565 

D 

a small  knife  for  cutting  ^rass,  on  the  principle 
of  an  axe. 

flesli  (not  eaten,  as  of  a cow,  horse).  Cf.  dalkt. 
two  and  a half, 
a hill, 
a daughter, 
a day. 
a tree. 

a mat  ( galichd ). 
lazy. 

meat  (for  eating).  Cf.  daggd. 

a front-tooth. 

a room. 

a hack-tooth. 

sunshine. 

the  sun. 

to  go ; deue-zanu,  to  go  away, 
to  feed, 
help!  (do/idi). 
dhdki,  on  high. 

at  midnight  ( ddhirdt ). 

risible. 

a club. 

to  take  out. 

a field. 

to-morrow. 

sunrise. 

a kind  of  loud  drum. 

E 

thus. 

now. 

here,  cf.  Hid. 
from  here, 
here. 

G- 

a village. 

before. 

upon. 

fighting,  mutual  assault. 

a wall. 

compassion. 

4 R 


S64 

WESTERN  PAllARl. 

ff/ilra. 

an  earthen  pot  ( ghafd ). 

ghidd. 

tom-cat. 

git  hi , 

a fire-place  (angifhi). 

god  nil. 

to  quarrel. 

golir  or  gauhr. 

a house. 

guhrchl , 

property,  substance. 

goUri-bari, 

property. 

gold, 

the  neck. 

gudld. 

sweet. 

guilt  lu. 

a finger. 

H 

/nidi,  hddrl, 

a word,  thing  (=  hat). 

halt  or  dll , 

a slave,  a servant. 

hand  it  u , hdndnu. 

to  go,  walk. 

K j°. 

yesterday. 

hi  mu. 

to  look  at,  stare. 

hi£u,  iSu, 

like  this,  of  this  kind. 

I 

*j*> 

mother. 

innl , aini. 

a fight. 

iSu,  hi4u, 

like  this. 

itid. 

here,  cf.  ethla. 

J 

jag  I'd, 

the  walls  of  a house. 

jetld , 

where  (rel.). 

jhi khuta, 

a garment. 

jhon. 

a person. 

jitu. 

like  what  (rel.). 

jodde, 

when  (rel.). 

jogd. 

a place. 

jubar. 

a plain,  a maidan. 

jiihn, 

the  moon. 

jwdnas. 

a woman,  a wife. 

K 

kdclili , 

a bank,  liigh  ground. 

leal. 

a famine. 

hand, re, 

in  (a  certain)  direction  (=  taraf). 

kanchhd, 

vounj;,  small. 

hang, 

a row,  noise. 

kdrd. 

revenue. 

karego, 

a corpse. 

kiOthali. 


555 


kartd , 

great  anxiety. 

katnii,  kafelnu. 

to  beat. 

ketid. 

where  ? 

khdti. 

revenue. 

khetx. 

a field. 

khiydniyb. 

to  give  to  eat. 

kilo. 

in  the  morning. 

kill'd, 

like  what  ? 

kobbe. 

ever,  sometimes;  kobbe-nd , never 

sometimes. 

kodde. 

when  ? 

kde, 

why  ? 

koili. 

a verandah. 

kiiku. 

a cuckoo. 

kutsozzo. 

bad,  ugly,  ignorant. 

kyuth. 

clouds. 

L 

Id t. 

a loot. 

launu. 

to  take. 

lu  ll  HU, 

to  supply,  fix,  determine  (lagdnil) . 

lekhd-chokhd. 

computation. 

lldd. 

crop-tailed. 

lira. 

a cry. 

Ida, 

iron. 

loti-pot i. 

goods  and  chattels. 

M 

machh , 

a man. 

mdvcho. 

parents. 

majjat. 

. an  army. 

mdnjd. 

a bed. 

manri i. 

a betrothal. 

mb  at  ho , mhathfo , 

small. 

mirb. 

a roof- 

mitnu. 

to  he  got,  to  be  met. 

moj. 

merriment,  rejoicing. 

mol. 

price. 

mukyu. 

to  complete. 

mukti. 

much,  very  much. 

mule. 

below. 

» 

nd. 

no,  not. 

m a. 

a name. 

nabamu. 

to  pierce. 

TOIi,  IX,  PAST  IV. 


kobbe. 


4 b 2 


566 


WESTERN  PAHiftf. 


nadri. 

sight  (nazri). 

nahar , 

gut,  leather  string. 

nat}U, 

to  bring. 

narelb,  narelfd , 

a vessel,  dish. 

natsozzo. 

bad,  ugly,  ignorant. 

nauz , nauzo , 

bread,  food. 

navi. 

subject,  ruled. 

navird,  neori. 

likeness. 

nenu, 

to  take. 

neori , navird, 

likeness. 

neitre. 

near. 

nhothnu. 

to  run. 

nth. 

no,  not. 

nikfd. 

small. 

nokhi. 

an  unfair  injury  ( anokhi ). 

0 

obd. 

up,  above. 

oh  ax i. 

to  be. 

ore, 

causelessly. 

otnu. 

to  turn,  return. 

P 

pachid,  pichid. 

a paternal  uncle. 

pagi. 

a vestibule,  verandah. 

pagrd  (1), 

visible. 

pagrd  (2), 

a follower. 

pdhr. 

a hill. 

pajdhr , 

a load  of  grass  or  firewood. 

pdkharo. 

opposition,  enemy. 

pandale, 

a verandah. 

pande. 

upon. 

pandku. 

beyond. 

pane  nit. 

to  clothe. 

paiii. 

a shoe. 

pdtf.u. 

to  throw,  place. 

pans. 

five. 

par  chi. 

a lance  ( barchi ) . 

paueno. 

sharp. 

paler. 

remonstrance,  appeasing. 

pairi. 

a field  (East  Kinthali). 

pehdfu-khe. 

(adv.)  next. 

phabnu, 

to  meet. 

phardd. 

a complaint  in  a law-court, 

phayd. 

a kiss. 

KIUTUALI. 


phrezd. 

on  the  day  before  yesterday. 

pichhaukd , 

behind.' 

plchid , pachid, 

a paternal  uncle. 

pionblt. 

yellow  ink. 

piri. 

a generation  ( pirhi ). 

pitou  or  tipnu. 

to  beat. 

pond, 

an  ear  of  corn. 

porta. 

there. 

pornu. 

to  fall ; to  he  proper. 

pd(ue. 

on  the  day  after  to-morrow. 

pujnu. 

to  arrive. 

para,  pure , puro. 

back,  beyond. 

pyull,  pyuioal, 

a door. 

R 

rabid l. 

a earess. 

rdchtiu, 

to  lose. 

rad. 

a harlot. 

raghes. 

meaning,  signification. 

rakd,  rekd. 

another,  other. 

rakh. 

alas ! 

rdmbi, 

an  instrument  for  uprooting  grass. 

rank hu,  raunu, 

to  remain. 

ratind. 

a verandah,  platform. 

regard. 

see  rigaru. 

rekd,  rakd. 

other,  another. 

rekkd, 

a rival  (fern.). 

rtgari. 

people,  population . 

rigaru,  regard , 

a member  of  the  royal  family. 

rirnu. 

to  fall. 

rokni i. 

to  stop,  prevent. 

roSnu, 

to  be  angry. 

rdiit, 

a rope. 

rubhan, 

before,  in  front  ( ru-ba-ru ). 

s 

Sad, 

a sound. 

Sadnu, 

to  call,  summon. 

(ah. 

life,  breath. 

(di. 

made,  completed. 

sairi. 

seo  seri. 

samdn. 

a reward. 

satigi. 

with. 

sand. 

treatment,  conduct. 

(art, 

opposed  (sari). 

658 


WESTERN  PAHARI. 


sardd, 
sarli, 
sat  hi  (1), 
satin  (2), 
sank i% 

Sekurd , 

Seld,  Solid , 
sen,  sairi , sett, 
sibitre, 

Sigd, 

Sigi,  Stgi, 

sij/d, 

stkhnu, 

Slid, 

Stlt, 

SiraS, 

» 

Stic, 

80a, 

sob,  sobbl, 
soend , 

Soka, 

Solid,  Seld , 

Sud, 

Sunttu. 

Suran, 

suttnu, 

tdtb, 
tdunu, 
tetid , 
thcM, 
thindy 
thtga, 
thokari, 
lipnu  or  pifridy 

tiSu, 

tdly 

tsalnu, 
tsdnnu , 
tsa  r, 
tsarnUy 
tsa  rndy 
hgdlsdy 
tgauthe. 


plenty. 

loud. 

a friend,  companion, 
with. 

debauchery,  lechery, 
a husk. 

cold  (East  KiSthall). 

a plain,  flat  place. 

always. 

swift. 

quickly. 

altogether. 

to  learn. 

hemp. 

•a  jackal, 
mustard, 
a boundary, 
straight  in  front, 
all.  * 

gold, 
dry. 
cold, 
memory, 
to  hear, 
astonishment, 
to  lie  down,  to  sleep. 

T 

hot. 

to  warm  up. 
there, 
a thing, 
man. 

a scoundrel,  cheat, 
a handcuff, 
to  beat, 
like  that, 
service  ( tahal ). 
to  go,  walk, 
to  prepare,  arrange, 
four. 

to  graze  (transitive). 

to  cause  to  rise,  to  put  up  ( pharhdna ). 

an  uncle  ( chdchd ). 

on  two  days  after  to-morrow,  on  the  fourtl 
day. 


take, 

tsdzznro, 

tgugauiyu, 

tsungnu% 

tuath, 

fu/cfukd , 


ubhd i, 
uchta, 
urnmor, 
undhd, 
ure  otnu, 
ure  laufiu. 


kiuthalI.  559 

six. 

good,  beautiful,  clean, 
to  graze  (transitive), 
to  graze  (intransitive), 
stormy  wind, 
bread,  food. 

u 

up  ; ubhd  ohnu,  to  stand  up. 
high. 

age,  time  of  life, 
down  (adv.). 
to  return,  come  back, 
to  take  away. 


withku , 


w 

inside. 


zagnu, 

zdnnu, 

sntnu,  znfhnu , 

zdgd, 

zdpnu, 


z 

to  guard,  watch,  tend  (cattle), 
to  think,  consider,  know, 
to  speak, 
fit,  suitable, 
to  speak. 


Besides  the  above,  attention  may  be  drawn  to  the  common  suffix  added  to  nouns  as  a 
diminutive,  or  without  any  special  force  at  all,  -til,  -td,  or -to  ; fern.  -th  In  the  specimens, 
this  termination  occurs  in  the  word  chhelfu , a kid,  but  other  examples  will  be  found  in 
the  above  Vocabulary. 

The  following  sketch  of  Kinthall  Grammar  is  based  on  the  language  of  the  two  speci- 
mens which  follow,  and  on  the  List  of  Words  and  Sentences  on  pp.  < 30  IT.  Its  prepara- 
tion has  been  materially  simplified  by  the  existence  of  the  excellent  account  of  the 
dialect  in  the  Itev.  T.  Grahame  Bailey’s  Languages  of  the  Northern  Himalayas.  When 
my  own  materials  were  wanting,  I have  freely  borrowed  from  him.  Moreover,  there  is  no 
fixed  system  of  spelling  Kinthall  words.  The  same  word  will  be  found  spelt  in  different 
ways  in  two  consecutive  lines.  Lor  instance,  the  word  for  ‘ by  him  ’ appeal's  in  the 
specimens,  as  originally  received,  under  the  forms  tiniye , tiniye,  tinje,  tinje,  and  tin  ye. 
In  order  to  facilitate  comp«arison  with  Mr.  Bailey’s  work,  I have,  in  such  cases,  selected 
and  adhered  to  one  system  of  spelling  ; when  possible,  following  that  adopted  by  him. 

Pronunciation. — KiUthali  strongly  resembles  Sirmaurl  in  its  phonetic  system. 
There  is  the  same  pronunciation  of  a as  the  6 of  ‘ hot  ’,  and  of  a,  at  the  end  of  a word,  as  o. 
Both  these  are  prominent  features  of  Kiutliali.  The  pronunciation  of  a as  6 is  almosi 
universal,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  specimens.  This  sound  is  sometimes  represented  in 
the  native  character  by  a (*r)  and  sometimes  by  o (^t),  but  will  always  be  indicated  by 
the  letter  6 in  transliteration.  Thus,  both  ?t%  and  then,  will  be  transliterated  as 
tobS.  The  use  of  5,  and  sometimes  «,  instead  of  a final  5 is  also  very  common.  Thus, 


660 


WESTERN  PAHARt. 


we  have  both  chohta  and  chohto,  a son  ; bold  and  bold,  said ; mahrd  and  mahro,  our ; 
ch  helfa  and  cheltu,  a kid ; ked  and  keu,  made.  Somotimes  the  o-sound  is  broadened  to 
au,  so  that  we  have  gdhr  or  gauhr , a house. 

An  initial  a or  a is  sometimes  elided,  as  in  dharati  (Hindi  adhirdt ),  midnight ; 
gif  hi  (Hindi  ah  git  hi),  a fireplace ; ndkhd,  for  anbkha,  eurious. 

In  Kiuthali  we  note  for  the  first  time  a peculiar  sound,  resembling  a much  prolonged 
German  it.  It  has  no  fixed  representative  in  the  Nagari  character,  perhaps  it  most 
commonly  appears  as  ay  a.  In  Ivans]  iteration  1 represent  it  by  U.  Thus,  wpor,  a sister, 
transliterated  bfihn  (see  the  remarks  on  aspiration  below).  It  may  be  noted  that  this 
sound  also  occurs  in  Kashmiri. 

The  letter  h is  dropped  as  frequently  as  in  the  oilier  Simla  Hill  dialects.  We  have 
hor  or  dr,  and ; hall  or  dll,  a servant ; and  (61  for  tahal,  service.  So  also  aspiration  of 
consonants,  especially  of  sonant  consonants,  such  as  bh,  dh,  and  gh,  is  sometimes  dropped, 
as  in  bat,  for  bhai,  a brother  ; Litre,  for  bhitre,  inside.  More  often,  however,  the  aspira- 
tion is  transferred, — projected,  so  to  speak,  to  a later  stage  of  the  word.  In  such  cases  the 
aspiration  is,  in  writing  in  the  vernacular  character,  retained  in  its  proper  place.  Thus, 
while  we  have  both  and  wftwr,  meaning  * to  be  ’,  the  first  is  pronounced  bhnu,  and  will 
be  so  transliterated.  Similarly  we  shall  find  words  such  as  grix,  a horse,  transliterated 
gdhr  a ; a boy,  transliterated  bagehr ; gr,  a house,  transliterated  gdhr ; and  a 

son,  transliterated  chohta.  In  all  these  eases,  the  transliteration  represents  the  real 
pronunciation.  It.  should  be  remarked  that  all  this  defective  pronunciation  of  h is  a 
prominent  feature  of  the  Pi&icha  languages  of  the  North-West  Frontier. 

Another  Pilachu  peculiarity  is  the  development  of  a ts  and  a z (often  pronounced 
dz)  from  ch  and  j.  The  specimens  will  show  frequent  examples  of  this,  a good  one 
is  the  word  tsozzara,  good,  often  written  chajard.  In  the  vernacular  character  is 
indicated  by  the  character  for  ch  with  a dot  under  it, — thus  — and  similarly  z or  dz 
by  of.  In  the  specimens  as  received  these  dots  were  carefully  marked,  so  that  in  most 
cases  little  difficulty  was  found  in  the  transliteration. 

As  usual,  8 is  frequently  pronounced  s,  i.e.  like  the  sh  in  ‘ shine  \ Thus,  Sum, 
heard  (Hindi  aund) ; das,  ten  (Hindi  das),  and  so  on.  This  is  really  a casoof  retainin'/ 
an  original  s,  which  Hindi  has  changed  to  s. 

In  the  specimens,  the  cerebral  letters  r,  n and  l are  all  carefully  marked  and  are 
indicated  both  in  the  vernacular  character  and  in  the  transliteration.  In  other  Indian 
languages  r,  which  is  a derivative  of  d,  never  commences  a word.  When  initial  the 
sound  is  always  a pure  d;  hut  in  the  second  specimen,  we  have  a remarkable  instancy,  of 
r being  used  instead  of  r at  the  commencement  of  a word,  as  in  the  word  rokne  (Hindi 
rokne).  So  also  in  the  preceding  vocabulary,  we  have  rambi,  a weeding  instrument.  This 
is  particularly  interesting,  for  the  same  change  also  occurs  in  European  Gipsy,  as  in  rol, 
a ladle,  for  the  Indian  doi.  Moreover,  a great  many  scholars  are  of  opinion  that  these 
European  Gipsies  originally  came  from  the  north-west  frontier,  where  the  Pifeclia 
languages  are  now  spoken. 

Another  noteworthy  peculiarity  is  the  frequent  change  of  t (especially  when 
representing  an  older  tr)  to  ch,  as  in  charn,  three ; chdmbd , copper ; chaufd  (Hindi 
thbfd),  a little  ; chijd  (Hindi  tijd)  riiird ; pichid  (Hindi  pitiyd ),  a paternal  uncle.  The 
.same  change  occurs  in  Sirmaurl  Bi&au.  A further  change  of  the  ch  so  developed  into 


KltjTHAlil.  561 

ts  occurs  in  khStg  (Hindi  khet\  a field.  In  Kashmiri  the  change  of  t to  ts  is  very 
common. 

Sometimes,  and  this  is  also  a peculiarity  of  the  PiSacha  languages,  a soft  consonant  is 
hardened,  as  in  parcht  (Hindi  barchi),  a lance ; lekhd-chdkha  (Hindi  lekhd-jdkbd), 
computation. 

A change  of  g to  d occurs  in  ddllehd  (Hindi  gdhehn  a mat. 

Letters  are  frequently  doubled,  although  this  doubling  is  rarely  represented  in  the 
vernacular  character.  When  this  is  the  case,  the  doubling  will  be  indicated  in  the  trans- 
literation. Thus  will  be  transliterated  sobbl,  because  the  word  is  so  pronounced. 

Nouns. — All  nouns,  without  exception,  have  their  agent  and  locative  cases 
singular  and  plural,  ending  in  e.  Thus  gdhre , by  or  in  a horse,  or  by  or  in  horses,  from 
gdftrd,  & horse.  Similarly  in  theso  cases,  gohr,  a house,  has  goitre  ; bdpu,  a father,  has 
bap  he  ; betl,  a daughter,  has  belle  ; and  b'tlhn,  a sister,  lias  bauhne.  It  must  be  remembered, 
however,  that,  as  in  other  Indian  languages,  the  locative  may  also  be  formed  with  the 
aid  of  postpositions  added  to  the  oblique  ease. 

Masculine  Tadbhara  nouns  which,  in  Hindi,  end  in  d,  also  end  in  d in  Kiuthali, 
but  this  a is,  as  already  explained,  interchangeable  with  d and  sometimes  with  a.  Tims 
gohrd  or  gohrd,  a horse;  clihelld  qi*  chhellu,  a hid.  Such  nouns  form  the  vocative 
singular  by  changing  the  final  d (o)  to  ed  and  the  vocative  plural,  by  changing  it  to  eb. 
Thus gdhred,  O horse;  gohred,  O horses.  All  the  other  oblique  cases  of  the  singular  and 
plural  (including  the  agent  and  locative'*,  as  well  as  the  nominative  plural,  are  formed  by 
changing  the  final  d (d)  to  e.  Thus  goitre. 

Masculine  nouns  ending  in  a consonant  have  the  nominative  plural  the  same  as  the 
singular.  The  locative  and  agent  add  e,  the  vocative  d in  the  singular  and  b in  the  plural, 
and  all  other  cases  of  tlve  singular  and  plural  take  d.  Thus,  gohr , a house,  or  houses  ; 
gdhre  by  or  in  a house  or  houses  ; gohrd,  O house ! gohro,  O houses  ! old.  sing,  and 
pluivgfdArd.  This  termination  d of  these  nouns  is  typical  of  KiStliall.  Bagbatl  has  here 
d,  while  Sirmaurt  has  either  e or  d. 

Other  masculine'  nouns  add  e in  the  agent  and  locative  and  take  d in  the  vocative 
singular  and  o in  the  vocative  plural,  but  are  otherwise  unchanged.  Thus,  bdpu,  a 
father  or  fathers  ; bdpuc,  by  or  in. a father  or  fathers  ; hdpub,  O father  ! bdpuo,  O fathers  1 
ohl.  sing,  and  plur.  bdpu. 

* Feminine  nouns  in  l add  e in  the  agent  and  locative  singular  and  plural,  e in  the 
vdeative  singular,  and  d in  the  vocative  plural,  and  are  otherwise  unchanged.  Thus  betl, 
’a  daughter,  or  daughters  ; be  tie,  by  or  in  a daughter  or  daughters  ; be  tie,  O daughter  ! 
bdp%d,  O daughters  ! ohl.  sing,  and  plur.  betl. 

Other  feminine  nouns  take  e in  the  vocative  singular,  0 in  the  vocative  plural,  and 
e in  all  the  oblique  cases  of  both  numbers  (including  the  agent  and  locative!.  Thus, 
plmrad,  a complaint ; voe.  sing,  phardde  ; voc.  plur.  pit  a r add  ; nora.  plur.  phardd  ; all 
other  cases,  phardde.  JBUhn,  a sister,  changes  the  il  to  an  in  all  other  cases  except  the 
nominative  plural.  Thus  obi.  sing,  and  plur.  bauhne. 

It  will  be  observed  that  except  in  the  nominative  and  vocative  case,  all  Kinthall 
*%oun9  have  the  plural  the  same  as  the  singular,  and  that  the  only  nouns  in  which  the 
nominative  plural  is  different  from  the  nominative  singular  are  masculine  tadbhavas  in 
d (d),  like  gohrd. 

vor,.  IX,  PART  IV. 


4 c 


562  WESTERN  PAHArI. 


The  above  rales  are  conveniently  exhibited  in  the  following  table 


NOMINATiyB. 

Vocativb. 

Oblique 

Singular 

an* 

Plural. 

Agent  and 
Locative 

Singular.  , 

i 

Plural. 

Singular. 

Plural. 

Singular 
and  Plural. 
ft 

tjdhra  (fl),  a liorse  .... 

gohre 

gfilirtd 

gdhr&l 

gohre  . 

9oV* 

gvhr,  a house  • . . . • , 

gflhr 

gflhra 

gflhro 

glthrd 

gefa* 

i 

bdpu,  a father  . . . . j 

i 

b.lpU 

bdpud 

bdpud 

bapu 

bapus 

1 

beti , a daughter  . . . . | 

bet  ? • 

belle 

belli 5 

bell 

bet  19 

pharud,  a complaint 

phar&d 

phardde 

pli  aradd 

phctrdde 

pharade 

The  commonest  postpositions  are  : — 

Accusative — kite,  huge,  ge. 

Instrumental — same  as  tins  Ablative.  Sometimes  the  same  as  the  Agent. 

Dative — khe,  huge,  ge,  rl  tel,  rl  khfttar,  to  or  for. 

Ablative — dtl  {do),  hdgd,  phd,  from;  stithl,  with. 

Genitive — rd. 

Locative — dd  (do),  maje,  in  ; pd nde , upon. 

Of  the  abovo  huge  and  hdgd  are  sometimes  used  in  a sense  equivalent  to  the  French 
chez,  as  in  : — 

dpne  dpne  hagd-khe  deue,  they  went  away,  each  to  his  own  homo. 
dpne  huge  tlti  daihre-tel  beihtdd  pord  rdhd,  I remained  for  three  days  lying 
down  in  my  own  house. 

Both  these  examples  occur  in  the  second  specimen.  In  the  latter  of  the  two,  note 
the  use  of  tel  to  mean  * during  ’,  equivalent  to  the  Hindi  tak. 

The  oblique  form  itself  can  he  used  without  a postposition  for  any  oblique  case. 
Several  examples  of  this  will  be  found  in  the  specimens,  principally  in  the  case  of 
pronouns.  Here  we  may  note  : — 

itne  borSo  mod  ten  1 61  ki,  for  so  many  years  I did  thy  service. 

The  following  are  examples  of  the  use  of  the  cases  : — 

Nominative  Plural:  —eki  adml-re  do  bagehr  the,  of  a certain  man  there  were  two 

sons. 

mere  bdbe-hdge  kitne  clli  ossd,  how  many  servants  are  there  in  my  father’s 
house  (see  above  regarding  the  meaning  of  huge). 

Agent. — Tins  is  used  for  the  subject  of  the  past  tense  of  a transitive  verb,  as  in 
Hindi.  Thus : — 

kanchhe  bagehre  dpne  baodtoge  bold,  the  younger  son  said  to  his  father.  Note 
that  bdlnu  is  transitive. 

bdpue  dpne  hali-khe  bold,  the  father  said  to  his  servants. 

bddue  eobbi-ri  gdll  ditti,  the  complainant  gave  abuse  of  (i.e.  to)  all. 

As  occasionally  happens  in  Hindi  dialects  the  Agent  case  is  sotaetimes  used  as  the 
subject  of  the  past  tense  of  an  intransitive  verb,  used  as  an  impersonal  passive.  Thus: — 
kanchhe  bagehre  dur  pdrdeSo-khe  dead,  by  the  younger  son  it  was  gone  to  a far 
country,  i.e.  the  younger  soxi  wont  to  a far  country. 


KIlJTHAIit.  563 

Accusative. — This  case  ia  usually  the  same  as  tlie  nominative,  but,  as  in  Hindi, 
and  according*  tp  the  same  rules,  can  also  take  the  postpositions  of  the  dative.  No 
examples  of'nouhs  in  the  accusative  with  a dative  termination  occur  in  the  specimens, 
but  there  are  several  examples  of  pronouns  treated  in  this  way,  some  of  which  will  be 
ohown^  the  proper  place.  The  following  are  examples  of  nouns  in  the  nominative  form 
1 of  the  accusative : — 

aur  zdgne-rl  Ichdtar  bhejd , he  sent  him  to  guard  swine. 

8Urd-re  juthe  6ekure  khde-rd,  having  eaten  the  waste  husks  of  the  swine. 
dchlie  dchhe  jhikute  led,  bring  very  good  garments. 

Instrumental. — This  case  may  bo  either  the  same  in  formas  the  case  of  the  Agent, 
or  it  may  be  governed  by  some  postposition,  one  of  those  of  the  ablative  being  generally 
employed.  The  only  examples  available  are  in  the  List  of  Words — (No.  228,  236)  : — 
mod  tes-ru  chdhtd  chite-sdthi  tipd,  I have  beaten  his  sou  with  blows. 
rd&sl-adthi  bank,  hind  with  ropes. 

Dative— 

kanchhe  bagehre  dur  pordeSd-khe  deud,  the  younger  son  went  away  to  a far 
country. 

bdpiie  dpne  hall-klie  bold,  the  father  said  to  the  servants. 

kanchhe  bagehre  dpne  bad-hage  bold,  the  younger  son  said  to  his  father. 

jo-kle  rna-ge  gohrVbdrt  a,  whatever  property  is  to  me,  i.e.  whatever  I have. 

ganhrb-rl  tel  rdjl  khusl  dte-ro,  having  returned  happy  and  well  to  the  house. 

bltre  zdne-rl  lei  bhdjd , he  refused  for  entering  (to  enter). 

merl  phard de-re  rokne-rl  tel,  for  stopping  (in  order  to  stop)  my  complaint. 

linle  sur  zdgne-rl  khdtar  bhejd , he  sent  him  for  watching  (to  watch)  swine. 

Ablative— 

kue- da  chU  an,  fetch  water  from  the  well. 

se  rupdye  les-hdgd  lire  Id,  take  those  rupees  from  him. 

se  time  kos-phd  Ibd-thd  ? ga-rd  hdniye-phd,  from  whom  did  yon  buy  that  ? 
From  a shopkeeper  of  the  village. 

The  postposition  sat  hi  means  both  ‘ by  means  of  ’ and  * together  with.’  An  example 
of  the  former  meaning  has  boon  given  under  the  head  of  the  instrumental.  For  the 
latter  we  have : — 

lu  daihre-rd  ma-sdthl  rod , thou  art  ever  with  me. 

Genitive. — The  suffix  rd  of  the  genitive  is  an  adjective,  like  the  kd  of  Hindi,  and 
the  rd  of  Mar  war  I.  When  governed  by  a masculine  noun  in  the  plural,  or  in  an 
oblique  case  of  the  singular  it  becomes  re,  and  when  governed  by  a noun  in  tlie 
feminine,  it  becomes  rl.  Thus : — 

jo  gdhrehi-rd  merd  badd  dsd,  (that)  which  is  my  share  of  the  property. 
suro-re  juthe  sekure  khde-ro,  having  eaten  the  waste  husks  of  the  swine. 
mere  kdke-rd  chdhtd  tes-rl  bauhne-sathl  bid  dsd,  the  son  of  my  uncle  is  married 
to  his  sister. 

tere  bad-re  gauhre  kitne  bagehr  dsd,  how  many  sons  are  there  in  thy  father  s 
house  ? 

$s  gdhfe-ri  kdh  minor  osso,  wliat  is  the  ago  of  this  horse  ? 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


564 


WESTERN  PAHARl. 


aw  batjldf'o  gkane-rl  siw  Idunde  Ide-god-thd,  I liad  taken  away  the  brotherhood 
to  fix  the  boundary  of  the  wall. 
hdtho-ri  gunthi-klie  chhap,  a ring  for  the  finger  of  (his)  hand. 

Locative. — The  postposition  da,  (do)  of  the  locative  is,  like  rd,  an  adjective  agreeing 
with  the  thing  contained.  W hen  agreeing  with  a masculine  noun  in  the  plural  or  in 
the  oblique  singular,  it  becomes  de , and  when  agreeing  with  a feminine  noun  it  becomes 
dl.  The  organic  locative  in  6 is  used  in  exactly  the  same  sense  as  the  locative  with  dd 
(de,  dl ).  Thus  : — 

tere  bad-re  gaulire  kitne  bagelir  dsd , how  many  sons  are  there  in  thy  father’s 
house  ? 

vi era  bad  tea  mhdthre  gauhro-dd  raalid,  my  father  lives  in  that  small  house. 
jethd  bdl  khetjo-dd  thid,  the  elder  brother  was  in  the  field. 
aw  bi  tel-do pard-nhdthd,  thereon,  I also  ran  away. 

tes  m ulkd- de  ekl  ddml-hdge  rod,  he  dwelt  with  a man  (masc.  sing.  obl.)_  in  that 
country. 

dpnl  loll- poll  sankl-di  kltdl,  he  lost  his  goods  and  chattels  (fern.)  in  debauchery. 
ma-khe  dp  no  hdli-maje  rdkh,  keep  me  amongst  thy  servants. 
se  libbe-pdnde  pdsa  tadro,  lie  is  grazing  cattle  upon  the  hill-top. 
hame  sdbbl  jhone  sfwe-pdnde  pt'ije,  we  all  arrived  upon  (at)  the  boundary. 
ekl  gliane-pdnde  havie  gdde,  wo  quarrelled  upon  (about)  a wall. 

The  following  are  examples  of  the  use  of  the  Vocative  : — 
he  bdpftd,  O father ! (I  have  sinned). 
bagelir  a,  O Son  ! (thou  art  always  with  me). 

Adjectives.—  The  rule  for  adjectives  is  the  same  as  in  Hindi.  Adjectives  in  a (d) 
change  the  termination  to  e when  agreeing  with  a masculine  noun  in  the  plural  or  in  an 
oblique  case  singular.  When  agreeing  with  a feminine  noun  they  change  it  to  t.  Other 
adjectives  are  undeclinable,  thus  : — 

(es-rd  jelhd  bdl,  his  elder  brother  (was  in  the  field). 

kanchhe  bagehre  bold,  by  the  younger  son  it  was  said. 

surd-re  jiithe  Sekure,  the  waste  husks  of  the  swine. 

dpnl  gdhrehl  katthl  kore-rd,  having  made  his  property  put  together. 

se  leahgdl  de-god,  he  became  poor. 

dui • pordeSd-khe  dead , he  went  to  a far  country. 

Comparison  is  made  as  usual,  the  thing  with  which  comparison  is  made  being  put 
in  the  ablative  with  dd. 

The  adjective  tsozzard,  good,  has  a comparative  beh,  better.  Other  adjectives  do  not 
change  in  comparison.  Thus:  — 

(•8-da  beh,  better  than  this. 

sobbi-dd  tgozzard,  better  than  all,  best. 

tes-ra  bdia  tes-rl  bauhne-dd  labd  dad , his  brother  is  taller  than  his  sister. 

The  numeral  ek,  one,  has  an  oblique  form  ekl,  as  in  : — 

ekl  ddml-re  dd  bagehr  the,  of  a certain,  man  there  were  two  bous. 

elcl  ddnii-hdge  rod,  he  dwelt  with  a certain  man. 

ekl  ghaite-pdnde  hatni  g odd,  wc  quarrelled  about  a wall. 


KlfjTHALl.  566 

Pronouns. — The  Personal  Pronouns  of  the  first  and  second  persons,  are  thus 
declined : — 

I.  Thou. 


Sing. 

Nom. 

/V  /V 

d,  aw. 

til. 

Ag. 

mbe. 

toS. 

Obi. 

ma. 

td. 

Gen. 

merd  (o). 

terd  ( b ). 

Plur. 

Nom. 

hame,  hdmS.  . 

tuine,  tussS. 

Ag* 

hame,  hdmS. 

lumS,  tussS. 

Obi. 

hamb,  hdmS. 

tussS. 

Gen. 

mdhrd  (b),  mdrd  (6). 

tumdhra  (b),  tumdrd  (6). 

In  the  plural  of  the  above,  the  final  nasal  may  be  omitted,  as  in  hame,  tusse , etc. 
This  is  generally  done  in  the  case  of  the  forms  tussS  and  tusso,  the  most  common  forms 
of  which  are  time  and  tusso. 

The  oblique  form  alone  is  often  used  for  the  dative.  Thus  we  may  say  either 
ma-khe  de  or  ma  de,  give  to  me.  See  also  the  example  of  hams,  below. 

The  following  arts  examples  of  the  nsc  of  these  pronouns:  — 
a etl  bhukhd  morne  lage-rbd,  I am  dying  here  of  hunger. 

junle  a dipne  sdthl-sahgl  khus  kordd,  with  which  I might  have  made  merry  with 
my  friends. 

aw  ethib  bdpu-lidge  dead,  I will  go  from  here  to  my  father. 

ma-pdnde  tes-rl  gall  dene-rl  phardd,  a complaint  upon  me  of  giving  his  abuse  (of 
abusing  him). 

jo  mem  badd  dsd,  (that)  which  is  my  share. 

mere  bdbe-hdge  kitne  dll  ossb , how  many  servants  are  there  in  my  father’s  house. 
merl  phardde-re  rbkne-ri  tel,  in  order  to  stop  my  complaint. 
ekl  ghane-pdnde  harnS  gode,  we  quarrelled  about  a Avail.* 

jobe  hdmS  sobbl  jhone  siwe-pdnde  pdje,  when  we  all  arrived  at  the  boundary. 

aw  tern  chohtd  bblne  zbgd  ml  rod,  I am  not  worlliy  to  lie  called  thy  sou. 

mbS  pap  keu,  I did  sin. 

moS  terl  tol  kl,  I did  thy  service. 

moS  bddu  nl  llpd,  I did  not  beat  the  complainant. 

ma-khe  Spue  hdll-mdje  rdkh,  keep  me  among  thy  servants. 

se  ma-khe  dee-de,  give  that  to  me. 

jb-klS  ma-gc  golirl-bdrl  d,  whatever  property  is  (belongs)  to  me. 
dj  eh  ma-lel  mild,  to-day  this  (brother)  was  found  for  (got  by)  me. 

* hamb  khitsl  home  porb,  it  is  proper  i’or  us  to  be  merry. 
nd  mdhrdt  ghdl-mathbl  da,  we  had  not  a fight. 
mdhrl  tel  gall  dittl , abuse  was  given  to  us. 
tu  daihre-ra  ma-sdtlii  rod,  tbou  art  ever  with  me. 
toi ma-khe  chheltii  bl  ill  ditto,  thou  didst  not  even  give  to  me  a kid. 


066  WESTERN  PAHARI. 

to&  tes-khe  Jun  tea  no,  thou  preparedst  a feast  for  him. 

moS  ta-hunde  pdp  kbit,  I,  while  thou  art  (/.<?.  in  thy  presence),  did  sin. 

terd  bdi  ethid  de-rod,  thy  brotlicr  hath  come  here. 

tere  dekhde  mbs  pdp  kcu,  in  thy  seeing  (i.e.  in  thy  presence)  I did  sin. 

mbs  terl  tol  hi,  teri  agayd  nl  tori,  I did  thy  service,  I did  not  break  thy  orders. 

se  tusse  kos-phd  lod  thd , from  whom  did  you  buy  that  ? 

tnsso-phd  piclihau-kd  kbs-rd  chohtd  do,  whose  boy  comes  behind  you? 

The  Demonstrative  Pronouns,  also  used  as  pronouns  of  the  third  person,  have 
feminine  and  (in  the  singular)  neuter  forms.  The  latter  refer  to  inanimate  nouns, 
whether  masculine  or  feminine.  These  pronouns  are  declined  as  follows  : — 


This,  he,  she,  it. 

\ 

i 

That,  he,  she,  it. 

Masc. 

Fern* 

Neut. 

! 

i 

Masc. 

Fein. 

j 

Neut. 

1 

1 

i 

Sing. 

i 

Nom. 

eh 

ell 

eh 

se 

i se 

se 

Ag. 

inie 

€sse,  isso 

■ inie 

tinie 

i 

' t&sse,  tisse 

tinie 

Obi. 

vs 

dssau,  dssd 

i 

| etthi 

fcxS 

i ftxssau,  tdssd 

t&tthi 

Plur. 

1 

Nom. 

eh  | 

1 

eh 

eh 

se 

se 

se 

Ag- 

1 i 

ihno,  ine 

ihnie,  In  id 

ihne , ine 

tihne,  tine 

! 

| t ihnie,  tinie 

tihne , tine 

Obi. 

ihnau , in  an 

ihnit  ini 

ihnau , inau 

t thnau  tinau 

tihni , tint 

tihnau,  tinau 

ihnd,  ino 

i 

ino 

Wind,  find 

tih no,  find 

The  neuter  forms  etthi  and  tetthl  are  only  used  as  inanimate  substantives.  The 
adjectival  neuter  form  is  tes,  like  the  masculine.  So  also  the  agent  case  is  only  used  as 
a substantive ; when  these  pronouns  are  used  as  adjectives  agreeing  with  a noun  in 
the  agent  case,  the  oblique  form  is  used. 

The  oblique  form  is  often  used  by  itself,  without  any  postposition,  to  serve  as  an 
accusative  or  dative.  "With  etthi  and  tetthl,  we  may  compare  the  Kashmiri  ath,  to  this 
{neut.),  and  tath,  to  that  (neut.). 

Examples  of  the  use  of  these  pronouns  are  the  following  : — 
eh  rnpbyd  tes-khe  dd,  give  this  rupee  to  him. 

jhikhnte  leb  es-de  paneb,  bring  garments  (plur.  masc.),  put  (them)  on  (plur. 
masc.)  him. 

etthi-ri  tel,  meri  phard de-re  rokne-rl  tei,  bddfie  pharud  ki,  on  account  of  this,  in 
order  to  stop  my  complaint,  the  complainant  has  made  a complaint.  . 
ine  kdh  kore-rdkho,  what  are  these  doing/- 
se  kangdi  be-gbd,  he  became  poor. 
se  met-khe  dee-de,  give  that  to  me. 
time  gohrchi  bade-ditti , he  divided  out  the  property. 


607 


time  sfCr  zdgne-rt  khatar  khetao-dd  bhejd , he  sent  (him)  into  the  fields  to  guard 
swine.  If  we  had  “that  man  sent  him  ”,  we  should  have  to  say  tea  ddmle. 
tea  dchhd  tip,  beat  him  well. 
tea  ghin  Idgi,  compassion  came  to  him. 
tea-khe  bblua , I will  say  to  him. 

tb$  tea-kh^jun  tab  no,  thou  preparedst  a feast  for  him. 
tea-rd  jethd  bdi,  hiS  elder  brother  (was  in  the  field). 
tea-re  gole-dd  Idgd,  he  fell  on  his  neck. 

tettlu-ri  tel  tere  bdpue  bdruktadri  tadnl,  on  account  of  that  thy  father  prepared 
a feast. 

tetthi-ri  phardd  ebl  konii  0,  a complaint  of  that  must  now  be  made. 
ae  rupdye  tea-hdgo  ure.  lb,  take  those  rupees  from  him. 
tine  khuSi  mmidici,  they  celebrated  rejoicing. 

The  Reflexive  Pronoun  is  probably  dpi  or  dpu,  but  no  example  is  in  the  speci- 
mens, or  is  given  by  Mr.  Bailey.  The  genitive  dtpnd,  equivalent  in  meaning  and  use 
to  the  Hindi  apnd  ,is  of  frequent  occurrence.  Thus  : — 

ae  aUrb-re  juthe  kekure  khde-rb  apnd  pet  bbhrb-tlid,  lie  was  tilling  his  belly  with 
the  waste  busks  of  the  swine. 

aw  hi  tei-db  apne  dove  pard-nhothd,  thereupon,  T also  ran  away  in  my  fear. 
bdpue  dpne  hdli-khe  bblb,  the  father  said  to  his  servants. 
time  dp  el  gtihrchl  bade-dilli,  he  divided  out  his  own  property. 

The  declension  of  the  Relative  Pronoun  is  very  similar  to  that  of  the  demonstra- 
tives. Thus : — 


Who,  which, 

that. 

} 

Sing. 

Plur. 

1 

Maec. 

Fern. 

Neat. 

Mrwo . 

Fem. 

Neat. 

Kom. 

i 

is 

jd 

* 

is 

jo 

Ag- 

i 

1 junlS 

i 

jtfsse 

i 

junta 

junno  | 

i 

junnt 

jtinnd 

Obi. 

! /«• 

jtssau,  jtissd 

j<"  it  hi 

i 

j unns  j 

j mints 

i junne 

Examples  are : — 

jo  gbhrehi-rd  mem  badd  dsd,  ae  ma-khe  dee-de,  that  give  to  me,  which  is  my  share 
of  the  property. 

tbS  ma-khe  chheltii  bi  rii  ditto,  jutue  a kind  kordd,  thou  didst  not  give  me  even  a 
kid,  with  which  I might  have  done  rejoicing. 

terd  cliohtd,  junie  dpnl  gorhl-bari  rdde-dl  kluydnl,  thy  son,  who  wasted  his  pro- 
perty on  harlots. 

mere  bdbe-hdge  kitne  all  (mb,  junnb-h age  mukti  roti  dsd,  how  many  servants  are 
there  in  my  father’s  liouse,  to  whom  there  is  much  bread. 


568 


WESTERN  PAHArI. 


The  Interrogative  Pronoun  is. very  similarly  declined  : — 


| Sing. 

Plur. 

Maac. 

! 

1 

| Pern. 

i 

Kent. 

i 

Masc. 

Fem. 

Neut. 

I 

! 

Nom. 

kun 

J 

1 

1 

j kun 

kdh 

kun 

kun 

kdh 

Ag. 

kunfe 

| kt8SG 

kunle 

kunne 

kunnl 

kunne 

Obi. 

k*s 

| lets  sail,  kfissfi 

kdnnl 

kunne 

kunnle 

kunne 

Examples  are  : — 

rne  kdh  kore-rdkho,  what  arc  these  doing  ? 

tusso-phd  pichhau-kd  kos-rd  chohld  do , whose  hoy  comes  behind  you  ? 

se  tuese  kos-phd  Idd-thd,  from  whom  did  you  buy  that  ? 

The  Indefinite  Pronouns  arc  kol,  anyone,  someone  ; and  ki£  or  kuchh,  anything, 
something.  Kol  has  an  agent  knnie,  and  an  oblique  form  kos.  RlS  and  kuchh  do  not 
change  in  declension.  Jo- kdh  is  ‘whoever  ’,  jd-klS  or  jd-kuchh,  whatever. 

Examples  are : — 

tes  kol  khdne-khe  nd  deo-thd,  no  one  gave  him  to  cat. 

jd-k,l£  ma-ge  gdhrl-bdrl  d,  whatever  property  is  mine  (is  thine). 

Verbs-  A.— Auxiliary  Verbs  and  Verbs  Substantive.— The  present  tense  is 
thus  conjugated: — 

I am,  etc. 


Singular. 


Plural. 


1.  I'isstif  dsu,  or  u* 


flssil,  asu9  u . 


2.  ttse,  a*?,  at. 


<*$80,  (Yso,  6. 


3.  fissa,  t ss <3,  (Isa,  3 , o. 


dssri,  Cl$sd9  aD&i  dso3  an. 


It  will  be  seen  that  there  are  three  sets  of  forms.  The  first  commences  with  a short 
<5,  followed  by  double  ss,  the  second  commences  with  d,  followed  by  a single  *,  and  the 
t.hird  is  a simple  vowel  or  diphthong.  In  the  third  person  the  termination  may  be  either 
d or  6,  according  to  the  general  law  that  final  d and  o are  interchangeable,  but  the  usual 
forms  are  ossd,  asd,  d and  o.  Sometimes  u is  found  instead  of  the  last. 

There  is  a negative  form  of  the  present,  nth  dnthi,  which  is  the  same  for  all  persons 
of  both  numbers. 


, The  past  is  thid  or  thd ; plur.,  thle  or  the ; fern,  (both  numbers)  thi.  Like  the  Hindi 
tha  it  does  not  change  for  person. 

The  verb  ‘to  become  * is  ohnu,  the  past  participle  of  which  is  oa.  Rctuhnu  or  round, 
to  remain,  is  also  used  as  an  auxiliary.  Its  past  participle  is  rdhd  or  rod.  Bod  is  often 
used  to  mean  ‘ I am  \ With  Idge,  as  in  Idgc-rdd,  it  is  used  to  form  a definite  present. 


kiiJthali.  569 

Examples  of  the  Auxiliary  verbs  will  bo  found  under  the  heading  of  the  active  verb. 
The  following  are  examples  of  the  Verb  Substantive  - 

terd  kdh  net  dsso,  what  is  thy  name  ? 

ea  gbhre-rl  kdh  ummdj * oaad,  what  is  the  age  of  this  horse  ? 
jo  gdhreht-rd  merd  hadd  dsd,  (that)  which  is  my  share  of  the  property. 
junno-hdge  muktl  roil  dad , to  whom  there  is  much  bread. 

jd-klS  md-ge  gohri-barl  d,  se  sdbbi  terd  d,  whatever  property  is  mine  that  all  is 
yours. 

mere  bdbe-hage  kitne  dll  dssd,  how  many  servants  there  are  to  my  father  ! 
tere  bad-re  gauhre  kitne  bagehr  dsd,  how  many  sons  ate  there  in  thy  father’s 
house  ? 

tes-rd  jethd  bdi  khetab-dd  tlild,  his  elder  brother  was  in  the  field. 

se  ebt  dur  thd,  he  was  still  distant  (when  his  father  saw  him). 

ekl  ddml-re  do  bagehr  the,  of  a certain  man  there  were  two  sons. 

nd  mdlird  ghdl-mathdl  oa,  no  fight  took  place  between  us. 

sobbl  jhone  Suran  be,  all  the  people  became  astonished. 

aw  terd  chdhld  bohie  zdgd  nd  rod,  I am  not  worthy  to  be  called  tby  son. 

tu  daihre-ra  ma-sdtlil  rod,  thou  art  ever  with  me. 

Active  Verb— The  Infinitive  or  Verbal  Noun  is  formed  by  adding  »«  (or  nu) 
to  the  root.  Thus,  tipnu  or  tipnu,  to  strike.  After  l,  r,  r,  rh,  or  n,  the  nu  (nu)  becomes 
nil  (mi).  Thus  kornu  or  kornu,  to  do.  Its  oblique  form  ends  in  ne  (ne)  ; thus , tipue, 
korne.  Examples  of  the  use  of  the  oblique  form  of  the  infinitive  are  : — 

8itr  zdgne-ri  khdtar , for  feeding  swine. 

muktl  roll  khdne-deue-khe  dsd,  there  is  much  bread  for  eating,  and  giving 
away. 

bltre  zdnc-ri-tei  bhdjd,  he  refused  to  go  inside. 
khuSl  korne  poro,  it  is  proper  to  do  rejoicing. 

Sometimes  the  infinitive  has  a passive  signification,  as  in  terd  chdhta  bdlne  zogd  nd 
rod,  I am  not  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son. 

The  Present  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  dd  (or  do)  to  the  root.  Its  oblique 
masculine  ends  in  de,  and  its  feminine  in  dl.  Thus  ft  pda,  striking,  masculine  oblique 
fipde , feminine  tipdi.  Examples  are : — 

mere  kandre  tipdd  daurd,  he  ran  beating  in  my  direction. 
nhothde  nhothde , while  running,  i.e.  as  I ran. 

The  oblique  form  is  sometimes  used  as  an  infinitive  of  purpose,  as  in  aw  badaro  siw 
Idunde  loe  gdd-thd,  I had  taken  the  brotherhood  to  fix  the  boundary. 

The  last  sentence  is  an  example  of  a verb  whose  root  ends  in  a vowel.  T hese  add 
ndd  ( ndo ) instead  of  dd  (do).  So : — 
detinu,  to  go,  has  deunda  ; 

raunu  or  ranked,  to  remain,  has  raundd  or  rauhndd  ; 

Zand,  to  go,  has  zdndd  ; 
aund,  to  come,  has  aundd. 

The  verb  blind,  to  become,  is  irregular,  making  its  present  participle  hunda. 


€70 


WESTERN  PAHARl. 


Like  the  Future  Passive  Participle,  to  be  presently  described,  this  participle  is  often 
•construed  with  the  oblique  genitive,  and  then  has  a potential  passive  meaning.  Mr. 
Bailey  gives  the  following  examples : — 

mahre  nth  dendo,  (as  for)  our  (case),  there  is  no  giving,  i.e.  wo  cannot  give. 
tere  nth  deundo  dnthl,  (as  for)  thy  (case),  there  is  no  going,  i.e.  thou  canst  not  go. 
meri  batthne-re  kitab  nth  porhdi,  (as  for)  my  sister’s  (case),  the  book  cannot  be 
read,  i.e.  my  sister  cannot  read  the  book. 

The  Past  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  d (or  5)  to  the  root.  Thus  tipd  (tipd), 
struck.  Examples  will  bo  found  under  the  head  of  the  past  tense.  The  following  past 
participles  are  irregular : — 

Post  Participle. 

oh  tin,  to  become,  da. 

zdnu , go,  god. 

lannii,  to  take,  Ida. 

raunu  or  rauhnii,  to  remain,  rod  or  rohd. 

kornu , to  do,  keii  or  kiu  (fem.  ki),  or  kittd. 

deyu,  to  give,  dittd. 


a li  n'd,  to  come,  ayd. 

khdnd , to  eat,  khdyd. 

pind,  to  drink,  piyd. 

deund,  to  go,  dead. 


A compound  past  participle,  corresponding  to  tipd  hundd,  in  the  state  of  being 
struck,  is  given  by  Mr.  Bailey. 


The  Future  Passive  Participle  is  the  same  in  form  as  the  infinitive  and  makes 
its  feminine  in  ni  (or  m).  Thus,  tetthi-ri  pharad  korni  o,  of  that  a complaint  is  to  be 
made,  i.e.  (I)  shall  make  a complaint. 

Like  the  present  participle,  this  participle  is  often  construed  with  tho  oblique  geni- 
tive case.  Mr.  Bailey  gives  the  following  examples.: — 

mere  bai-rc  nth  dead,  (as  for)  my  brother’s  (case),  it  is  not  to  be  given,  i.e.  my 
brother  has  not  to  give. 

tee-re  chiS  pint,  (as  for)  his  (case),  water  is  to  bo  drunk,  i.e.  he  has  to  drink 
water. 

The  Conjunctive  Participle  is  made  by  adding  e to  the  root,  but  this  form  is 
mostly  confined  to  compound  verbs,  q.v.  The  usual  conjunctive  participle  adds  ro  to 
this,  as  in  tipe-rd,  having  struck.  This  form  is  not  given  by  Mr.  Bailey,  who  gives 
instead  a form  equivalent  to  tipe-au , but  such  a form  does  not  occur  in  the  specimens.1 
Examples  of  the  ro  form  are  : — 

dpni  golirchi  katthi  kore-rd,  having  made  his  property  together. 

teti  zde-ro,  having  gono  there  (he  wasted  his  substance).  ^ 

suro-re  juthe  Sekure  khde-rd,  having  eaten  the  waste  husks  of  the  swino.  m 

The  Noun  Of  Agency  is  formed  by  adding  t ed/d  to  the  oblique  infinitive.  Thus, 
fiprieicdld,  a striker.  As  an  example,  we  can  quote  : — 

ga  Koti-ra  basnetcdld,  (I  am)  an  inhabitant  of  village  Koti. 


* Thi»  is  probably  (ipt-rau  (*>.  -rS) . with  the  r elided.  The  elision  of  r is  a marked  peculiarity  of  thelPiteoba  languages 
•of  the  North-West  Frontier. 


KlDTHALl. 


671 


The  second  person  singular  of  the  Imperative  is  tlie  same  in  form  as  the  root. 
The  second  person  plural  adds  d (or  a).  Thus  ftp,  strike  thou  ; tipd  (or  tipd),  strike  ye. 


Irregular  are 

aurid,  to  come, 

Imperative 

2nd  Sing. 

a, 

2nd  Plur. 

ad  or  a. 

denu,  to  give. 

de, 

deb  or  dd  (dd) 

laupd,  to  take. 

lau  or  le, 

led  or  Id. 

deunu,  to  go, 

dau  or  de, 

deo  or  (fd. 

The  following  are  examples  of  the  Imperative 


2nd  Sing. — 

se  ma-khe  dee-de,  give  thou  to  me. 

ma-khe  apne  hdli-maje  rdkli,  keep  me  amongst  thy  servants. 

tes-pdnde  zin  tear , put  the  saddle  upon  him. 

roHl  sat  hi  bank,  bind  him  with  ropes. 

kue-dd  chii  art,  bring  water  from  the  well. 

ma-da  gdd-kd  de,  walk  before  me. 

2nd  Plural. — 


dchhe  dchhe  jhikhute  led , ex-de  paneo.  JIdthd-ri  gnnthi-klie  clihap,  dr  Idto-khS- 
pdtii  deo,  bring  ye  very  good  garments,  (and)  put  ye  (them)  on  him. 
Give  a ring  for  the  finger  of  his  hand  and  shoes  for  his  feet. 
eh  rupoya  tes-khe  dd,  give  ye  this  rupee  to  him. 
se  rupoyo  tes-hdgb  ure  Id,  take  those  rupees  from  him. 

The  Present  Indicative  is  conjugated  as  follows  : — 

I shall,  etc. 


Singular. 

1.  tipd, 

2.  tipe, 

3.  tipd,  tipd. 


Mural. 


tipd,  tipd. 
lipo,  tipd. 


The  Present  Subjunctive.  “ I may  strike  ”,  ‘(if)  I strike’,  etc.  is  similarly  conju- 
gated, except  that  the  3rd  person  singular  is  tipe. 

It  will  be  observed  that  in  the  above  paradigm  there  is  the  usual  optional  inter- 
change of  o and  d. 

Some  verbs  present  slight  irregularities.  Thus,  auijiu,  to  come,  lias  its  1st  person 
singular  dd;  deunu,  to  go,  has  deu  ; and  la unu,  to  take,  lait,  and  so  on  respectively  for 
the  other  persons. 

Examples  of  the  present  Indicative  are : — 

se  fibbe  pdnde  paid  tsdro,  he  is  grazing  cattle  on  the  hill-top. 

merd  bdo  tea  mhdthre  gauhro-dd  rauhd,  my  father  dwells  in  that  small  house. 

tuasd-phd  pichhau-kd  kds-rd  chohtd  do,  whose  boy  comes  behind  you  ? 

Por  the  Present  Subjunctive,  we  have : — * 

khdd,  pid,  moj  kord,  let  us  eat,  let  us  drink,  let  us  make  rejoicing. 

A Present  Definite  may  be  formed  by  adding  the  verb  substantive  to  the  simple 
present,  as  in  tipd  osso,  he  is  striking ; but  more  usually  it  is  formed  by  adding  Idge  rod 
either  to  the  present  participle  or  to  the  oblique  form  of  the  infinitive. 

TOt.  IX,  PART  IT.  4 !•  a • 


672 


WESTERN  PAHArL 


The  word  rod  is  the  past  tense  of  raunu,  to  remain,  and  is  treated  as  the  past  tense 
of  an  intransitive  verb.  Thus  a tipdd  lage  roa  or  a tlpne  lage  rod , I am  striking.  The 
only  example  in  the  specimens  is  : — 

a etl  bliiikhd  morne  lage  rod , 1 here  am  dying  of  hunger. 

Another  form  equivalent  to  the  present  definite  is  made  by  conjugating  rdkha  (6),  he 
was  kept,  with  the  shortest  form  of  the  conjunctive  participle.  Rdkha,  being  the  past 
tense  of  a transitive  verb,  requires  the  subject  to  be  in  the  agent  case.  Thus,  mod  tipe 
rdkha , by  me,  having  beaten,  he  was  kept,  i.e.  I am  beating  him.  So  in  the  parable,  the 
elder  son  asks  his  servant  Ine  kah  kore-rdkho , what  are  these  (people)  doing  ? 

The  Imperfect  is  formed  by  conjugating  the  present  with  the  past  tense  of  the 
verb  substantive.  Thus,  a tlpii  thd,  I was  boating.  Similarly,  in  the  parable  we 
have : — 

se  stfro-re  juthe  Seknre  khde-ro  dpnd  pel  hohro-thd , he  was  filling  his  belly  with 
the  waste  husks  of  the  swine. 

tee  koi  khdne-khe  nit  deo-thd,  no  one  was  giving  him  to  eat. 

The  Future  is  conjugated  as  follows.  It  changes  for  gender : — 


1 

2 


Singular.  Plural. 


Muse. 

| '! 

1 Fem.  ; 

i • 

j i 

Masc. 

Fem, 

■ 

fipua,  tipiimfi 

! ! 

1 V , "V  s 

. {ip&T,  (ipu  ml  ! 

! I 

tiptiviG 

tip  umi 

tlpela  (-10) 

i tlpeli 

! 1 

tipole 

tipoli 

tipol.X  (-7/5) 

! 1 

[ tipoli  ! 

l i 

tipnlp 

tipoli 

As  examples  we  have 

a to  ethib  bdpu-lidge  deua,  hor  tes-khe  holua , I will  go  from  here  to  my  father,  and 
will  say  to  him. 

The  Fast  Conditional  is  formed,  exactly  as  in  Hindi,  by  using  the  present  parti- 
ciple without  any  auxiliary.  Thus,  tlpdd , (if)  I had  struck,  I should  have  struck  (if), 
I might  have  struck.  So,  in  the  parable,  we  have  : — 

chheltit,  juttie  a dpne  sathisavgi  khuS  kdrdd,  a kid  with  which  I might  have 
made  rejoicing  with  my  friends. 

The  Fast  Tense  is  formed  exactly  as  in  Hindi.  The  Past  participle  alone  is  used. 
In  the  case  of  transitive  verbs,  the  participle  is  passive,  and  the  subject  is  put  in  the  case 
of  the  agent,  exactly  as  in  Hindi. 

Thus,  mod  tipu,  he  was  struck  by  me ; mo%  fipi,  she  was  struck  by  me,  and  so  on. 
If  will  ba  remembered  that,  according  to  the  usual  rule,  the  masculine  past  participle 
can  end  either  in  d or  o (in  the  case  of  keu,  done,  it  ends  in  «).  Thus,  fipd  or  fipo. 
The  masculine  plural  ends  in  e,  as  in  tipe,  and  the  feminine  singular  and  plural  in  i 
as  in  tipi. 


kiCtealI.  573 

The  following  are  examples  of  the  past  tense  of  intransitive  verbs : — 
beSudd  pdfd  rolid,  I remained  fallen  senseless. 
a dj  bahutd  handd,  I have  walked  a long  way  to-day. 
dur  p&rdeSo-khe  dead , he  went  to  a far  country. 
teti  box  a kdl  pord , there  a great  famine  fell  (cf.  poro,  below). 
se  kangdi  de-god , he  became  poor. 
se  uthd,  he  arose. 

jdbe  se  gauhro-re  neure  dgd,  when  he  came  near  the  house. 

hamd  khuil  korne  pord,  it  fell  to  us  to  do  rejoicing,  i.e.  it  is  proper  for  us  to  do 
rejoicing. 

ekl  ghane-pdnde  hamS  gode,  we  quarrelled  about  a wall. 

jdbe  hanii  sobbl  jhdtie  stioe-pdnde  puje,  when  wo  all  arrived  at  the  boundary. 
dpne  dpne  hdgo-khe  deue,  they  went  each  to  his  own  house. 
jdbe  tes  hid  di , when  memory  came  to  him. 

The  following  are  examples  of  the  past  tense  of  transitive  verbs  : — 
moe  tes-rd  clidhtd  tipd,  I have  beaten  his  son. 
mdS  pap  kew,  I have  done  sin  (cf.  kittd , below). 
td$  ma-klie  chheltu  bi  rii  ditto , thou  didst  not  give  me  even  a kid. 
toS  tes-kbe  jun  tsdnd,  thou  preparedst  a feast  for  him. 
kanchhe  bagehre  dpne  bdo-hdge  bold,  the  younger  son  said  to  his  father. 
time  site  zagne-ri  khdtar  khetso-dd  bhejd,  he  sent  him  into  the  fields  to  feed 
swine. 

bddiie  ma-pdnde  bad  kittd,  the  complainant  made  a complaint  upon  me. 
moe  terl  tol  ki,  teri  agaga  nl  tori,  I did  thy  service,  I did  not  break  thy  com- 
mands. 

time  dp  til  gohrehl  bade-ditti,  he  divided  out  his  property  and  gave  it. 
tine  khuH  mandwl,  they  celebrated  rejoicing. 

The  Perfect  |S  rarely  used,  the  Past  being  commonly  used  in  the  sense  of  the 
perfect,  as  in  several  of  the  above  examples.  AVhen  the  perfect  is  used  it  may  be  made 
as  in  Hindi,  by  adding  the  present  tense  of  the  verb  substantive  to  the  past  participle,  as 
in  mod  tipd  osso,  I have  struck  him,  or  by  a circumlocution,  as  in  : — 

terd  bai  ethld  de-roa,  thy  brother  having  come  here  remained,  i.e.  thy  brother  is 
come  (Hindi  d rahd). 

The  Pluperfect  is  made  as  in  Hindi,  with  the  past  tense  of  the  verb  substantive, 
as  in  mod  tipd-tlid,  T had  struck.  The  tense  is  often  used  to  indicate  something  which 
occurred  a long  time  ago.  Examples  are  : — 

met'd  chohtd  more  god-tfid,  my  son  had  died,  i.e.  died  long  ago. 

rdchd-thd , he  was  lost  (a  long  time  ago). 

se  tnsse  kos-phd  Idd-thd,  from  whom  did  you  buy  that  ? 

Oftener  tho  sense  of  the  true  pluperfect  is  indicated  by  a completive  compound  (Hid. 
post),  as  in  : — 

jdbe  sob  kliov-rd  mukd,  when  he  had  squandered  everything. 

The  Passive  Voioe  is  formed  as  in  Hindi,  with  zanu,  to  go,  ns  in  a tipd  zdu,  T am 
being  beaten,  but  it  is  seldom  used. 


574  WESTERN  PAHiRt. 

Causal  Verb8  are,  as  a rule,  formed  by  adding  au  to  the  root.  Thus,  fipauriu  (with, 
the  * shortened),  to  cause  to  strike ; tsugaunu,  to  cause  to  graze. 

The  Past  of  such  verbs  ends  in  dyd,  as  in  tipdyd. 

Irregular  is  khiynnnu,  to  cause  to  eat,  Past  khiydnd,  as  in  junie  dpni  gdhri-bdri 
ratde-di  khiydni , who  has  caused  his  property  to  be  devoured  on  (i.e.  by)  harlots. 

There  are  the  usual  Compound  Verbs.  The  specimens  only  contain  examples  of 
rntensives  and  Completives.  Mr.  Bailey  gives  Frequentatives  and  Oontinuatives. 

Intensives  are  formed  with  the  short  form  ol*  the  conjunctive  participle,  and  are 
as  common  as  in  Hindi. 

Thus,  to  quote  a few  from  the  specimens,  wc  have : — 
dee-denu,  to  give  away. 
bSde  denn , to  share  out. 
be  zanu,  to  take  place. 
more  zariu,  to  die. 

loe  zdnu , to  take  away  (not  a true  intensive). 

For  Frequentative 8 Mr.  Bailey  gives  a rlre  korii,  I am  in  the  habit  of  falling. 

For  Continuatives  Mr.  Bailey  gives  se  rlrdd  rohd  Idge  hundd , he  continues  to  fall,, 
he  keeps  on  falling. 

Completives  are  formed  with  muknu,  to  complete,  with  the  full  conjunctive  parti- 
ciple in  -ro,  as  in  : — 

jobe  sob  khoe-ro  mukd , when  he  completely  squandered  all,  used,  as  explained 
above,  in  the  sense  of  a pluperfect. 


[ No.  I.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


575 


Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAHARI  (KlftTIIALl). 

Standard  Sub-dialect.  State  Keonthax. 

Specimen  I. 

ft  $ i toH£  wrm  srrft-Trf  ftTO  f 
ft  TOft-TT  tot  frro  toto  % fMi  frj  f 1 tot  faffa  ^§>#  ^rnrft 

TOtft  fri  ffft  i ft%-TO  fro  wm  wrrft  TOft 

* • ^ 

W§t  TO-ft  %^TO  ffT  ?ift  ^TTCr-Tt  TO^ft  wit-vit 

fHt-ft  ftf  i to  to  fta-ft  gro  to  irft  tot  tot  ftr 
S tot*  ftcr  ft^n  i to  to  xrft  ^ft-fTf  ftro  i to 

ffftrr  #r  ^TTO-ft  *nro  Swt-^t  tot  i ftT  fr  fft-f 
wro-ft  ^tttot  to  vrft-^rr  i T^rr  to  fti  ^t%#  *tt  fft-^T  i srf 
?ftr  ^ ^rri  to  ftft  ff  to-tS  ff to  ^£t  tot  TOt-^Tf  TO<?t 

ft^t  ff-fr  ^TOT  ^TT  ^fT  Ufft  TOT  TOf  «TT»T  ft^TT  I fN 

©V 

trffft  ^TWTPT  %TOT  ft?  TO-%  ftTOT  t 3TTOTT  ftf  rtf  TO*  • 

Sift-TT  TOT  TOT  I TO  TO  ftZT  ftTO  ft*T  *TT  ftTO  I fMI 
TOf  ¥T^t  *T§  TTO  | f TOT  TO!  WT^-TO  i^^TT  I % *#t  fT 
*T  TOJJT  TOST  | TO  fTO  TO^ft  TO[  ftf-ft  TO-f  TO-^T  TOTT  TO! 
wNt  ff tJT  I TO-f  ft Z ftft  f t SPJTO  TO  TOf  TOfTTOt-TTftf 
TO  fNi  TO  TO  TOT  ftet  ft*T%  fpIT  TO  ftTO  I TO  mm  TOTOT 

TOalt-fr  ftft  % TOt  ^Tt  f wwt  TOt  TO-f  TOfT  l TOft-ft  f^t-f 

WT  TO  TOft-fr  TOft  fft  I *IT3i  fN  ft5T  to;  % TOT  ftTO  ftf 
ftTO-TO  ft*  ftTO  I TT^T-TO  STTt  ftTO  I Cff  ftf  ^ft  TOTTft  II 

ftf  TOT-TT  TOT  TOf  #ft-^T  ftTO  I TO  f ftft-f  TO>f  TO2IT 
ffftTT  TOTO  iTTf-TT  TO^  ^TO  l ff  ftq  TOTTO  ¥T^t  TOTO  TO 

gro  f ^»T¥  ff  Trft  i fdftu  TO-ff  ftft  f % to  mk  Trftro 


576  WKSTJSBN  PAJSA.fl. 

TO*X  TlTO  I Tit  Tflfr  *^-Tt  * R TtTO  T^ft-lt  Tit 

wro  wroiTfr  i % Tit  Ttt  *t*t  wi-fi  Tit 

wit  i Ttaj-ro  to<^  Tit  writer  w to  ?tar  TOift-#  fta-rftro  i Tit 

tTTTfnT  TOTO  TOJ-VTn  WIT  TIT  TO*  Tw  ?TP7  TrCr  3®  TO  TTCT  TOT 
ft  ft$  to  ttP!  wit  Tit  *?f-Ti  ft  ft  f^ft  ft  to! 

mft  fft  tot  toto  i to  TiTT  frzr  wit  TOfa  TOroSt  ^-roft 
tft-#  froret  Ft#  TtaHt  to  ^poT  i frofhr  Ttar-w  ft*t  ii  *trr 
^ tft^T  *f-Wt  ftTO  I *t-T#h£  ft-f  TOt-*TTft  TO  t TT#i?ift  TO  I 

to*  irf  Tif-rit  fttt  uft  TOt  n*t  i ffa  £r  3tt  *ft  *> 

ttro-ro  Titi  *W  ttTto  i Tit  ttro-ro  trft  ftz  ftTO  11 


577 


[ No.  I.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 


WESTERN  PAHARI  (KlftTHALl). 

StandAd  Sub-dialect.  State  Keonthal.' 

Specimen  I. 


TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 


Eki-admi-re  do 
A-certain-man-of  two 
bola  je,  ‘ jo 

it-was-said  that,  * what 
• deb-dc.’  Tbbe  tinle 

give-away.'  Then  by-him 

Thbre-jae  dailire-da  phire 

*Afew-mdeed  days-from  aftei' 

' kbrS-rb  dur-pbrde5b-kke 

made-having  a-far-country-to 


Kan  chhe-bagehre 


apne-bao-h'agc 


bagehr  the. 
sons  were.  By-the-younger-son  his-own  father-to 

gbhrchi-r&  mera  bsda  asa,  se  ma-khe 

property -of  my  share  is , that  me- to 


apni 

his-own 


dui-khe 
the-two-lo 

kanchbe-bagelire 
by-the-younger-80  n 
deua,  hbr 

it-was-gone,  and 


gbhrchi 

property 


bade-ditti. 
icas-divided-ou t. 


lbti-poti  £auki-dl  khol.  -Jobe  sbb 

gqods-cliattels  debauchery-in  to  as-lost.  When  all 

tbbe  teti  bbra  kal  pora,  hbr  se 

then  there  a-great  famine  felly  and  he 

t§s-mulkb-de  eki-admi-hage  rba. 

that-counti'y-in  a-certain-man-to  he-remained. 


apni 

gbhrchi 

katthi 

his-own 

property 

together 

teti 

zae-ro 

apni 

there  gone-having 

his-own 

klibe-rb 

muka, 

been-lost-having  was-fn  ished. 

karigal 

be-gba. 

Tbbe 

poor 

became. 

Then 

Tbbe 

tinle 

sur 

Then 

by-him 

swine 

zagne-ri 


khatar  khctso-da 

watching-of  for-th  e-sake  the-ficlds-in 
juthe  gekure  khae-ro  apna 

waste  husks  caten-having  Ms-own 

koi  kb&ne-khe  na  deo-tha. 

anyone  eating-for  not  gioing-was. 


bolb,  * mere-babe-h&go 

it-was-said,  1 my  father- to 

roti  khanb-dene-khe  asa, 
bread  eating-giving  for  is. 
Aw  bthib  b&pu-liage 
I ffom-here  the-father-to 

VOL  LX,  PART  IT. 


kitno 

how-many 


bheja.  Hbr  se 

he-was-sent.  And  he 

pet  bbhrb-tka.  Raka 

belly  he-filling-was.  Other 

Jbbe  tbs  Sud  &t, 

When  to-him  memory  came , 

bssb,  junno-hage 


servants  are, 


whom-to 


surb-re 
theswine-of 
tbs 

to-him 

tbbe 

then 

mukfi 

much 


lage-roa. 


6v  a 6ti  bhtikha  mbrne 

and  I here  hungry  to-die  engaged-remained. 

deua,  hbr  tes-khe  bolus,  “he  bapua, 

will- go,  and  him- to  I-will-say,  “ O fathet 

4 s 


578 


WESTERN  PAHlRI. 


mol  ta-hunde  P6rmeSwa’r6-ra  l)6ra  pap  keu.  A\v  tcra 

by-me  thy-whil  e-being  Ood-of  great  sin  toas-done.  I thy 

chohta  bolno  zoga  11a  roa.  M5-klie  apne-hali-msje 

son  i o-say  Jit  not  remained.  Me  ( acc .)  thine-own-sercants-among 

rakli.”  * Sc  utliii,  or  bapu-hage  deua.  So  obi  dur 

keep ' lie  arose,  and  thc-Jather-to  •rent.  lie  still  distant 

thil,  bap  tie  dekha.  Tes  ghin  lag!,  Sr  daurg-ro 

teas,  by-the  father  he-icas-secn.  To-him  compassion  came,  and  run- having 

tes-re  gSle-da  laga,  or  pkaya,  ditta.  Tes-ro  cholite 

him-of  neck-on  he- icas-at  tach  ed,  and  a-kiss  icas-gicen.  Him-of  by-the-son 

bolo  jo,  ‘ho  baptia,  tere-dekhde  PormoSwaro-ra  moO  pap 

it-icas-said  that,  ‘ O father,  in-tliy-seeing  God-of  by-me  sin 

* keu,  or  5w  tora  cliobta  bolno  zoga  11a  roa.’ 

tcas-done,  and  I thy  son  to-say  worthy  not  I-remaincd.' 

Tobo  bapuc  apne-hali-klic  bolo  jo,  ‘achlie  acbhe 

Then  by-the-father  his-oicn-sercants-to  it-was-said  that,  ‘ good  good 
jhikhute  loo,  es-de  paneo.  Hatho-ri  gunthi-khe  olihap, 

clothes  bring,  this-one-one  put-on.  The-hand-of  fmger-for  a-ring, 

or  lato-khc  pani  , doo.  Khan,  pm,  moj 

and  thc-fcel-lo  shoes  give.  Let-us-eat , tet-us-drink,  merriment 

korii,  je  inora  chohta  more-goa-tha,  jie-goa ; 

let-us-make,  that  my  son  hac ing-d i ed-gone- was,  having-lived-went ; 

racha-tlia,  pluibe-goa.’  Tflbfi  tine  khu6I 

lost-teas,  having-been-found-went.’  Then  by- them  rejoicing 

manawi. 
was-celeb  rated. 

T6bo  tes-ra  jet  ha  bai  khetso-da  this.  JSbe  sc  gauhr6-ro 

Then  him-of  the-etder  brother  the-field-in  teas.  TVhen  he  the-honse-of 

neiire  ay  a,  time  naclinc-gane-ra  lad  £una.  Time  tobe 

near  came,  by-him  dancing-singing-of  noise  was-heard.  Hy-him  then 

apna  hall  £ada,  or  puchlia  jo,  * ine  kali 

his-own  servant  teas- called,  and  it-was-asked  that , ‘ by-these  what 

kore-rakho  ? ’ Tinic  tes-khe  bolo  jo,  * tcra  bai  ethia 

is-being-done  ? ’ 13 y- him  him-to  it-was-said  that , * thy  brother  here 

aS-roa.  Gauhro-ri-tei  raji  khuSi  6t§-ro 

come-has.  The-house-of-f or  (i.e.  to)  happy  rejoicing  returned-having 

ae-roa,  tetthi-ri-tei  tero-bapue  baraktsari  tgani.'  Se 

he-come-has,  that-of-for  by-thy-father  feasting  was-prepared'  Se 

t&be  b8fe  roS2-ad,  bltrc  zane-ri-tei  bhaja.  T8s-ra 

then  much  angered , within  going-  of -for  it-was- ref  used*  Him-of 


kiUthali. 


579“ 


bapu  tfibe  baeda  aya,  5r  tfis  patero-klifi  lee-goa. 

the-father  then  outside  came,  and  him  appeasing -for  took-away. 

Tfibe  tinlc  apne-bapu-hagf  bolo  jo,  ' ‘itno-borso  mo? 

Then  by-him  his-oivn-father-to  it-was-said  that,  tfor-so-many  -years  by -me 

ten  tfil  ki,  teri  agaya  ni  tori,  fir  to? 

thy  service  teas- done,  thy  command  not  icas-broken , and  by-thce 

ajo-tel  ma-khe  chbcltu  bl  ni  ditto,  junio  a 

today -up- to  me-to  a- kid  even  not  tcas-given,  by-which  I 

apne-sathi  sang!  khuS  kfirda.  Jfibc  tora  chfihta 

my-oion-companions  with  rejoicing  might-have-made.  When  thy  son 

aya,  junie  apni  gfirhi-bari  rgde-di  khiyanl,  to? 

came,  by-whom  his-own  property  harlots-ou  was-caused-to-be-caten,  by-thee 


tes-khe  jun  tsano.’ 

him-for  a-fcast  was-prepared' 

‘bagelira,  tu  daihre-ra  ma-sathi 

‘ son,  thou  days-of  nie-witli 

a,  so  sfibbi  teri  ii. 

is,  that  all  thine  is. 


Tinlo  tes-kho  bolo  jo, 

By-him  him-to  it-was-said  that, 

roa.  Jo-ki?  mS-tro  gohrl-bari 

remainedst.  Whatever  me-to  property 

Aj  oil  -to!  nilta  balin' 

Today  this-one  me-to  was-got  for- ns 


khu4i  kfirno  pfiro ; koe  jo  tora  bai  mfire-goa-thri, 

rejoicing  to-do  is-proper  ; why  that  thy  brother  h a v i n g- died -you e- was, 

obi  jie-goa ; raclie-goa-tba,  obi  mite-goa.’ 

now  having-lived-went ; hoving-bcen-lost-gone-was,  now  having-been-got-went' 


rot.  IX,  PART  IT. 


4 e 2 


580 


[ No.  2.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAHlRl  (KIAtHALI). 

Standard  Sub-dialect.  State  Keonthal. 


Specimen  II. 

iTTT  5TT  TTT^t  | W*  TR-TT  wf  | WTcT  I iff  Wt^t-TT 

©\  C\ 

TOnRT36T  n 

tfNtt  TOTTO  ^ f%WT  I ^ £frn  I 

*rr  ^ttt  i qsft  to  xri%  to  Ri  i tot 

TOTTt  TO-ft  sTTTO  <Stq  iTt^rr  ?TT  I 5R  TW  TO  #fif-qTq 

TO  TO  cfT^q  TIT#  f^T?t  I TO  WT  ^R*TTT  ^ST  TO5* 

to  wrq  i ^nrq^i  toA-#  %to  i tot  ft  Ai-ft  tort 

XTTT  ^#t5T  | TOT  ^TTrT  ttftSWT  I TOTW  TOT 

•C\ 

%*jqT  TOT  TTTT  I qT^q  % wf-RT^  TOT-ft  TOSt  q%TT 

TOiq  l qft-ft  TO  Aft  XfiTTq-T  At  qT^q 

| WT  ^Tft  At-TOft  f^rft  Aft-ft  TOTq  qft  ^ II 


581 


£ No.  2.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

•WESTERN  PAIIARI  (KlftTIIALl). 

Standard  Sub-dialect.  State  Keontiial. 

Specimen  II. 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 


Mcra  na  Madho. 

My  name  Madho. 

Ga  Koti-ra  basnewala. 
Village  Koli-of  inhabitant. 

Badue 

By-the-complainant 
Mol  badu 

By-me  the-complainant 
EkI-ghane-pande  harnl 
One-icall-npon  we 

sTw  launde 

boundary  for -fixing 

siwe-paude  puje 

the-boun  da  ry-upo  n arrived,  then 
J6be  mere-kanare  tipila 


Mcre-bapu-ra  ns  Sadliu.  Jat  Kanet. 

My-father-of  name  Sddhu.  Caste  Kanait. 


ma-pande  chanchakh  j hut  hie  bad  kitta. 

me-upon  gratuitous  false  complaint  was-made. 

ui  tlpa.  Na  niahra  ghal-matliOl  Ca. 

not  ic  as-beaten.  Not  of-tts  fighting  look-place. 

gdde.  Tetie 

quarrelled.  There 


loe-goa-tha. 


aw 

I 

Jobe 

t a ken  -a  icay-h  ad.  IF  hen 

tObe  badue 

by-the-com plainanl 
daura,  sObbi 


badaro 

gliano-ri 

the-brctherhoocl 

the-wall-of 

hanie 

sobbi 

jbdue 

ice 

all 

persons 

sObbl-ri 

gfili 

ditti. 

all-of 

abuse 

was  given. 

jbdue 

3 lira  n 

Oe. 

When  in-my-direction  beating  he-ran, 

Apne-ap  ne-1 : a gO-klie  (leu  e. 

Their-oicn-their-oicn-honses-to  they- went. 
para-nliOtha.  NhOthde-uhOthdc  mera 

a way -ran.  A-running-a-running  my 

tm-daihre-tei  bosuda  popii  roha. 

three-days-for  senseless  fallen  I-remained. 

je,  * nia-paude  tes-rl  gall  dene-ri 


all  persons  astonished  became. 

ASe. 

Aw  hi  tei-dO  apne-dore 

I also  there-on  in-my-oini-fear 
lat  pbr.pua.  Apne-bage 

foot  was-bursl.  In-my-oicn-honse 

Badue  zago 

By-lhe-complainant  it-  was-  thought 

SJ 

pharful  korni  0.’  EttJii-ri 


that,  * me-upon  him-of  abuse  gicing-of  complaint  to-be-made  is. 


meri-pharade-re  rOknc-ri  tel 


badue 


( 'IV 


This-of 

plmrad 


tei 

for  my-complaint-of  stopping-of  for  by-the-com plainant  causelessly  complaint 
ki.  Jo  niahrl-tei  gall  ditti,  tetthi-rl  pharful  obi 

was-made.  Because  tts-to  abuse  icas-givev,  thal-of  complaint 

k6rnl  6. 
to-be-made  is. 


now 


582 


PATIALA  KI0THALT. 

As  explained  on  p.  550  ante , KiStliali  is  spokon  in  the  Srinagar  thdnd  of  the  State 
of  Patiala,  the  estimated  number  of  speakers  being  3,000.  As  a further  example  of 
KiStliali,  a version  of  the  Parable  is  given  as  received  from  Srinagar.  A transliteration 
is  given,  but  it  has  not  been  thought  necessary  to  give  a translation  also.  The  specimen 
is  not  very  satisfactory  owing  to'  its  being  written  in  the  Persian  character,  the  reading 
of  which  sometimes  leaves  doubtful  the  forms  of  isolated  words,  but  an  effort  has  been 
made  to  correct  the  deficiencies  in  the  transliteration,  and  the  specimen  is  sufficient  to 
show  that  the  KiSthali  of  Srinagar  is  the  same  language  as  that  of  the  preceding  speci* 
mens.  The  few  differences  are  mainly  matters  of  spelling.  The  following  points  may  be 
noted : — 

The  postposition  of  the  locative  is  sometimes  de,  when  we  should  expect  dd,  as  in 
hafho-de  ehhdp , a ring  on  the  hand  ; kheho-de,  (the  elder  son  was)  in  the  field ; lundl-de, 
(wasted  thy  substance)  among  harlots. 

Near  the  end  of  the  Parable  we  have  hahye  instead  of  lidye , the  sign  of  the  dative. 

Once  or  twice  we  have  ahu  for  * T,’  and  the  nasal  of  rnS,  me,  is  often  omitted.  The 
h at  the  end  of  eh,  this,  and  kdh,  what  ? is  dropped,  and  the  word  for  anything  is  hot, 
not  k'ti  or  kuchh. 

The  conjunctive  participle  is  generally  formed  as  in  the  standard,  but  we  have  also 
ao-ro , having  come,  and  utho-rb , having  arisen. 

In  bolnma,  I will  say,  the  long  u has  been  shortened.  Borrowings  from  Hindi  are 
khdi,  let  us  eat,  hoe,  let  us  become. 


583 


[ No.  3.] 

INDO-ARYAN  . FAMILY.  Central  Groups 

WESTERN  PAHARl  (KlftTHALl). 

Srinagar  Dialect.  (Patiala  State.) 

jAj  c«uU  ujV  d £i) 

M 

cz*  c— ' ° 4*  wy  j&w  j)  y^°  ijiU  iy  <£u 

<s£^i  y^  c~~jb*J  y jLo  e^_  ajj 

uyy  c=^  c—yfi 

j)  Ly*£  uy*>  cr^jJ  y5"  S^- 

^.^CLo  ^xj  c^f  <i2_  1>?54j’  IjJ  J&  Jjj  p 'U~* 

& jJ  W'-fc'  jy-  <=— <*J  £L  I^<5  Jl*  J)  <=—J 

e=!Jyyb*  <=-^3^  c_^c  y & <=y  4->  yJ  ** 

ai  yy  c-^°  j)/0  yy  jf  j-y  y-y  yj*y)  ^yy*1 4- 
y b uy*]  uLy  «£-  v-Hi-*  y 4—  <14  y 
j^y  ^y  Jjy  et-^c  y-  *—  ^ s-rr^  uyJ  <=&)  y*$ 
Wj^  ^y  jy  ttJ  yy+*y)  c=y  ^y 

jJ  or10  ;>;  yjy  J*  ^ ^y  ^ 3^  c^r^  2>  <*&d  '-^ 

4^  y );  ^ y ^ e^^r0  yy  y ^ ^ 4-  V ^ 


684  WESTERN  PAHArI. 

<LJ  y^Jt  )j£  4~^°  v.^SjJ  <=f^J  y\ 

yy]  uHh  j)  3^  ^ ^ 

J I jl  ^_£-^b  c — ^ -.  •p^jfJ,  c — ^ ^^jIa  c-_j**Aj 

cz^J  1/  <z-j'c  1^°  <=b  W ^U.  y^y°  e/^>A 

* «yy  ^ ^_>j  jy*  jj  tei  jy5  r-^-ij  iy 

jt  <i_lf  bj  <=— jjyj  c—y  y)<$  <-r^  Ui  <=— 1 £ fy  y! 

<^aJ  15  £ j b^^.;  yy  c_jt&  ;5y  c=V  jfy  obi  )y  <o^-b 

<jy  <*y  <_y^  o-y  y y 4— 

yW  )yh*l  ^ ^y*>  &S  jj;^  ^ ^°'  ^ Sr5^^  ^ Sr^ 

^O  S-'Jy-  =£-  3^  c^°  jybe  <oJo  *=— y yb  «— ^4  c-y^  c=^ 

y^i  <=Jy  c-^  y f J^  stO^"  ^ 0 &yb*  ^31  *4^ 

U/ 

kaiU'  ^1  u3f  _^>  ^o  qC-bc  yiA^  <*y"  e/^y  yi  *“* 

^ ^ ^xk*  ^ I C^*  jj  3!  ^ 

*£-  iw^>-?5j  <^y  ^ ^y  y L/^y  )y^  *- — ^ ^<0^ 

j-^j  yj  w-*'  _y-J  ^ibe  (^xb  y^.  > ^ y;  by  <l__) 

1 — -^i  Wj  y®  jjV  ^ Wj  utbe  by 

^yi'0  cr^I  *0-  U>‘  jy 


585 


[ No.  3.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


Central  Group. 


WESTERN  PAIlARl  (KIUTIIALl). 

Patiala  (Srinagar)  Sub-dialect. 

transliteration. 


State  P attala. 


Eki-admi-re  do  bagehr  tlie.  Tihnau-maje-de  ckhotre-ne  bapu-hagc  bola, 
‘haT  bapua,  jo  malo-ra  bada  ma-klie  pliaba-tha,  ma-klie  do.’  Tube  tinie 
tinau-kko  se  mal  bade-ditta.  Or  thware-dino-pachhe  chhotre  lmgehre  sfibbi- 
thiyu  kattha  kore-ro  ekl-diiro-ro  mulkho-khe  deua,  fir  teti  apna  sfih-thiyii 

kaputi-maje  klioa.  Or  jfibe  sobh-thiyn  khoe-paya,  or  tes-mulkho-da  bora 
ki>l  p6ra.  Tfibe  se  kangal  ohne  lagii.  Tfibe  se  tes-nmlkho-re  eki- 

rane-hage  deua.  Tinie  se  apne-khetso-de  sfir  zagne  bkejja,  fir  tinie 

socha  ki  je  6y6kur  sur  khao,  se  tlnau  bl  kliao,  ki  kfii  tes-khe  kfii 

na  deo-tha.  Tfibe  time  bo^I-de  ao -{for  ae-)rfi  bola,  ‘mere  bafi-re  kama 

hirnewale-khe  lekhaji  roti  khao-fisso,  or  alifi  bhuklia  mfiru.  Mere-iitho 

{for  uthe)-ro  apne-bao-bage-khe  deftfS,  fir  tes-khe  boluma,  “bapua,  ahff 

Gl-ra  Mil  tera  gunai  fissfi ; obi  ahn  tetthi  zoga  ni,  jo  log  mii-khe 

tera  beta  bolo.  Ebi  mS  tu  apna  hull  zane-rfi  rakli.”  ’ Tfibe  iithe- 

rfi  apne-bawa-liage  tsala.  Or  se  elm  dur  tlia,  tes  dekke-rfi,  tes-re  bafi- 

khe  tars  aya,  fir  daure-rfi  Hgai  ditti,  fir  buliat  pliaiyS  loa.  Bete  tes- 

khe  bola,  ‘bapua,  mfihfi  tera  fir  Gf-ra  bura  kia,  fir  ebi  ettlii  zoga  ni 

jo  log  ma-khe  tern  beta  bolo.’  Bapue  apne-naukrfi-khe  bola,  ‘ tsahgi-de 

tsahgl  jiukhate  lefi,  fir  tes-de  pahmao,  fir 
bahni  deo ; fir  ham  klui6  or  khus  lioi ; 
mfire-goa,  par  ebi  jio  goa  ; rache-goa-tha, 

kliu£  ohne  lage. 


tes-re  hatho-de 
moe  zana-tha 
par  ebi 


tnithe-gfia.’ 


clihap,  or  lato-di 
je  mera  beta 
Tfibe  se 


khotsfi-de  tha. 


Job  gkfiro-re  neure  aya, 

Tfibe  ek  naukfir  £ade-ro  puchha.  ki,  * e 
* tera  bhai  ava,  or  tere  bawe  bori  dham  ditti,  tetthi- 
ava.’  Tinie  rose  lioe-ro  na  socha  ki  * bibtara 


gane  or 
ka  fissfi?’ 


ri-tef 

jau.’ 


Or  tes-ra  bfira  beta 
nackne-ra  3ad  boa. 

Tinie  tfis-khe  bola, 

ki  ki  raji-baji 

Tfibe  tes-re  bawe  bahar  awe-ro  tinie  mancwa.  Tinie  bafi-klio 

jawab  ditta,  * dekli,  aiv  itne-borSo-de  teii  tabol  kfirdfi,  fir  kfibblii  tori  boll 
bahar  na  deiia,  pfir  tog  kfibblii  bakri-ra  chheltu  ma-khe  na  ditta,  jfi 

aw  apne-satli-ae  sathi  kliu4  lio-aii.  Or  jfibe  tera  c beta  aya,  junie 
tera  lfita-pfita  lundi-de  klioa,  tfii  tfis-ri  khatir  bfiri  dbam  ki.’  Tinie 
tes-khe  bola,  4 e pota,  tu  sfida  ma-hange  ro-hai ; jo-kie  ma-haiige  fissfi,  sfib 
tera  fisso.  Khul  ohna  fir  kliu^I  rnanana  pfiro-tba,  koe-ki  tera  bhai  moa- 
tba,  ebi  jio-goa ; fir  rache-goa-tha,  so  ebi  mithe  liai.’ 

TOL.  IX,  PART  IT. 


4 r 


586 


HANDORT. 

The  word  ‘ Handuri  ’ moans  literally,  the  language  of  the  State  of  Hindur  (properly 
Ilandur)  or  Nalagarh,  lying  immediately  to  the  south-west  of  the  rest  of  the  Simla  Hill 
States.  But  it  is  not  the  language  of  the  whole  of  the  State,  and  it  is  also  spoken  in 
other  states  adjoining. 

In  Nalagarh  itself  two  languages  are  spoken.  To  the  west  there  is  the  Powadhi 
Pafijabi  of  the  plains,  spoken  by  39,515  people,  and  described  in  Part  I of  the  Volume, 
pp.  679  and  ff.  In  the  east  the  language  is  Handuri,  spoken  by  an  estimated  number  of 
17,862  people.  Handuri  is  also  spoken  in  the  State  of  Mailog  which  lies  to  the  cast  of 
Nalagarh.  Purther  to  tho  east  lie  the  States  of  Bija  and  &uthar  where  Baghati  is 
spoken.  North  of  Nalagarh  lies  the  State  of  Bilaspur  or  Kahlur.  Here  (as  described  in 
Part  I,  pp.  677  ff.)  the  language  is  Pafijabi. 

To  the  north-east  of  Nalagarli  and  to  the  north  of  Mailog  lie  the  States  of  Baghal 
and  Kunhiar.  Baghal  has  Bilaspur  immediately  to  its  north-west,  and  here  and  in 
Kunhiar,  the  language  is  called  Baghal!.  Baglmll,  although  it  has  a name  of  its  own, 
is,  however,  only  Handuri,  but  more  mixed  with  Panjabi.  It  is,  in  fact,  a transition 
dialect  showing  Handuri  merging  into  the  Kalilurl  Pafijabi  of  Bilaspur.  It  varies  from 
place  to  place,  and  from  mouth  to  mouth,  and  is  sometimes  not  Handuri  at  all,  hut 
must  be  considered  as  identical  with  Kahluri. 

At  other  times  it  is  more  nearly  Handuri.  Under  such  circumstances  it  would  be 
a useless  waste  of  time  to  consider  the  fluctuating  dialect  oil  Baghal,  and  our  attention 
will  be  confined  to  the  Handuri  spoken  in  east  Nalagarh  and  Mailog,  satisfying  our- 
selves with  recording  the  number  of  both  forms  of  Handuri  in  the  following  statement : — 

Handuri — 

East  Nalagarh  ..........  17,802 

Mailog  . . . . . . r . . .0,117 

23,979 


24,384 

«.••••  1,848 

20,232 

Total  Handuri  of  both  kinds  . . 50,211 


Handuri  itself  is  a transitional  form  of  speech.  It  is  a mixture  of  Kifithali  and 
Pafijabi,  and  a very  brief  notice  will  suffice  to  show  its  character.  Accordingly  only  one 
specimen — a version  of  the  Parable — will  be  given,  and  the  merest  skeleton  of  its 
grammar.  From  these  it  will  be  seen  that  Kintliali  and  Pafijabi  forms  aro  used  almost 
indifferently. 

Noun 8 may  lie  declined  as  in  Kiuthali  with  the  plural  generally  the  same  as  the 
singular,  and  with  masculine  nouns,  like  ghar,  ending  in  consonants,  making  the  oblique 
form  in  o ( gliaro ),  or  they  may  he  declined  as  in  Pafijabi  with  an  oblique  plural  in  a,  as 
in  hdrlyn-khe,  (the  father  said)  to  the  servants. 


Baghali — 
Baghal 
Kunhiar  . 


kiuthalI  (handCri).  587 

The  Agent  Case  generally  takes  the  PaKjahi  postposition  nr,  hut  sometimes,  we  have 
the  KiSthali  termination  e as  well,  as  in  pute-ne , by  the  son  (piit,  a son).  The  locative 
may  end  either  in  the  KiSthali  e,  or  may  be  formed  as  in  PaKjahi.  Thus,  we  have 
doruye,  (the  elder  son  was)  in  the  field,  and  ddrua-blehe.  (sent  him)  into  the  fields  (to 
feed  swine),  in  which  blche  represents  the  PaKjahi  viclich. 

The  postposition  of  the  Dative- Accusative  is  the  KiSthali  khe,  with  ye  for  a variety. 
The  postposition  jo  is  also  used  for  the  same  cases.  It  is  common  in  the  PaKjahi  of 
Kangra  and  the  neighbourhood. 

The  usual  postposition  of  the  Ablative  is  te,  as  in  lene-ti,  from  the  well,  or  the. 

The  Genitive  almost  always  has  the  KiQtliali  rd,  hut  sometimes  we  find  the  PaKjahi 
da  (as  in  sentence  232).  TJie  feminine  of  rd  is  rl  with  rlyd  for  its  oblique  form.  Thus, 
ghore-rl  jin , the  saddle  of  the  horse  ; tis-rlyd  baihan-sdthl,  with  his  sister ; tis-rlyd. 
kydfi-te,  on  his  neck. 

The  Pirst  two  personal  Pronouns  are I;  ag.  mi;  obi.  mit,  nia,  or  mu;  gen. 
rnerd  : plural  noin.  and  ag.  dse  ; obi.  dsd  ; gen.  asadd  or  a sard.  So  tti  or  tit,  thou  ; ag. 

te;  obi.  tit,  ta  ; gen.  tern  : plural  nom.  and  ag.  /use  ; obi.  I usd;  gen.  tusddd  or  tusdrd 

The  PaKjahi  influence  in  the  above  is  manifest. 

Por  the  demonstrative  pronouns,  wo  have  : — 

ft,  this  ; ag.  ini  or  inlye  ; ohl.  is,  ete,  or  e : plur.  e ; ag.  Ini ; ohl.  Ind. 

se  or  o,  that;  ag.  tint  or  tlnlye  ; ohl.  tis,  titi  or  te : plur.  se ; ag.  tine;  obi. 

t Ind. 

As  usual,  these  are  also  used  as  pronouns  of  the  third  person. 

The  relative  pronoun  is  jo,  ag.  jlnl  or  jlntye,  and  so  on,  like  the  demonstratives. 

Kit),  who  ? ohl.  sing.  his.  Kyd , what  ? obi.  not  noted. 

Kichli  is  ‘anything,’  jo-kichft , whatever. 

As  regards  Verbs,  the  Verb  Substantive  is  the  same  as  in  PaKjabi,  hut  he  or  hai 
may  also  he  used  for  any  person  of  either  number.  Niki  is  ‘I  am  not.’ 

The  principal  parts  of  the  verb  mdrnd,  to  strike,  are  as  follows  : — 

Pres.  part,  mftrdd ; Past  part,  mariya  or  mar  yd , ( lagged , to  begin,  has  lagd) ; conj. 
part,  marl-lee. 

Imperative.  2.  sing,  mar  ; plur.  mat'd. 

Old  Pres.  sing.  1.  mdri,  2.  mitre,  3.  mitre  ; plur.  1.  mitre,  2.  maro,  3.  mitre. 

Por  tlio  Present  Definite,  and  for  the  Imperfect,  we  have  rahi-hd,  thou  remainest 
(always)  with  me  ; bliari-thd , lie  was  filling  (his  belly)  ; and  did- the,  (no  people)  were 
giving. 

The  Future  is : — 

Masc.  sing.  1.  mdriga,  2.  margd,  3.  mdrga  ; plur.  1.  marge,  2.  mdroge , 3.  marge- 

The  Past  Tenses  are  formed  as  usual  from  the  Past  Participle. 

Irregular  past  participles  are  : — 
dltd,  given. 
kltd,  done. 
ley  a,  taken. 
payd,  fallen. 

*geyd  (plur.  gaye ),  or  gd,  gone. 

T0L.  IX,  PART  IV. 


4 f 2 


588 

[No.  4.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAIIARl  (KlffTHALl). 

HANi)tjRi  Dialect.  Nalagarh  State. 

ft  it  I ftTTO  €t  fn  % 

% wr-ft  %t-t  i <itft3f  tow-toT-tt  ^ft  ffft  ftro  i wrz- 

to  totot  frsT  fri-fro  TOt  ^rt-T  gwt-%  wrat  to it  i frit 
Trnrnrr  wzi-wzi  tott  ^ft-TOft-ft%  *§t£  ftro  i % 
to  ^tct-ttct  ftf  =5^tt  ft  ff  grot  TOft  toit  i % tot 

f4|TS  TOT  I TO  % TO  TOft-T  TO#t  TO^  TOT  TT*t  TORT  I 
it-TO  % TTT  ftft  TOTO*  ftTOf  #t%  #T  TOT^I  TO-ft?TT  l TT  TOt- 
T T^-TOTOTOT-f  TOTOT  WZ  TO-TO  TO-ff  TTT  TOf  TO  %ft- 

% I ftftif  #TOT  % TTO  TT#t  % I ftTO-R  TOTO 

®v,  • 

ftTO  t TOff  ftT  #5%-^  TOTT  % I tM  TOT  ?rf  TT  | tM 
TOW-TOft-il  TO^TO  ftT  TO-%  ftTOT  % TOft  H TOTOITt-^  ft 
TOlfVf  TO  ffff  *TO  ft?IT  I fNf  TO  HcT  ftTPG  ftTO  ft^  I 
TO  ftr  TT#t  % f-ft  ft  TOt  % I ftT  ssft-%  TOTO-TOft-f 

» ♦ C\ 

TOTO  I % TOT  TT-ft  TO  TOT  TO%  TO  % f TOT  I TO  f-ft  TOST 
to^-to  i ftr  ftft-ft  TO-ftrrT  writf  TOft  ftft  ftr  to-^  frf- 
f q^TT  %TO  I H?T  ft*T%  TORT  t TOt  *f  TORTOt-T§  ft  Wpft-f 
to  ffro  to<t  ftro  ftr  fNf  to  to  grr  ftro  ftro  ft  ttt  i 
frft  tot  TOft-f  TTftro-%  ftftro  ftro  ftr£  to%  wft  ftr  fn- 
% TOTTft  I TO-T  TRt-T  #ft  ftT  TOff-f  TOt  Wrft  | ^TTO-% 

°\  Ov 

TTO  ft%  fft  ftT  TTft  ft%  %ft  | TO  H?T  Tfft  TOTO 

fNt^T  ’ft-TO  I TTft  TO-TO  ftft-TO  I %ft  Tift  ftf 
TOt  II 

frr-TT  TOT  H?T  ftro  TO  I f % % W-^  IJTOT  ftft  ft?T 
TOW  TOTO  I TO  q^i  Tift  TOTOi-%  H$TO  ft  TTft  TO  TT4  TTfT  I 


KlftTHALi  (HANDtfRl).  589 

% %tt  wi  tott  % i 

*U*%-TT  3PT  cnlcu  I 71%  % *TT  TtT  TftflTt  oTT%-%  TJ^rfMlT  I 
%%  tNt-tt  *rr%t  *nr  *trit  i ?tac-#  wr%  wim  i g%-%  %t^iT 

r^TT-ft  $35  I fJ^TTT  *tfT  I 

ftr  ?f  *rc-*t  «nrsir€NT-TT  fftrr  i %7Mn%  % tM  ^rnr%- 

fTPU-^rt  TT^t  I 7T7T  ^W^\  Wt  1J  %TT  TJ^  W5TT 

^4tif  % %TT  ^T-^rr  #8T-^t  % TftT-%  *rrc%ft 

i 7tar-%  TTT^t-%  %twr  % % H7i  ^ w$i  %%  *n%  Tf  *r  i 
itefte  %%-%  % % TTTT-ft  % ! ^TTOT  TT^t  fNT  *TT  I 71%-^ 

7ITT  TTfi  Trft  tii-HT  %%  % *TT  ^rft  *!T-m  *IT  II 


690 


[ No.  4.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAHARl  (KifTTlIALt). 

HandObI  Dialect.  Nalagabii  State. 

TRANSLITERATION  and  translation. 

Eki-manua-re  do  put  the.  Clihote-pute-ne  bolya,  ‘30 

One-man-of  two  sons  were.  The-younger-son-by  it-was-said , ‘ what 

mera  bada  hai,  se  ma-jo  dei-de.’  Tinlyl  apne-gbaro-ra  lata-pbata 

my  share  is,  that  me-to  give'  By-liim  his-house-of  property 

dn-jo  bid!  dita.  Chhote-pute-nc  jebe  apna  bada. 

both-to  having-divided  was-given.  The-younger-son-by  when  his-own  share 

lei-leya  barl-duro-re  mulkko-kke  cliall-geyii.  Teti  rai-ke 

was-taken  a-very-far-of  conntry-to  it-was-gone.  There  having-remained 

apna  lata-pliata  sara  uto-pato-bicho  khoi-dita.  Tebe  sc  sab 
his-own  propei'ty  whole  debauchery-in  teas- lost.  When  he  tv  hole 

lata-plmta  khoi-chukya,  to  tote-mulkbo  bharl  kar  paya. 

property  wastcd-completely , then  that-conntry(-in)  a-great  famine  fell. 

Se  bara  kangar  hul-geya.  Tebe  se  tete-niulkbo-rc  eki  manS-satlio 

Be  very  poor  became.  Then  he  that-country-of  one  man-with 


rehne-lageya ; jje-sage 

se 

ralia, 

tlnl  apne  dorua-biche 

SUl* 

to-dwell-began ; whom-with 

he 

dwell. 

by -him  his-own 

field-in 

swine 

charne  bhej-dita. 

Se 

sSro-re 

bacbure-saleflkra-te 

apna 

pet 

to-graze  he-was-sent-away. 

lie 

swine-of 

remaining-h  usks-with 

1 his-own 

belly 

bharS-tba ; tes-klie  bor 

manS 

kiclib 

na  deo-the. 

Tebe 

tlnivl 

filing -teas ; him-to  other 

men 

anything 

not  giving-were. 

Then 

by -him 

suckya  ke,  ‘ mere-babe-ge  itne  barl  be,  llna-ge  itna 

it-was-thought  that,  ‘ my-father-of  so-many  servants  are , them- with  so-much 

rijk  be  kbanc,  bor  badne-khe  batera  lie ; ban  bbuklia  marQ-ba. 

food  is  to-eat,  and  distributing-for  sufficient  is;  I hungry  dying -am. 

HaS  uthi-ke  apne-baO-ge  jaOga,  bor  tSs-kbe  bolOga,  “ bS 

I arisen-having  my-own-father-to  will-go,  and  him* to  I-will-say , “ O 

bao,  me  Panmesro-kke  ni  jani-ke  ta  bundiyo  pap  kita ; 

father,  by -me  Qod-to  not  known-having  thee  in-being  sin  was-done ; 

ban  tera  put  bolne  joga  nlhS ; jerc  t8r&  hor  bafi  be, 

1 thy  son  to-be-called  worthy  am-not ; such-as  thy  other  servants  are. 


kiSthali  (HAijuvOBi). 

691 

mfi-jo 
me- to 

bl  rakhi-le.”  * 

even  keep."  ’ 

Hor  uthi-ke  apne-bab-gp  aya. 

And  arisen-having  his-own-father-to  he-came. 

se 

&e 

aj&  dur-hi  ttia,  tSs-rc-babe  tebe  so  dekhea.  Tebe  to-jo  taras 

yet  far -even  teas,  by-his-father  then  lie  tom- seen.  Then  him-to  compassion 

ai-ga,  hor  , dori-ke  tfis-riya  kyarl-tc  japlii  diti,  hor  tes*re 

came,  and  run-having  his  neck-on  embracing  was-given,  and  his 


mSha-te 

puka 

leya. 

Put 

bolno  lageya, 

‘ he  bao,  mg 

mouth-of 

kiss 

was-taken.  The-son 

to-say  began, 

‘ 0 father,  by-me 

Panmesrb*kke  ni 

jani-ke 

ta 

kundiye  pap 

klta,  hor  hau 

God- to 

not 

known-having 

thee 

in-being  sin 

was- done,  and  I 

ebe  tera 

put 

bolno  • jb 

ga 

nl  reha.’ 

Pherl  tes-ro-bao-ne 

now  thy  son  to-be-called  worthy  not  remained'  Again  his-father-by 
hariya-khe  bolfiya,  ‘ soldo  sobto  talc  lyao,  hor  t£s-khe  panhao ; 

the-servants-to  it-was-saul,  ‘ good  good  clothes  bring , and  him-to  put-on ; 

tes-re  Iiatli6-th8  mud!  hor  pao-le  jut!  panhub ; asa-klio  klian.8  pine 
his  hand-on  ring  and  feel-on  shoe  pul-on;  us-lo  cat  ( and)drink 

deb,  hbr  raji  liono  deb ; merit  put  mari-gii-tlia,  ebe  jiuda, 

allow,  and  glad  to-be  allow ; my  son  having-died-gonc-had,  now  living 

liui-ga ; hraclil-ga-tha,  ebe  miti-ga.’  Tebe  sob  raji  liono 

became;  liaving-been-lost-gone  had,  now  was-fonnd.'  Then  they  happy  to-be 
lage. 
began. 

Tes-ra  bara  put  dbruyb  tlia.  Tebo  so  gbara-ro  nCro  pujya, 

His  elder  son  Jield-in  teas.  When  he  the-housc-of  near  arrived, 

tin!  git  naclina  suneya.  Tebo  ok  liarl  balwal-ke 

by-him  singing  dancing  tcas-heard.  Then  one  servant  called-having 

puchheya  kc,  ‘ eti  kya  hai-raha  ? ’ Tinl  tfs-klie  bolya 

it-was-asked  that,  ' here  what  is-going-on  ? ' By-him  him-to  it-was-said 


i6> 

1 tera 

bhal 

ayii-hc ; 

tere-bao-ne  tbs-re  i 

•aji-baji 

awno-ra 

that, 

* thy  brother 

come- is ; 

thy-Jather-by  his  safe-and-sound 

coming-for 

jag 

kita.’ 

Tebe  so 

jari-ga,  lior 

bliitro 

jane-khe 

mukri-ga. 

feast 

was-made' 

Then  he 

angry-ioent,  and 

inside 

going-for 

refused. 

Tebe 

tgs-ra 

bao 

bar 

aya,  tgs-klio 

paly  fine 

laga. 

Pute-ne 

Then 

his 

father 

outside 

came,  him-to 

to-entreat 

began. 

The-son-by 

bolj 

a, 

‘ blial. 

itnl 

barsti  mane  tusari 

tel  kit! 

, kadi 

it-was- 

said , 

'lo, 

so-many 

years  by-me 

thy  service  was-done,  ever 

tusara 

bol 

ni 

mora, 

v 

hor  te 

ma-khe 

biikriya-ra 

ehhelu 

thy 

saying 

not 

was-disobeged,  and  by-thce 

me-to 

goat-of 

young-one 

In 

ni 

dita. 

tete-sathe  jo 

hau 

apne 

-mi  Ini -jo 

even 

not 

was-given, 

that-with  that 

1 

my-o  ten  -friends- 1 o 

khawal-kS 

rail 

hunda. 

Tpte-bakhtO  jo 

o tera 

caused-to-eat-having 

happy  might -have-become. 

At -t  hat-time  that 

this  thy 

692  WESTERN  PAHAflf. 

putr  aya,  jmlyi  36  terii  ghar-bar  rSda-jo  kkarwaya,  tS 

son  came , by-whom  that  thy  property  harlots»to  was-given-to-eat,  thou 

tfis-re  awi^S-ri  khatar  kiti.*  T6s*re  bao-n6  bolya  je,  * hS 

his  cotning-of  feast  to  as -made.’  Sis  father -by  it-was-said  that,  * 0 

put,  tii  sada  m§rS*sathe  rahn-ha ; je-kichh  m&re-gfi  h6,  se  tera 

son,  thou  always  me-with  dwelling-art ; whatever  me-with  is,  that  thine 

hi  he ; asa  raji  hoga  cliainda-tka  ; tebo-j6  tgra  bliai 
alone  is ; to-us  happy  to-be  proper-was ; then-that  thy  brother 
mari-ga-tha,  tebe  se  phor  jiwl-ga ; hrachi-ga-tha, 

having -died-gone-had,  then  he  again  came-to-life ; having -been-lost-gone-had, 

miti-ga.’ 
was- found.’ 


593 


SIMLA  SIRAJT. 

According  to  local  tradition,  difficult  mountain  country  is  known  as  Siraj,  i.e. 
Siva’s  Kingdom.  Tho  Siraj  par  excellence  is  the  southern  part  of  Kulu  lying  to  the 
east  of  the  State  of  Mandi  and  north  of  the  river  Sutlej  (Satlaj).  South  of  the  Sutlej,  the 
comparatively  low-lying  country  comprising  Kotgarh,  Sangri  and  the  greater  part  of 
Kumarsain  is  known  as  Sodhoch,  and  the  language  here  spoken  is  Sodliochi,  which  is 
akin  to  Kulu  Siraji.  South  of  Sodhoch  we  come  to  another  difficult  mountainous  coun- 
try comprising  the  east  of  the  main  portion  of  Keonthal  State,  including  the  small 
States  of  Theog  and  Ghund  and  part  of  Punur,  part  of  the  State  of  Kumharsain,  the  States 
of  Darkoti  and  Balsan,  the  Kaneti  tract  of  the  State  of  Bashahr,  and  most  of  the  British 
tract  of  Kotkhai.  This  also  is  a"  Siraj,  and,  to  distinguish  the  dialect  here  spoken  from 
the  Siraji  of  Kulu,  we  may  call  it  Simla  Siraji. 

This  Simla  Siraji  includes  two  dialects  mentioned  by  Mr.  Bailey  in  his  Languages 
of  the  Northern  Himalayas,  which  he  calls  respectively  Eastern  Kiuthali  and  Kotkhai. 
These  two  are  practically  the  same,  the  former,  perhaps,  more  nearly  approaching  the 
Standard  Kinthali  spoken  to  the  west  of  the  Simla  Siraj,  than  the  latter.  For  the  pur- 
poses of  this  Survey  it  is  not  necessary  to  distinguish  between  them. 

The  number  of  speakers  of  Simla  Siraji  is  reported  to  be  as  follows.  It  is  to  he 
remembered  that  the  figures  for  Keonthal  include  those  for  Theog,  Ghund,  and  Punur  : — 


Ki'oiitliiil 9,110 

Kumharsain  1,275 

Darkoti  .............  595 

Balsnu  .............  5,457 

Bashahr  .............  2.511 

Kotkhai  .............  ivS82 

4e 

I 

Total  ‘28,833 


Simla  Siraji  closely  resembles  Standard  Kinthali.  Immediately  to  its  south  lies  the 
Bissau  dialect  of  Sirmauri  spoken  in  the  State  of  Jubbal,  but  it  shows  few  traces  of  its 
influence. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  give  a complete  grammar  of  this  dialect.  It  will  he  sufficient 
to  point  out  the  principal  points  in  which  it  diJVers  from  Standard  Kiuthali. 

As  in  Sirmauri,  a final  7 very  often  becomes  e.  This  is  especially  common  in  the 
case  of  feminine  nouns.  Thus,  in  the  parable  we  have  both  badhde  and  badhdt , rejoic- 
ing. Similarly  we  have  ghbrche , for  ghorcht , property  ; kheche,  for  khechi  (Hindi  khetl), 
cultivation,  and  many  other  instances.  There  is  the  same  interchange  of  final  d and  d that 
we  have  observed  in  Kinthali,  as  in  <lb  or  dd,  the  sign  of  the  ablative  case,  but  the  o 
termination  is  much  more  common. 

The  Declension  of  nouns  is  nearly  the  same  as  in  Kiuthali.  The  only  important 
difference  is  that  masculine  nouns  ending  in  a consonant  often  have  the  oblique  form  in 
6 instead  of  a.  Thus,  the  oblique  form  of  des,  a country,  is  cither  desb  or  deso. 

The  postpositions  of  the  dative  are  ke  or  kb  instead  of  kite,  and  age  instead  of 
huge.  Similarly,  in  the  ablative  we  have  ago  instead  of  ha  go,  hut  do  (da)  is  more  com- 
mon. If  the  sentence  tes-re  such  wo  means  ‘ he  considered  ’ as  translated  in  the  original 
specimen,  the  postposition  re  is  exceptionally  used  to  indicate  the  agent  case. 

VO  I..  IX,  PAST  IV.  *■  ° 


594 


WESTERN  PAHArI, 


For  the  Pronouns. 

we  have : — 

I 

Thou 

Sing. 

Nom. 

a 

tu 

Agent 

mb,  moS 

tdy  toS 

Obi. 

mtt,  ma 

tUy  ta 

Plur. 

Nom. 

& . /V  * 

e,  aimu,  eu 

tuS 

Agent 

e 

_ f\t 

tue 

Obi. 

do 

tub 

The  genitives  are  as  in  Kifithali,  except  that  according  to  Mr.  Bailey  the  genitive 
plural  ‘your  * is  tiiauro  or  tiianrb. 

The  Demonstrative  Pronouns  are  thus  declined : — 


— - 

This,  bo 

Masc.  Fein. 

Neat. 

Masc. 

That,  he 

Fern. 

Neat. 

Sing. 

Nom. 

fih 

i 

eh 

eh 

se 

1 

se 

se 

Ag. 

: ene.  enne 

1 

isse 

ene , enne 

tSne,  tonne 

tisse 

tene,  tSnnS 

Obi. 

& 

issati 

Stthi 

tds 

tissau 

mthi 

Plur. 

Nora. 

\ 

i 

! * 

1 eh 

\ 

eh, 

eh  ■ 

|S5 

\*e 

se 

Ag.  ... 

ine 

inie 

ine 

tine 

tinie 

tine 

Obi. 

! 

ino,  inau 

i ini 

ins,  inau 

tins,  linau 

tinl 

tins , tinau 

The  Relative  Pronoun  jo  is  similarly  declined. 

As  for  the  other  pronouns,  ‘ what  ’ is  kti  instead  of  kdh,  and  ‘ anything  * is  kichh 
instead  of  kuchh. 

The  Verb  Substantive  is  thus  conjugated  in  the  present  tense  : — 


Sing. 

Plur. 

i. 

'■V 

u 

n 

2. 

ai 

o 

3. 

lllly  Oy  6 

aUy  by  o 

or  so,  080  or  osb  may  be  used  for  any  person  of  any  number  as  in  the  Bi££au  dialect  of 
Sirmauri. 

The  past  is  ta  or  thd,  fcm.  tl  or  thi,  etc. 

In  the  Active  Verb,  the  principal  peculiarity  is  the  conjunctive  participle.  This 
may  end  in  i,  as  in  Sirmauri,  of  w iiioh  e is,  as  explained  above,  a variant.  Thus  in  the 
parable,  in  the  same  sentence,  we  have  bhdji-goa,  he  refused,  and  ruie-tjoa , he  became 
angry.  More  commonly,  however,  yo  is  used  instead  of  i,  as  in  rohyd,  having  remained; 
khorchyo , having  spent,  and  many  others.  Compare  Giriparl  Sirmauri. 


595 


KITJTHA&t  (SIMLA  SIRAJt). 

The  conjugation  of  the  Present  differs  slightly  from  the  standard.  It 

* I beat,’  etc. 

Sin". 

Plur, 

1. 

pita 

pit  a 

2. 

pita 

pito 

3. 

pito 

pito 

Similarly,  the  Future  masculine  is  : — 

‘ I shall  beat,’  etc. 

Sing. 

Plur. 

1. 

pituld 

pit,  ume,  pit  mi 

2. 

piteld 

pitole,  pitle 

3. 

piteld,  pitta 

pit  die,  pitle 

The  Imperfect  is  formed  by  adding  td  or  tlul  to  the  present.  Thus  a pitu  td,  I was 
striking.  Or  a periphrasis  is  used,  as  in  a pile  rohd  td. 

The  only  other  point  to  notice  is  the  use  of  the  verb  djnu,  meaning  to  come.  We 
shall  meet  similar  forms  of  this  verb  in  other  dialects. 

As  a specimen  of  Simla  Siraji,  there  is  given  a version  of  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal 
Son.  It  has  not  been  thought  necessary  to  add  an  interlinear  translation. 


VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


4 o 2 


[No.  5.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


596 


Central  Group. 

WESTERN  EAII ART  (KT&TITALl). 


Simla  SikajI  Dialkct. 

uft  JTTft  ft  WtZ  R I $ld,i  WM«U  RTt%  Rtft  it  ft 

^ Cv  ♦ C\ 

RTR  RT  W%  fr  Wifi  % *J%  R I TO  TO  WR  Rt%  #t«W 

C\  C\ 

Rrft  i €t z ft ^runuT  rto  to  tot  rt*  Rftr  f(&w  tot  i 
rm  trr  ^ (Mni  ?§xr  wtrrw-r  wTr  i w%  4H  w^t  w<r*i  tjrtt  <t«i 
TO  tort  *rrft  tob  rst  i ? tr  w ww*  ^rsrr  i to  to  qft 

RTO  Wf  T?RT  WRIT  I TO  TOf R tt  #TT  TORT  WRRT  WEST  I TO 

w tott  «r%fr  ^wwi-  to  wrwt  rtw^  wft  rt  i tow  twt  rtw 
fww  rt  rrt  rt  i to  tot  iNfr  f if  rr  wtr  •qt  fhrw  tot 
ftro  tt^tt  %t  5T5  wf  ijwt  ftf  trt  i wt  wsr  wnfij  rr 
wtr  iw  tow  Rt^it  rrt  rt  TORRtTT  rtr  fit  rr  ftaT  i to 
wt  tot  wtza  rtwr  wtRT  wf  twt  i if  to;  ffre  w to  4%  ft 

‘ C\ 

TW  I TO  % WSR  WR%  RR  Wl  WTWT  | TO  % ^T  TORT  ft 
RST  RR  RWT  I 'ftR  WTR  TOT  R3ER  ##t  RR  TOT®  ft  fRR  WTR 

If  ft  i ftfR  fmt  % rtrt  ft  toirtrttt  rr  erf  wtto  wWr  i to 
to  to  wt^t  towr  ftro  rr  *to  i rtr  torrt  ftRftw  Rtirt  it 
to%  wftft  tow  *fs%  rtoto  i TORtR  qrtnft  wiftR  qrnft  wrwt  i 
towtw  tor  ffnr  rtor  ft%  rrt  i Rfftt  iff  % frr  tot 

ftqr  i wTO  qr  qq  trot  fro  i to  TOTf  wrf  wif  n 

TOTT  TOT  fro  WTO  3TT  I ^R  f TO  IJoTT  Tlf  ff 

•TTOTt  TO§t  3pqt  | Trft  ftTO  ft TO  ^ft  it  i*  WT  ft  TTt  TT  I TO 
TOW  ftwt  it  TO  vnf  WTO  W I ft  RR  TOft  Tift  TOlfti 

qi^TOTT  ft  W I TO  % Rf  RtWT  ft?lf  TO^T  WTft  RtWT  I fWTT 
TTRI  RTRT  WT3TT  i f W Tf#RT  TOTT  ( WtZ^l  Rift  f ft  ft  fft 

Ov. 


507 


KlfiTBAll  (SIMLA  SIRAjI). 

^nwft  qn:  i «tt  qnft  fft  i ttxj 

• Cv  <\ 

ft  *tt  ffft  ft  *rf  'vrm  ffft  fit  f*m  x^raft  qsr^T  i sra  x* 

Os.  Ov  x 

TtTT  Wtt  ^TTOT  ff  *Tlf  Tjf  T^r#  XJTT^  qWi^fl 

ft  *r  i qif  ^rrc  ffm  f wr&n  ^ ft  $ft  f i ft 

wrw  f *rrit  *rft  t *rft  i ^Tft  ^fft  fNT  qft  m i 

fft1  f fn  wi  fter  ftn  f^rc  *rr  ^ ff%  ft^rr  11 


[ No.  5.J 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


Knq 


Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAHARl  (KltfapHALl). 

Simla  SirajI  Dialect. 

TRANSLITERATION. 

Eki-machh8-re  do  cliohtu  the.  Chhotre-cliohtue  apne-babe-kc  bolo  je, 
* jo  gkftrche  (ya  kheche)  mere  bsde-re  ajo,  se  mS-ke  de.*  Tene  sab 
kheche  done-chohtu-kft  bfdi.  Chbote-cliobtue  apna  bada  ley8  ek-durd-de£o-rS 
liatb-kb  dewa.  Tethe  rdhyft  apne  kheche  jldpane-de  khoe.  ,T6be  sbb 
kheche  kldSroliyft-  rnuka,  t6be  tes-de46*da  bliarl  kal  pftra.  Tbbe  se  kaiigal 
liua.  Tftbe  tes-desb-rc  eki-bbsnl-age  rblinda  laga.  Tene-bdsnue  se  sSgor 
cliarda  khech6-da  chhara.  T6be  se  sug6r-re  bbche-do  gfilekhre-sbiige  apno 
pochbbr  bhftro-tha.  Tes-ke  rekii  (other)  rnackh  kichh  na  deo-tha.  Tbbe 

tes-re  such  wo  je,  * mere-babe-age  ere  rigbr  6so,  jinb-re  roti-ra  chota 
(scarcity)  nai  ; a bhukha  mbi-rba.  A uthyb  apne-babe-age  deu,  tes-ke 
bolu  je,  ‘‘baba,  mo  Bhbgwanb-ra  pap  tS-hunde  kiya.  Ebe  a tera  chohta 
bolne  joga  nai  rba.  Jere  tere  rlgbr  asb,  era  raii-ke  hi  rbkb.”  * Tbbe 

se  iithyd  apne-babe-age  aja.  .Tbbe  se  dur  aja,  tb  tbs-re  babe  dekha 
gliin  kbryb,  tbs-rc  gblb-de  klri-deyb  (having  run)  gbhwal  di  (embraced) 
muh-de  khobe  ditti.  Cliohtue  hole  je,  ‘ biiba,  mb  Bhbgwanb-ra  pap  tS« 

samno  kiya.  Ebe  a tera  obohta  bolne  joga  nai  rba.*  Babe  apne-rigrb. 

kc  bolo  je,  ‘ es-ke  sabhi-do  aolihe  jhurke  bbmab.  Hatho-de  kagni,  lato-de 
pan!  lab.  A§-ke  khane  pine-re  badhae  hone  deb.  Kll-ri-tST  je  mera 

cliohta  mbryb,  jiwa ; khoa-tha,  ebe  mili-goa.’  Tbbe  badhai  kbrde  lage. 

TSs-ra  bbra  chohta  kheclib-da  tha.  Jbbo  se  glibrb-nera  puja,  tbbb 
tene  natsno  ganb  Sunb.  Eki  rigbr  bbdyo  puchlio  je,  * e ka  ho  rblio-b  ? * 

Tene  tes-ke  bolo  je,  ‘ tera  bhai  aja-6.  Tere-babe  tes-ri  raji  kliu4l-re 
badliavi-re  pawanchare  ki-b.’  Tbbe  se  ruse-gba,  bbitre  dewda  bhaji-gba. 

Tes-ra  baba  bahbr  aja.  Tbs  pateOda  laga.  Cliohtue  bolo  je,  ‘ mo  to 
terx  chakri  etnl-bbr6b  kbre,  na  kbbhi  tero-liukbm  tsoro.  Tul  mS-ke  ek 

eliehltu  bi  na  ditto  jo  a apne-mitro  sbhge  rnilyb  khu4i  ktirda.  Jbbe  e 
tera  chohta  aja,  jene  bade  (all)  ghbrche  cbhe6ri-do  khewe,  tul  6s-ke 
8tno  pawanchare  di-6.’  Babe  uttbr  ditta  je,  ‘ ehohtya,  tu  to  dherl  mQ 
sathe  rbhe.  Jo-kah  mu-age  bso,  se  sbbe  tera  bso.  AS  khu^i  hopa 
p6ro-tba,  kli  je  tera  bhai  muiyb  jiwa ; klioe  goa-tha  ebe  mile-goa.’ 


599 


bararT, 

The  northern,  or  Barar  part  of  the  Jubbal  State  has  the  State  of  Bashahr  to  its 
north,  and  the  Puuur  section  of  the  State  of  Keonthal  and  the  Kotkhai  tract  of  the 
Simla  District  to  its  west.  The  dialect  spoken  in  Barar  and  also  in  the  adjoining  parts 
of  Bashahr,  Punur,  and  Kotkhai  is  known  as  Bar&ri.  The  estimated  number  of  speakers 


reported  is  as  follows : — 

Jubbal  (BarSf)  3,898 

'Keonthal  (Punur)  ............  434 

Bashahr  ..............  2,624 

Kotkhai , 938 


Total  number  o£  speakers  of  BarSfi  • . 7,894 


Bararl  is  hardly  worth  noticing  as  a separate  dialect,  and  is  only  here  described  in 
deference  to  native  nomenclature.  It  is  simply  a form  of  Simla  Siraji,  somewhat  mixed 
with  the  Bissau  form  of  Girl  pari  Sirmauri  spoken  in  .lubbal.  A short  extract  from  a 
version  of  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son  will  be  sufficient  as  an  example. 

"We  may  note  the  spelling  of  the  word  for  ‘ son  ’ which  is  chhdatd  as  in  Bissau.  This 
is  evidently  an  attempt  to  represent  the  sound  of  clwktd,  the  true  pronunciation  of  the 
word  spelt  chhdtd  in  the  vernacular  character.  We  may  also  note  the  word  techhe, 
there,  for  lettlie , another  instance  of  the  common  change  of  t to  eh. 

The  interchange  of  l and  e,  and  the  oblique  form  in  6 arc  as  common  as  in  Simla 
Siraji ; the  sulfix  of  the  dative  is,  however,  written  hhe,  not  he. 

For  the  pronouns,  we  have  no  instead  of  a,  I ; instead  of  mdS,  by  me  ; and  ta8 
instead  of  ta,  thee.  Those  are  only  variations  of  pronunciation  in  a dialect  the  pronun- 
ciation of  which  necessarily  varies  slightly  every  few  miles.  More  important  is  the 
neuter  form  led,  that.,  used  for  the  nominative  and  accusative  singular  and  plural.  Its 
dative  singular  is  tethue  instead  of  tetthi.  Here  again,  compare  the  Kashmiri  till,  that 
(neut.),  dative  talk. 

Another  word  for  * that’  is  tteje  as  in  Giripari.  In  the  neighbouring  Jaunsari  jo  is 
very  commonly  added  to  the  demonstrative  pronoun.  ‘ Anything  * is  kichhi. 

In  Sirmauri  the  present  participle  is  commonly  employed  as  an  infinitive  of  purpose, 
and  here  we  have  chanld  used  with  the  same  force.  llande  in  khdye-handc  is  for  hunde. 


600 


L No.  6.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 


WESTERN  PAHARI  (KlftTHALl). 


BarIr!  Dialect.  State  Jubbal. 

tjqft  htto  t sFfare  ir  i qn<u$  qrnrw  ^ $ 

^ ^ ^ *mr  ?r*r  % i mr  ^rft 

«rft«p[  # arhft  i 3rpuw  wV^z  w «rrfr  ^ *^ft 

fT  $^t  i i *rrw  ^ *n%  *wrf  #*tt%  i w 

fanft  % T^t  iir  ^ ^t  wr&  irsT  i % ^^rr  i ?i%  w 

top*  %8i  f wn  srft  i *reror  ^pst  *mrw  g*n: 

i for%  w*  ?frr  wrk  *nrw  vz  wr  i t^t 

^ far#t  % *?frrs  i 5mr  wr  % ^ ^ %<?t  ftaf  *r 

tto  % ^nq  % # gift  frit  * i *rN  *rft  *$un  g*u  i 

*rN  *nrw  *n%  ^rni  ^raT  ir  w mwn  ft  *sraft  ^r  *nr 

©v  'J  ^ 

?rNf  ^rnr  <rre  fwr  g i d%  #p9Zt  ?r%  % r*rc  i g 

©v  ^ 

*?t  *tdt$  gnra:  ^tt  ^rnn  if 


601 


[ No.  6.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAHART  (KlftTUALl). 

Barari  Dialect.  State  Jumbal. 


TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 


Ekl-manehha-re 

dui 

clihGati 

i tlie. 

Kanchlie 

Apne-babe-khe 

One-man-of 

two 

sons 

were. 

By-the-younger 

his-own-father-to 

likliG  je. 

* ai 

Babu, 

ju 

ghorclie  mere-bil<le-d 

i fi-6,  toft 

it-was-icritten  that. 

• O 

Father, 

what 

property  my-share-in 

comes,  that 

m3  Gru  de.’ 

Tone 

apne 

gkGrchi  borGbftv 

dul-cbhGate-khe 

to-me  here  give* 

By-him 

his-oton 

property  equally 

two-sons- to 

badt.  K anchhe-cbboate  jo  badG  layo-herG,  lobe  ekl-dfir-deso-dsi 

was-divided.  By-the-younger-son  when  all  was-taken,  then  a-far-couutry-in 
dewa.  Teclihe  rOi,  ju  apne  gliorcho  the,  bade 

he-icent.  There  having-remained,  what  his-oicn  property  was,  entirety 

klial  khGngfile.  Jo  kielihT  lie  rGG,  seje-desG-da 

having-eaten  it-was-icasted.  When  anything  not  remained,  that-conntry-in 

kal  p6ra.  So  hua  dalji.  Tfibe  roa  tethuO-desd-re 

a-faniine  felt.  lie  became  poor.  Then  lie-remained  thal-conntry-of 

boson  satin.  Tene-bosne  chliara  apue-dGkkre-da  sun  gar  charda. 

inhabitant  with.  By-tliat-inhabitunt  he-was-sent  his-own-Jifltl-in  stcine  for-feeding. 

Ju  sungre  khaye-hande  sekle  bdclio,  teo  klial 

What  by-the-sicine  being-eaten  husks  remained-over,  those  haring-eaten 

apne  pet  bhtira.  Reka  lie  deft  kicblil  lie  kGie. 

his-own  belly  icas-filled.  Other(-thinn)  not  tcas-giren  anything  not  by-anyone. 

Teue  sUcliG  je,  ‘ mere-babe-kae  jet!  rigfir  sG,  tes-kbe 

By-him  it-was-thought  that,  * my-fatlier-near  as-many  servants  are,  them-to 

apu-klie  G bddne-khe  niuktl  rutl  so.  Ao  mori-laga  bhukha. 

themselves  for  and  distributing- for  much  bread  is.  I dying-am  hungry. 

^ V ryj 

A5  • apne-babc-kae  deiila,  G bGlula  je,  “moe  PonesGrG-rl 

I my-oton-father-near  will-go , and  I-will-say  that,  “ by-me  God-of 


khuslii-kliu 

bar  ta5 

agu 

pap 

kiya-sG.  Aibe 

tera 

clihoata  bolne 

desire-to 

outside  thee 

before  sin 

done-is.  A Tow 

thy 

son  for-calling 

yoga  ne 

r5a. 

Mb 

bln 

apne-ckakGr 

nliGrfi 

jib.1”  * 

fit  not 

I-reniained. 

Me 

also 

th  i n e-own-  serva  n ts 

like 

consider.**  * 

M 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


SOrachOlt. 

&6rach61i  is  the  Pahayi  dialect  of  the  Thakurate  of  Ravvain, — a portion  of  the  Keon- 
thal  State.  The  Thakurate  is  situated  immediately  to  the  east  of  tho  Barar  Pargana  of 
Jubbal.  The  number  of  speakers  is  estimated  to  be  2,428. 

S6rach6li  is  closely  connected  with  Siraji.  It  will  be  sufficient  to  give  one  specimen 
of  it, — a version  of  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son,  and  a brief  account  of  the  principal 
points  in  which  tho  Grammar  differs  from  that  of  Standard  Kifithali.  We  may  com- 
mence by  giving  the  following  list  of  unusual  words  occurring  in  the  specimen  and  in 
the  list  of  words : — 
dh  thy  a hand. 
aim u,  to  bring. 
as nu,  to  come. 
bddd,  all,  the  whole. 
bdmnft,  to  put  clothes  on  a person. 
chhagtu,  a son. 
chhagli,  a daughter. 

ch  he  knit,  in  khdyb  cliheknfi,  to  cat  completely,  to  finish  eating. 

ddljl,  poor,  poverty-stricken. 

dokhdrd , a field. 

gauhr  or  gbhr,  a house. 

jlntrkd , a garment. 

kagnl,  a ring. 

khfib,  the  mouth. 

khan  gain  ft,  to  waste. 

klibbd,  a kiss. 

mdi,  a girl,  a daughter. 

may  ft,  a boy,  a son. 

br~deif.fi , to  give  away. 

pamichdrt,  a feast. 

rekd,  other,  another. 

Sad,  a sound. 

Seklild,  a husk. 

tadb,  property,  goods  and  chattels. 

tiled,  angry. 

ujuiiu,  to  rise,  to  arise. 

uti,  an  embrace. 

The  interchange  of  t and  e is  extremely  common.  Thus  we  havo  paunehdre  dine, 
a feast  was  given,  where  we  should  expect  paunchdrl  dint , etc. ; for  * by  him  * wo  have 
thfi,  tene,  and  tine.  On  the  other  hand  in  bhukhdl , by  hunger,  wo  have  l used  instead 
of  e,  the  termination  of  the  instrumental. 

Similarly,  the  confounding  of  tin;  letters  d,  b,  and  ft  is  very  common.  The  termi- 
nation of  tho  Genitive  is  either  rb  or  rd,  and  that  of  tho  Ablative  is  dd,  do,  du.  As  an 
extreme  case  we  may  quote  the  various  forms  for  * our.*  These  are : dmdrd,  dmaro , 
dmord,  amoro,  dmrd  or  dmrb. 


KlCfflALl*  ($fiRA.0HOLf) . 60& 

'*  * 

The  elision  of. initial  h is  very  common.  Thus:  hame  or  dme,  we;  bnu  (or  bud,  or 
ova),  to  bo  ; ud  (or  uo),  become.  As  examples  of  the  metathesis  of  the  letter  h,  we  may 
quote  dhth,  a .hand,  and  gbhr,  a house. 

A good  example  of  the  frequent  Paharl  change  of  t to  cli  is  found  in  the  word 
tSchhe,  for  tethe,  there. 

In  Kintliall  the  oblique  form  of  masculine  nouns  ending  in  consonants  is  made  by 
adding  b.  Thus,  ganhr , a house,  obi.  ganlirb.  In  Siraji  this  b often  becomes  6,  and 
this  is  also  the  case  in  SSrachbll.  TIlus,  in  the  first  few  lines  of  the  parable,  we  have 
manchlid-rc,  bdyd-kc , and  deio-khe.  The  same  termination  is  even  added  to  a noun 
ending  in  a vowel,'  in  mud,  (before  thy)  face. 

The;  postpositions  closely  resemble  those  of  the  Standard,  but  there  are  some  varia- 
tions, mostly  matters  of  pronunciation. 

The  Genitive  takes  rd  (rb)  as  usual. 

For  the  Dative,  besides  khe  (with  its  variant  khi),  we  have  also  khii,  ku,  kde,  and 
the  Siraji  ke.  For  hdge , we  have  age  and  dgu. 

For  the  Instrumental  there  is  korl  ( kbre ),  as  in  roiltd  korl  bank,  bind  (him)  with 
ropes  ; Sekhle-kdre,  (filled  his  belly)  with  husks. 

For  the  Ablative,  besides  eld  (clo,  du),  there  arc  klm  and  km. 

For  the  Locative  there  is  the  usual  dd  (do).  * On 5 is  yds  or  gdsl  (gate). 


For  the  Personal 

Pronouns  there  are  several  forms 

. AVe  may  note  : — 

T. 

Thou. 

Sing.— 

Nom. 

/y*  /yj 

a,  du 

til 

Agent 

mm 

tin,  tdi 

Obi. 

mU 

ta 

Gen. 

meed  (b) 

teed  (d) 

Plur. — 

Nom. 

liame,  dme 

tv  me 

Agent 

hame,  dme 

(time 

Obi. 

dmu 

ftl  ill  U 

Gen. 

dmdrd  (b),  dmbt'd  (o),  anted  (b)  tumdrd  (o),  tudrd  (o),  tuord  1 

The  Demonstratives  are : — 

This. 

That. 

Sing.— 

Nom. 

e 

se,  seb 

Agent 

hit,  Pne,  hie,  neut.  el  hue 

ft n7,  tene,  tine,  neut.  tethue 

Obi. 

es,  neut.  ethu 

tes,  neut.  tethu 

Plur. — 

Nom. 

e 

se,  seb 

Agent 

hie 

tine 

Old. 

iu 

tin 

No  feminine  forms  have  been  noted,  but  they  doubtlc 

;ss  exist,  as  in  the  Standard. 

The  Relative  pronoun  is  jun  or  jo,  declined  like  se.  Thus,  Agent  sing,  fit  ft.  Jim- 
jo  is  * whatever.’ 

Kd  is  * what  ? ’ and  kichln,  ‘anything.  * 

VOL.  IX,  TART  IV. 


4 H 8 


604 


'WEeTBRN  PAHA$I. 


The  Verb  Substantive  has  many  forms  for  the  present.  The  following  have  been 
noted : — 


I am,  etc. 

Sing,  and  Plur. 

1.  08u,  aau,  8U. 


9 ■) 

g'  I 080,  80,  080,  80,  0,80,  (6),  8(1,  6,  6. 

The  Singular  and  Plural  are  the  same,  and  so  are  the  second  and  third  persons. 
The  Past  is  thb  or  thiyd. 

The  Active  Verb  shows  few  irregularities,  and  most  of  these  are  matters  of  spelling. 

Irregular  past  participles  noted  are  dind{o),  given;  god  or  go,  gone;  rod  ip), 
remained  ; and  nd(b),  become. 

The  conjunctive  participle  ends  in  * (e)  as  in  pheti,  having  run  ; die,  having  come ; 
but  the  Siraji  form  in  yb  is  more  common,  as  in  oiyd,  having  become ; pitiyo,  having 
struck  ; logo,  having  taken  ; royo,  having  remained ; ujuiyo,  having  arisen. 

The  Present  Participle  is,  as  usual,  employed  as  an  infinitive  of  purpose,  as  in  chdrdd 
chhdrb,  sent  him  to  feed  (swine). 

The  Present  is  thus  conjugated  : — 

I strike,  etc. 


Sintf. 

1.  pita. 

2.  pito. 

3.  pi  lb,  pito,  pita. 


Plur. 

pi tu,  pile, 
pito,  pite. 
pito,  pite. 


The  above  are  the  forms  noted.  There  are  doubtless  others  also. 

For  the  Imperfect  we  have  bhoro-tho,  he  was  filling  (his  belly). 

For  the  Past  Conditional,  we  have  rondo  thiyd,  I might  have  remained. 
The  following  forms  have  been  noted  for  the  Future  Masculine  : — 


‘ I shall  strike,’  etc. 
Sing. 

1.  pitiilb 

2.  pitlo 

3.  pitlb 


Plur. 


The  Past  is  quite  regular,  and  need  not  detain  us. 

So  is  the  Perfect.  Thus  : dib~6,  he  has  come.  Forms  like  koru-o,  (sin)  has  been 
done,  are  for  koro-b,  under  the  rule  about  the  interchange  of  u and  o. 

For  the  Pluperfect,  we  have  atdo-thiyb,  (thy  saying)  had  (not)  been  put  aside. 

For  Compound  Verbs,  we  have  : — 

Intensives,  such  as  more  (for  mori)  go-tho  ; oe  (for  hoi)  go. 

A completive  is  tine  khdyo  chheko,  he  had  completely  eaten. 

Inceptives  are  formed  with  the  Present  Participle,  as  in  rondo  logo,  he  began  to 
remain. 

A Permissive  compound  is  khaqe  pine  deo,  allow  (me)  to  eat  (and)  drink. 


605 


[ No.  7.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAHARt  (KI^THALt). 

&&bach6lI  Dialect. 

q#t  tori##  #frrc  # i TOq#  to#  ##  tori#  #N^q 
ftft  ##  ft  tot  3fwf  sfft  ##  ffifr  tori  ito  fr  ft  ftr-#  i 

frv  c\ 

ftft  TOq#t  sfft  f4  fro  qfft  i *i#  tori#  fif^q  TOft  tot  qft 
#ro  ##t  #prz^  #*r#  #ft  ##  ##  t?t  TOqft  ^ TOft 
*§*n#t  i sr#  ft#  TOt  tort  ##t  #ro  tot  #*rft  gfr  to*  xrft  i 
tott  ##t  <3#t  i tot  ##t  to  #*i#t  qft  WTTO  ffft  fft 

TOTft  i tot  fWft  wirt#  ##t  ftrorfr  #j#r  TOft  ^rft  » ##t 

#TT^  TOq  ##  #TO*  TOT  TOWt  vfZ  TO  ft  I ftft  TOR#  TO 
fTO#t  # ftft  I TOT  fftft  # #?T#  ftro  #T  TOT  TOT  TOt  <ft^ 

ftro  tot  tor  qfsqrot  iRTOft  tot  #r  jjtot  *ttot4  i #r 

TO#  TOT  f#TO  i^i  TO  *jf  TO  *Nr  TOT^  q#TIT#t  qqft  TOITOt  TO 
ft  i to!  #rt  #hrc  ftro#  ftft  to  ttot  i if  ft  ftro  tit# 

Cv  ©^  ♦ 

TOR  I TOTOTO  TOT#  TOT  TOT#t  TOT#t  ! qft  #ft  ^T  TO#  TO# 
ft  ftft  TO  TOlft  #T  #ft  ftTO  ft#  w£l  TOfTO  TO*T  q#  ft# 
TOlft  TOT#  ft#  ft#  I TOT  TOT^q  TO#  ftft  q TOTT  #ff  TO 

C\  Ov 

ff  tort  q#Trr#t  qqft  tort# t to  ft  i q*rr  totto  #rt  #fro  ^ 

c\  ©\ 

ftTO#  TOtft  TO  TTOT  I TO  TOT#  ftTO#  ftft  TO#^  TOTTO#  TOjg# 
TOT#t  #TC#T  TOt  t TOT  TO#  T#  TOT#  TOT#t  TO#  TOft  TOT#t  I 
^ WT#  ft#  #ft  TO#  ft#  #ft  I wf'  TOT#t  TO  #ft  #!#£  #T  ft 
ft  TO  ftfft  ftq  ft  I ##t  Rfft  TO#  TO  II 

ql  #TOt  TOft  R?#T^ft#fft  ft  I TOT  ##t  fk  #fT  1JTO  TO 
TO#  TO#TT  TO  RJTO  I ?ftft  q#t  ftf#q  TOft  # #TOt 

TO  TOTTO  TOT  I ##  #TOT  ftft  W #ft  TO#  TOft  *T  I #f  TO# 


600 


WESTERN  PAHARI. 


iTNmR  ?Nt  i % ztwr  ^rr  §^<ft  wrt  i 

%*rft  tot  ^rnft  i ifaT  ^rnfr  i vrrwT 

5T  nz\  TOT  ^Tt  ^TTSTTOT  faRTt  ifTt  %TWT  ^ fMft  I 

*j%T  ft  ^ftarft  %oE^  5TT  t%  ^TT^  ^TTR%  H^*TFHW^T  ^n€t 
*ft  fsrat  i 5i%  %ft  % tot^  ^mt  ^t%  #%  *t|; 

%*nft  xfNrro  i nHt  to!  fat  <t  TOfft  4 ^rt  tstt  i sr 
^tt^  ^rcrt  ^rft  %ft  i wsft  %t«n  fatY  «r  %ft  *rrt  %r  %t 
fwr  q%  ?rt  cft#^T  tfar  i *ftcr  tt  tt  r%fa%  %t  ii 


607 


[ No.  7.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAH  ART  (KTtjTIIALt). 

^6rach6lI  Dialect. 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 


£kl-mancbh6-re 
A-man-of 

tene-kanchhe-cliliagtue 
by-that-younger-son 
mere-bade-dO  ii£6,  tethu 
my-sharc-in  comes,  that 


dui 
two 

1)010, 

it-was-said, 

mu  bl 
to-me  also 


chl1aj5t.i1 


the.  Apne-bay<$-ke 

sons  were.  His-own-father-to 

c nicre-O-baya,  jun-jO  tadO 

‘ my-O-father,  ivhatever  property 

Or-de.’  Tinl  apno  tadO 

give-away.’  By-liim  his-own  property 


dui-bil  badO. 
two-near  ivas-divided. 


Jobe  kanchhe-cliliagtue  bfulO  I6y6-er0, 


When  by-lhe-younger-son  all 


teba 

then 


SCO 

that 


chhagtu 

son 

tadO 


dur-de^o-khe  dewO. 
a- far -co  untry -to  wen  t. 


kliaO 


kliangalO. 


Techlie 

There 

JObc 


tone 
by -him 
tine 


il-was-taken-up, 

royo  apnO 

having-remained  his-own 

bade  khayo-clihekO, 


property  was-eaten 

was- wasted.  When 

by -him  all 

was-eaten-comple tely, 

teba 

tes-deSo-do 

boro  kal  porO. 

Teba  seO 

dalji 

uO.  teba 

then 

that-conntry-in 

a- great  famine  fell. 

Then  he 

poor  became.  Then 

seO 

tos-dcso-do 

ekl-manckho-niaji  rondo  lago. 

Teba 

tini-manchhe 

he 

that-country-in 

a-rnan-among  remaining  began. 

Then 

by -that- man 

sou 

dOkhore-do 

sugor  ebardo 

cbliarO. 

SeO 

sug6ra-ie 

he 

the-field-in 

swine  feeding 

ivcis-deputed. 

He 

the-swine-of 

apno 

his-own 


pet 
bell  y 

dlnO.  T£s-re 

was-given.  U.im-of 

osO,  tlu-rIgor5-age  khane  badne-kki 
are , those-servants-to  eating  dividing  for 


bhorO-thO. 

Jilling-wos. 

sOchOyO 

it-was-thought 


khae-hunde-66khle-kore 
ea  ten-being-h  asks-  wi  th 
kiclihl  no 
anything  not 
m6rc-bayo-kae 
my-father-to 

bhukhiu. 
by-hunger. 

tere-mn5-agu 
thy-f ace-before 

bOlnc  jOgO  11a 
to-be-called  worthy  not 

UjuiyO  apnc-bayO-kachhO 

Having-arisen  liis-own-father-near  he-came.  Yet  he 


Aurl-manclihe  1 es 

By-another-man  to- him 
je,  ‘jgtnc- vigor 

that,  ‘ as-many -servants 

inuktl  osO,  a mua 

much  is,  1 


A 

I 


ujuiyO 

having-arisen 


apne-bayo-bil  dcu 

rny-oion- father- near  (will-)go 


Ptinesor-dO 

God-in 


bodkO 

sin 


roa. 

remained. 


agio  kovu-0. 

formerly  done-is. 

MO  bl  rig8r 

Jle  also  a-servant 

asO.  Ebl  seO 


30, 

that, 

AH  tero 
I thy 
bha.se 


1 die 
“ niuf 
“ by- me 
chbSgtu 

son 

cluid.  ’*  * 


like 

dur 

distant 


consider.  ” 


a$e 


having-come 


608 


western  paharL 


lago-tlio,  t ini-bay  e asG-di.  ber  deklio  gluij 

reached-was,  by-that -father  coming -of  (at -the-)  time  he-was-seen,  compassion 
kiye,  plieti  a6iy6  g6Jil  utS  dine,  t6s-ri-kliab6-de 

tcas-made,  having-run  having-come  on-tlie-neck  embrace  icas-given , his-mouth-on 

kliobc  dine.  Tes-re  chkagtue  tes-khe  bolo,  * e bay  a, 

kisses  mere- given.  By-him-of  the-son  him-to  it -mas-said,  ‘ O father, 

mul  terc-mu6-agu  PGnesdr-do  bGdko  agio  kttru-G.  Eba  ail  tern 
by-me  thy-f ace-before  God-in  sin  formerly  done-is.  Norn  I thy 

chbSgtu  bolne  jogo  mi  rfta.’  Babe  apne- 

son  to-be-called  worthy  not  I -remained.'  By-thc-father  lds-own- 

rig6r6-klie  bolo,  ‘bade-khu  a el  i live  j burke  ano,  tes-khe  bamo. 

se^vants-to  it-tcas-said,  *. all-than  good  garments  bring,  him-to  clothe . 

Tes-re  ahthG-de  reke  kSgue  lao,  nai  paui  lao.  Mn  khane  pine 
Him-of  hand-on  another  ring  put,  netc  shoes  put.  Me  to-cat  to-drink 

deo,  achhe  roue  deo.  Mui  jano  jO  mero  chhSgtu 

allow,  well  to-remain  allotc.  By-me  it-is- thought  that  my  son 

m&re-go-tho,  t5be  jiundo  Gc-gG.’  Seo  klmsl  unde  liige. 

died-gone-was,  then  living  he-became.'  They  rejoicing  being  began. 

JSbai  tes-ro  boro  cliliagtu  dokliore-do  llio.  Tuba  seo  gaulirG-neva 

Now  him-of  the- elder  son  the- field-in  was.  Then  he  the-honse-neur 

puja,  tdbe  naclme-gane-ra  sad  suna.  Tin!  eki-rigGr-du 

arrived,  then  dancing-singing-of  sound  mas-heard.  By-him  a-servant-on 

bodiyo  Sado  kl,  * tes-ro  ka  mtttloh  oso  ? ’ Tone 

having-called  it-was-asked  that,  * that-of  what  meaning  is  ?'  By-him 

tes-klie  bolo  jo  ‘ tero  blu'd  fisu-o.  Tere-biiye  paunchare 

him-to  it-wos-said  that  * thy  brother  come-is.  By-thy-fathcr  feast 

dine,  seo  jiundo  milo.’  Se  ilka  ua,  bhitdre  deundo  bhajo. 

was-given,  he  living  icas-gol .’  lie  angry  became,  within  going  refused. 

Tethu-khii  tes-ro  bay  bare  aso.  Tcba  te*  sGinjhaundo 

Thal-for  him-of  the-father  outside  came.  Then  to-him  explaining 

lago.  Seo  bliajo  j5,  - ‘eti  bGrGs  tero  kaj-kam  kiyo ; 

he-began.  He  refused  that,  ‘so- many  years  thy  business  mas-done ; 

kaibi  tero  bolno  11a  atfui-thiyo.  Mn-ke  bi  taf  lokro  cheltu 

ever  thy  saying  not  put-aside-icas.  He- to  also  by-thee  a-small  goat 

na  dino,  jethe  a 6 a pne-bhol-ma  nclihe-d;i  AchhG  rondo- tliiyo. 

not  was-given,  by-which  I my-omn-friends-anwng  well  might-have-remained . 

J6be  tero  se  cliliagtu  a so,  jini  bade  ghfirchi  chhewri-du 

When  thy  that  son  came , by-whom  the-iohole  possession  harlots-on 

khewe,  tul  t&s-klii  paunchare  dine.’  Tin!  nag 

was-camed-to-be-eateu,  by-thee  him-Jo"  a- feast  was-given .’  By-him  negation 


KITJTUALl  (^6UACH6lI). 

609 

kiye,  *tCi 

(lus-kuri 

m3 

hare 

v6a. 

Ju 

was- done,  * thou 

days-a-acore  (i.e.  always)  me 

with  remainedst. 

What 

mQ-agu  6so,  bado 

toro. 

AmS 

kliuii 

ona  thiyo, 

38 

lero 

bbai 

me-to  is,  all 

thine. 

For -ns 

rejoicing 

to-be  tens. 

as 

thy 

brother 

mfive-go-thiyo,  ebe 

tai 

jiunda 

Ge-g6a ; 

khoe-go-tho, 

ebe 

mile- 

■go.’ 

died-gone-tcas,  now 

verily 

living 

hc-became  ; 

lost-gone- was. 

now 

teas- got.' 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IY. 


010 


ktrnt. 

Immediately  to  the  south  of  the  Barar  Pargana  of  Jubbal  and  of  Rawain  lies  the 
Stateof  Tarocli.  To  its  south  lies  the  main  portion  of  the  State  of  Jubbal,  of  which  the 
language  is  the  Bi£3au  dialect  of  Sirmauri,  and  to  its  east  the  Jaunsar-Bawar  Pargana  of 
Dehra  Bun,  of  which  the  language  is  Jaunsari.  The  language  spoken  in  Taroch  and  the 
adjacent  parts  of  Jubbal  is  called  Kirni,  from  Kirn,  the  name  of  one  of  the  Parganas  of 
the  State,  and,  as  might  be  expected,  is  a mixture  of  Eastern  Kinthali  and  Jaunsari,  the 
former  element  predominating.  A very  brief  notice  will  suffice.  As  a specimen  there 
is  given  a short  extract  from  a version  of  the  Parable  of  tho  Prodigal  Son. 

It  will  be  seen  that  we  have  here  most  of  the  special  peculiarities  of  Eastern 
Kinthali.  There  is  the  usual  confusion  of  i and  d,  as  in  tis  or  tes,  him  ; of  i and  e,  as  in 
the  dative  postposition  ki  corresponding  to  the  Simla  Siraji  ke  ; and  kichhe , anything, 
corresponding  to  the  S6racholi  kichlu. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  postposition  of  the  genitive  is  the  Jaunsari  kd,  changed  to 
kb  under  the  usual  Kinthali  rule. 

The  first  person  singular  of  the  Future  occurs  in  na/tulo,  I will  go,  and  bdliild,  I will 
say,  which  are  Eastern  Kinthali.  The  Jaunsari  forms  would  be  naSma  and  bolmd.  In 
the  Conjunctive  Participle  kharl-beru,  being  troubled,  we  are  reminded  of  the  Kumauni 
form  ending  in  her,  which  is  used  much  farther  east. 

As  special  peculiarities  we  may  notice  the  interchange  of  k and  g in  sukro  or  sugro, 
swine,  and  the  termination  ro  added,  as  in  Rajasthani,  to  the  Past  Participle,  as  in 
tnagie-ro  and  bechie-rb.  The  word  dSl  for  * was  ’ is  intei’esting  as  a survival  of.  the  old 
Prakrit  form  it  si,  from  which  is  derived  the  Panjabi  si.  Forms  similar  to  dSi  also  occur  in 
several  of  the  Pi4acha  dialects  of  the  North-West  Frontier.  We  may  also  note  the  use  of 
honde  as  a sort  of  expletive  with  the  genitive  in  mere  honde-ko  bato , the  share  of  my 
being,  i.e.,  my  share.  Here  we  see  the  commencement  of  the  use  of  libndd  to  form  a 
genitive,  an  idiom  which  is  firmly  established  in  Kashmiri,  where  honct1  is  used  as  a 
genitive  postposition.  It  also  occurs  in  Rajasthani  (Marwari)  and  in  Sindhi. 


611 


[No.  8.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAHARI  (KlttTHALl.) 

(Kirn i Dialect.)  (States  Jubbal  and  Taroch.) 

% ^V  to  *§§  $ i *rroV  *fr€V 

^v  ^ *f£v  ^rrt  % i <^tfv  f^t  i 

m fmt  ^rrq^t  ®rreV  ^tfV  *rftWfV  m fft  %rV  mV  i mV 
fast  sir^v  ^rnrr  w^V  i *rt  fh*V  ^snmV  toV  ^nt  t^Vcrst  m 
mV  sit*  i m m *itV  m ^mfV  i m m-%  1%^  ^V  mV 

ft  tt  ftfmr  tfNV  i ?t%  t %^V  *rrV  ^irfr 
mgr  \ m *rci  *#f  ^V  m ^v  t ^nrr  ^v*  fm  ^Vi 

fart  *t  i m ^mcro  ^HV  ft  miV  ?Tt  ¥rq  $ stt"'  ^V 

wlcKt  *fV  wV  5ft  fw£  # *3T%  % 3TC%  % *tTm  ^tt§ 

*xi%  m ^ i Tf  ^t  ^ff  «t  m *ff  *V*a€V  *rr 
^rpmV  *ft  WM  ¥T  ?HV  Hi^^fV  i m%  ^ 

WfafT  mV  *^*tV  WR  H 


VOL.  IX,  PART  it. 


4 i 2 


612 


[ No.  8.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAIlAltl  (KlftTHALl). 


KirnI  Dialect. 


(States  Jubbal  and  Taboch.) 


TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 


Eki-admi-kS 
One-man-of 

bold  jo, 
it-was-said  that, 
batg-dini. 
was-divided-out. 
duri-deso 
to-a-far-cowntry 
tine  apno 
by -him  his- own 
Tab  tgs 
Then  to-him  being -troubled 

kesd-kg  dli5n  sado.’ 


do  beta 

two  tons 
mere-honde-kd 
* my -being- of 
Jab  tine 

When  by-him 
na&j.  Tgtho 

went-away.  There 


hug-thg.  Ka  nchbg.be  tg 

were . By-the-younger-son 

b5to,  oro-dg.*  Tgng 


appg-bapo-ki 
his-own-father-to 
ghareuchi 


share,  away-give 


apno 

his-own 


bato 


bate  khai-bechlero, 
share  toas-eaten’was-sold, 
khari-beru  a£i.  Tab 
was.  Then 

Tene 


dono*k8 

both-to 

se-d 

he-also 

Jabe 

When 

tab  paro  tgs-dgso  kal. 

then  fell  in- that- country  a- famine. 
tgs-ke  jiu-di  gsi  a£i,  ‘ ha 

him-of  soul-in  such  was,  * I 

se  apng  kliecho-da  sukro  chardo 


By-him  property 
oro-magiero,  tabe 

share  away-was-taken,  then 

tine  bado  khao  bgcho. 

by-him  all  was-eaten  was-sold 


some-one-of  near  may-live .*  By-him  he  his- own  fields-in  swine  feeding 
chhara.  Tgs-sugro-ki  36  tus  ubrao  tho,  se  kbayo 

was-sent.  That-pig-for  what  husks  remained-over  were,  that  was-eaten 
aphu,  or  tis  k6I  kichhg  na  de  tlig.  Tab  tine 

by-himsclf,  and  to-him  anyone  anything  not  giving  was.  Then  by-him 

apne-jio-do  suchyo,  * rnere-bapu*kg  th5?  to  nokrg«chakr6-ko 

his-own- soul-in  it- was -thought,.  * my-father-of  near  indeed  servants-of 


ghato 
deficiency 

maru 
die 

“ha, 

“father, 
beto  jhateddo. 
son  to-be-called. 


ni,  jiu-khe  khang-ke  batpg.ke  bawale  ch&prg, 

is-not,  whom-for  eating- of  dividing-of  much  bread  {is), 

bhokg.  Ha  apne-ba-kt-na  na6ulo,  tgs-kf 

by-hunger.  I my-own-father-to-near  will-depart,  him- to 

mu  Bhagawano-ki  kachli  ki  tat!  agg.  Ha 


Ood-of  sin  was-done  thee 

Jasng  t§  r g-nokar-g6o  mS  bhi  jan. 

As  thy-servant-like  me  also  consider.’ * ’ 


before. 

99  9 


ha  eikg 
I here 

bolulo, 

1-will-say, 

na  tgro 
not  thy 


613 


KOCHI. 

Bashahr  is  the  largest  in.  extent  of  the  Simla  Hill  States,  and  its  Baja  is  the  proud 
possessor  of  a pedigree  which  traces  his  family  back  for  120  generations.  It  lies  to  the 
east  of  &6dhock  and  Simla  Siraj  (see  p.  593  ante),  and  has  to  its  south  the  Barar  tract  of 
Jubbal,  the  Rawain  Pargana  of  Keonthal,  and  Garhwal.  At  its  western  end  it  is 
bounded  on  the  north  by  the  river  Satlaj,  across  which  lies  the  Siraj  of  Kulu.  Its 
inhabitants  havo  been  tentatively  identified  with  the  Brisari  of  Pliny  XVI,  17,  and  the 
locality  indicated  by  that  writer  agrees  with  the  suggestion. 

Bashahr  is  bilingual.  In  its  western  half  its  language  is  Aryan,  and  towards  the 
east  the  language  is  the  Tibeto-Burman  Kanaw*ri  or  Kanauri  and  other  connected 
forms  of  speech.  There  are  doubtless  many  Aryan  dialects  spoken  among  the  western 
mountains  and  these  are  all  grouped  together  by  local  tradition  under  the  name  of 
Kochi,  the  number  of  speakers  being  reported  to  be  51,882. 

The  example  of  Kochi  given  below,  which  is  presumably  the  dialect  spoken  near 
Bampur,  the  capital  of  the  State,  is  a form  of  Kiuthali,  closely  allied  to  Simla  Siraji 
and  {?oraclibli.  It  shows  a few  traces  of  the  influence  of  the  Kulu  Siraji  spoken  on  the 
other  side  of  the  Satlaj,  such  as  the  use  of  the  postposition  le  for  the  dative,  but  these 
are  of  small  importance,  and  Kochi  must  certainly  he  classed  as  a form  of  Kilithali.1 

The  specimen  of  Kochi,  as  received,  was  written  in  an  alphabet  of  its  own,  allied  to, 
hut  not  the  same  as,  TakrI.  The  following  are  the  forms  used  for  the  different  letters  of 
the  alphabet ; no  instances  of  the  letters  tha  and  dha  occur  in  the  specimens  received. 
It  will  be  seen  that  the  form  of  jha  is  the  same  as  that  of  ja,  which  is  an  apt  illustration 
of  the  tendency  in  these  Pahari  languages  to  drop  the  aspiration  of  sonant  aspirates 
(gha,  jha , dha,  dha,  and  bha)  : — 


* There  ia  a alight  error  in  regard  to  the  area  shown  for  Kdclii  in  the  map  facing  p.  373.  Mr.  Urahame  Bailer  informs 
me  that  in  this  map  it  goes  a little  too  far  to  the  north-east.  The  blue  area  lying  east  of  the  letter  * of  the  word  Kochi 
in  .the  map,  and  north  of  the  river  Satlaj,  should  have  been  shown  as  white. 

* 


&oom  Aipnaoet. 


kiOthalI  (x6chI).  015 

The  Koch!  alphabet  is  as  careless  as  the  Takrl  in  the  representation  of  vowel  sounds. 
Only  a few  variations  have  been  shown  in  the  foregoing  table. 

In  order  to  facilitate  the  reading  of  the  specimen  it  is  given  in  facsimile,  with,  on 
the  opposite  pages,  a line  for  line  and  letter  for  letter  transcription  in  the  Nagari 
character.  This  is  followed  by  a transcription  in  the  Homan  character,  showing  the 
words  not  as  they  are  written,  but  as  they  would  be  written  if  spelt  correctly  in  the 
Nagari  character. 

In  the  first  place  no  distinction  is  made  between  long  and  short  i or  between  long 
and  short  u,  the  long  i being  used  for  both  the  former  and  the  short  u being  used  for 
both  the  latter.  The  initial  a is  often  written  a.  Thus,  dpne  is  written 

Non-initial  long  vowels  are  often  represented  by  their  initial  forms,  and  at  the  same 
time  the  letter  q is  often  used  as  a sort  of  scaffold  on  which  to  build  an  initial  d.  Thus 
o is  written,  as  an  initial  either  *ft  or  qt.  Moreover  this  w is  used  instead  of  y when 
this  precedes  o.  Thus  tethiyo  is  written  wrfHt  and  khdyo  is  written  ijrY.  Instances 
of  the  use  of  initial  vowels  instead  of  non-initials  arc  for  hodte  and  for 

gdifd.  These  are  two  extreme  cases,  for  both  the  non-initial  and  the  initial  forms  are  used. 
Nor  non-initial  e,  we  have  ; or  even  (for  wvr  ) for  se  ; and  for  tend.  In  the 
latter  we  have  an  example  of  ye  used  for  initial  e.  Nor  non-initial  a we  have  cases  like 
for  pardeso,  while  still  more  extreme  cases  are  for  do,  and  even  for 

ghoro. 

The  letter  e is  sometimes  used  instead  of  i as  in  for  pdkoriyo,  and  similarly 

o is  used  instead  of  u,  as  in  TNrt  for  lulu. 

The  letters  e and  ai  are  continually  confnsod,  as  in  for  tebe. 

A sign  resembling  .a  visarga  ( : ) is  frequent  in  the  specimens.  It  will  be  observed 
that  it  only  occurs  after  long  vowels,  and  possibly  it  may  be  (as  in  Takrl)  merely  an 
indication  of  length. 

As  regards  consonants,  it  may  be  noted  that  n is  always  written  with  ammasika 
(or,  , rather,  anusvdra  instead  of  anutuisika)  over  the  preceding  vowel.  Thus,  tene  is 
written  ?Nr . 

As  regards  pronunciation  the  facts  are  much  as  in  Siraji.  Thus  there  is  the 
frequent  interchange  of  e and  l,  as  in  ghdrehl  or  ghorche,  property  ; dint  or  depe,  given 
(fem.).  So  also,  there  is  the  interchange  of  d,  d and  u,  of  which  there  are  examples  in 
almost  every  line  of  the  specimens.  We  may  quote  one  example  of  d being  used  instead 
of  a regular  6,  viz.,  mulkd-do  instead  of  mulko-dd. 

There  is  a good  example  of  the  usual  change  of  t to  cli  in  the  word  for  ‘ here,  * which 
is  once  written  ithd  and  once  ichhd. 

We  have  seen  how  most  words  written  with  an  aspirated  consonant  for  the  first 
letter,  in  Kiuthall,  transfer  the  aspiration  to  the  end  of  the  first  syllable.  Thus  the 
word  written  chhotii  is  pronounced,  and  in  this  work  transliterated,  chdhtu.  This  pro- 
nunciation affects  the  Koch!  spelling  of  the  word  chhotii,  which  is  here  spelt  chhdhtu 
(flftar).  Here  the  chh  is  preserved  in  writing,  owing  to  literary  influence,  but  the 
transfer  of  the  h is  also  indicated  by  its  insertion  after  the  chho.  As  usual  tin's  word  is 
here  represented  in  the  Homan  character  by  chdhtu. 

An  initial  y is  liable  to  be  dropped,  as  in  dd  for  ydd,  memory.  So  also  a dh  has 
been  dropped  in  sdu,  a friend,  if  it  represents  sddhu. 


616 


WESTERN  PAHARt. 


In  the  declension  of  nouns  we . have  the  occasional  Siraji  change  of  6 to  6,  as  in 
mdnad-re,  of  a man,  but  s&gord-re,  for  sSgoro-re,  of  the  swine.  In  other  respects  the 
oblique  form  is  made  as  in  Kiftthali. 

Jn  addition  to  the  usual  Kiuthali  postpositions,  we  may  note  le  (borrowed  from 
Kulu  Siraji),  to  ; tcile  (or,  once,  wild),  near,  equivalent  to  the  Hindostanl  pda  ; motji , 
with,  together  with  ; and  kore  (or  kori),  with,  by  means  of.  The  KiGthall  huge  appears 
as  age. 

For  the  personal  pronouns  there  are,  as  usual,  several  forms  differing  slightly  from 
those  found  in  standard  KiSthali.  Thus  we  have  had  or  hS,  I ; agent  mod  or  md;  obi. 
mU;  had,  us;  mhdrd,  our.  tu,  thou;  agent  ta$ or  tel ; ol)l.  tad. 

e or  yah,  this,  has  its  emphatic  form  el,  this  very ; and  its  oblique  (regular)  ea. 
Se,  he,  that,  has  its  agent  tene  (tipi),  and  its  oblique  tes,  te,  or  teh.  The  relative 
pronoun  je  has  its  agent  jile,  referring  to  a goat,  and  jene  (jinl),  referring  to  a human 
being.  Kd  is  what?  Kde  (koi),  anyone ; kichh,  anything  ; je-kie!,  whatever. 

The  Verb  Substantive  in  the  present  tense  is  so  or  dsd.  This  verb  has  also  a present 
participle  dsdo,  and  a conjunctive  participle  dsiyo,  with  which  forms  we  may  compare 
the  Kashmiri  dsun,  to  be,  which  is  conjugated  throughout. 

The  imperfect  is  thd,  etc.,  as  usual. 

The  conjugation  of  the  active  verb  calls  for  few  remarks,  as  it  is  practically  the  same 
as  in  Kmthali.  The  present  participle  of  hdnd  (hond  or  hdnd),  to  be,  is  hondd,  not 
hundd. 

The  past  participle  of  denu  (-d,  -5),  to  give,  is  dlnd  (deno,  etc.)  or  dittd  (ditto). 
In  the  phrase  deud-do  thd,  (the  elder  son)  had  gone  to  the  field,  do  is  added  to  the  past 
participle,  a suffix  which  is  common  in  the  Dogra  dialect  of  Panjabi,  spoken  far  to  the 
west. 

The  conjunctive  participle  is  formed  by  adding  i (e)  or  iyo,  as  in  Simla  Siraji.  The 
* (e)  forms  are  principally  used  in  compound  verbs,  as  in  pheti  deuoiyo,  having  run,  in 
which  pheti  deunu  is  a compound  verb. 

As  usual  the  present  participle  is  used  to  indicate  an  infinitive  of  purpose,  as  in 
chdrda  chharo,  appointed  him  to  feed  (swine). 

Inceptive  compounds  are  formed  witli  laggnu  (past  part.  Idgd)  and  the  present 
participle,  as  in  manadndd  patedndd  laga,  he  began  to  reconcile  and  coax. 

Completive  compounds  are  formed  with  muknd  and  the  conjunctive  participle,  as  in 
ghorche  khd(i)yo  bechiyd  muke,  (when)  he  had  completely  eaten  and  sold  the 
property. 

As  regards  vocabulary  the  following  words  may  be  noted : 

memory, 
to  come. 

to  summon,  call, 
always,  continually, 
a day. 

clinging,  an  embrace. 


ad, 

ajnii, 

bodna, 

dherd,  a day ; duey#  ( dherl ), 
du8, 
ghydl. 


KI&THALl  (KOCHI). 


ker, 

the  neck. 

khobu. 

a kiss. 

laukhro, 

small,  younger. 

mukftu, 

to  complete. 

nasnu, 

to  go,  depart. 

nohore, 

ady.  like. 

phefou, 

to  run. 

617 


TOL.  IX,  - 


818 


t No.  9 ] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WKSTMIN  PAIlARl  ,1CI0tUALI). 

KOchI  Dialect.  State  Uashaur. 

IX  KOCHI  CHARACTERS. 


^ P'Qp  ^ <4V^ 

JfjTfr  i ’P*rjs.£sp 

*«F *rfP  3^  \SV^=  3^ 

5.  -?  ?P<^  ) ^ ^ 

"s^  J*r  ^ f&p  w^jp  i®  -Shy  i 

34"  *£§:  rs-f  tfi&P  y-'^-lr&w^- 

y jj-7^  #t-£  \ i yy  y •£&•*&  ^y>- 

5 ^ i & -F  -Pr' ^ 

io.  yjjYb 

>Jwr  > Hi  > v^if  >-$&%  /9J  df?tf  $q£ti 

>3r^?7 

is.  d}^y  •i&'FfJ?  JS  '53$  <7?  17^^^  vl^ 


619 


[ No.  9.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAlIARt  (Klth’IlALl). 

Kochi  Dialect.  State  Bask  a hr. 

LITERAL  TRANSCRIPTION  IN  THE  NAGART  CHARACTER. 

inft  Rrrot  t # i wrk  # q mm 

to  q t%  ft  to:  tt  wt^t  g # % i to  to  ^t4% 

qHft  ft#  qifNrt  ft#  i to  tt%  qrrw: 

qi^r  qTqrifr  qTqTNrr  #:  wr#t  i to  #to  to%  wrV 

e.  qHft  %^naE  q *itq  i to  tot  to  to#  to  qr#  ?qr#t  q#ft 

1R%  TO  TO  *TOT  qt  q\T3B  q-#T  I TO  TO  qT3E#  ^T*  I 

TO  TO  q#t  ftftqTTt  ^FTT  I TO  # ^TO 

% TOTT  WTTOt:  I TO  # TOT  T TO  ff#  q£r- 

qrl  #T  TOTOt*.  qw^T  TOWT  ^TTt  3T  I ftr  WT  |#T  I 
• • 

10.  #Tq  TO  % I TOT  ^R#  RTR  T ft*Tf  TOTf 

1 TOq  ^TT#  # ffa  T TTTC[  TSTOft  ftft  qtaft  TOft  ft 
Trfr  ^::wt  tpit  to  i to  ftfr  qrq  #ft  Tift 

TRT  TO#  RTR  ft#  TO  *tft  TO  # ftRT  # #t#  TO- 
TO  •TT  ^ftft  ?rift  TOER  qTq  I TO  Tift  #Tt  WtT£ 
is.  <ftr#  #tqr  to  t%t:  i w # to#  q#t  ftroft  qftr  wf 


VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


4 1 2 


620  * WESTBRJf  PAHARf. 

f >-»i? 

4%$ *fs-£  i 

f$f  x^wr f -£'f)zf'  ipif$$p 

5 J&f  §}d$~  fb:  ? ,337  „ ftw-fftf’ 

v*3'-  ^ J}s/~  ffjzp  jj^r  -r^° 

*Arf^  j£f?r»  f$f*rfTTx  Y£-  w >> 

10-  SifpZZ . fj^a&'^scjT'  ~J~A  ^rj*  $5j£ 

fflfigf'  >5^^-  Z£  2$Ti&  ^sC  5^ 

^ jf-ff  ff~) "5^  $ ^»9  4^  ^ 

& ^L  >-f^r  >p>  >£fff&fbr<F' 

1S-  4^-  fbfp  >?%  c«»»  r^-c^  -f^Q^ 

^&r*£  F»f  W? P L&Zfep'gi^ 

fQfb  gf)  rr-f  £:  j$~ 

‘!b?*hj'^-'*y|a^p9^3?fe 

^ sfr^^rf  *£>#;***>, 


JflUTHALI  (K0CHI).  621 

wrf  i itf  tot  TOftit  ;roii  tr  ft#  toto  i sr:#  tot  ^r* : 

“ ■* 

TO  TOT  T TOT  TO  %#ft  ffm  # I TO  wit  §%#  TO 
#T§  ft  fiT#t  % TOT3B  %t:ft  TO  ^ #§  TO  I To  T WVWZT* 

#TTTO:  # TOT  TOTO  TO  TOt  TOTO  TO  #ft 

5.  to  TOt  #r%  #ro  to  to:  i ?ftro  tort  ftssit:  # 

^ • 

it#:  ir  to  *ft  #toi  to##  tow  tow  *js%  tott#  \ 

TFT  % TTTTOIT  STTOt  % TOTTO£  TO#  1 ir  TOT  it  TOT  WtTZTT 
TTO  Vt*TO  #TO  #TO  ff^T  ftTO  I TO  TOT  *.  TOTO  % TO  II 

TOTT  TOST  €tTOT  StTO  % STOTT  TO:  I TO  TOT  TOTO  TO 

♦ ' • 

10.  TJTO  ffali  TOTO#  TOTO#  TTW#  | ?tl  TO  TOT  ftTO 

itftft  g#  % tot  Tilt  it:  to:  fttr  t#:  i to*  tot  *ft  it# 

% TOT  ^TT  "TOT  T#  TOT:  I TO  TTW  TO?  # *T%  SFT  TFT 

ft  to:  ##TOft  # toT:  i to:  spirit  TO  itro  i 4tro  iffro 

TO  #TO  I TO  TT  TO  TOTT  TO##  TOT  ^ TOTTft^T  M^##  *UTO:  I 

16-  WtTS  ft#  % #*#  TO  TOS  zrrft  to#  TO#  # I TOt 

,> 

it#  #s:  tot  i to:  to  to  w&z  ft  to  ft#  irf:#  tt  tot# 

\J  Nj  x 

SW  Tin  TO^T  I 51^  TJ  71TT  TJ5IT  ^T4I  TOHSIT 

to  srft  to#  %#t##  # tot  *i  sir  *§#TOft  to  i 

♦ 

<r*IT 

to%  to  if  toft  #to  i g it  n #ft  nr  s:  # 

>ji 


Q22  wrstebn  pahArT. 

&4T  k tt?  '$fcVTf  ^ jT 

'W^9  ^ '$f£z  vfr  V ff^QiP jrs 

’r-f^SSV' 


KlfjfHAbt  (KOCHI). 

fi  n*t  n^Ert  fi  ^Tt  i TNt  irti  in 
Wu  d fin  ntnT  n i n$  wr. 

% *3v  *s  "S 

*i«ti  urn  ht  nw  urn  11 


628 


624 


[ No  9.] 

& 

INOO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAHA?I  (KiCtHALT). 

Koch!  Dialect.  State  Bashahr. 

.'f'* 

,v 

TRANSLITERATION  ACCORDING  TO  PRONUNCIATION,  AND 

TRANSLATION. 

Ekl-manso-re  dux  choli^u  the.  Laukhre-cliolitue  babe-khg 

One-man-of  two  sons  were.  By-the-younger-son  the-father-to* 

bolo,  * e baba,  jo  tere  ghftrcke  hau,  tet-ra  bgda 

it-tcas-said,  * O father , what  thy  property  may -be,  that-of  share 

mS-le  oru-de.’  Tebe  tene  apne  ghdrchi  dui-wile 

me-to  give-away Then  by-him  his-own  property  thc-two-neqg 

bldiyo  dine.  Tebe  lifikre-duso-pachhe  kanchha  cho^u 

having-divided  was-given.  Then  some-day s-af ter  the-younger  squ 

apna  bsda  pakciriyo  p6rdeso-le  naso.  Tebe  tene  apne 

his-own  share  having-taken  a-far-country-to  tcent.  There  by -him  his-own 

sare  gliftrcki  deale-de  klxoe.  Jebe  teh-re  se  apne  sare 

all  property  bankruptcy-in  was-lost.  When  him-of  that  his-own  all 

ghftrclie  khayo  becliiyo  muke,  tebe  t§s-mulk%-do 

property  haring-eaten  having-sold  was-f  wished,  then  that-country-in 
kal  p6r6.  Tebe  se  dalje  hua.  Tebe  se  ekx-jimidaro-msjl 

a-f amine  fell.  Then  he  poor  became.  Then  he  a-faimier-icith 

ralmda  laga.  Tone  se  apne-doklire-de  sSgra  ■ ckarda 

remaining  began.  By-him  he  his-own-felds-in  swine  feeding 

chliaro.  Tebe  se  sSgoi'o-re  boche-liGndc-sftlekre-kfire  apno 

was-appointed.  Then  he  llie-swine-of  remained-becoming-husks-with  his-own 
peclihra  bhtfrna  chao-tha,  ” hoi1  na  deo-the  koe  kichh 

belly  to- fill  wishing-icas,  and  not  giving-was  anyone  anything 

t8s-le.  Tebe  t8s-re  apne-bap8-re  rig8r-dliftgg&rfl-re  ad  aje 

him- to.  Then  him-of  his-own-father-of  servant s-menials-of  memory  came 

je,  ‘ tin-re  apCx  khaiyo  roti-poH  b8chdi-thi, 

that,  * them-of  themselves  having-eaten  brea d-etcel era  remaining-over-and-dbove-was , 

hau  icliha  bhukha  nx&ru.’  Tene  apne-jiwo-do  sffcho, 

L here  hungry  die.'  By-him  h is-own  -soul-in  it-was- thought, 

* hau  xtha  {for  ichha)  apne  bap8-wile  deft.  Hau  fces-khe  bolu 

‘ I here  my-own  father-near  may -go.  I him-to  may-say 


KIUTHALf  (KOCHI). 

j6,  “ mol  P5ns6r  na  dekhiyo 

that,  “ by-mo  God  not  having-scon 
Ebe  hau  tero  chohtu  phirne 

Now  I thy  son  to-be-called 

ap  ne-rig6ro-n6hore  apu-age 

thwe-own-servants-like  thy  self -before 

apne-bapG-wilo  chala.  AjI  se 
his-oum-father-near  went.  Still  he 

t8s  dekhiyo  ghin  ki. 

him  having-seen  compassion  was-made. 
t&s-chohtu-rl  kero-de  ghyal  deivo 


pap 

sin 


mo. 


that-son-of  neck-on 
T&s-re  cliohtue  bola, 

Him-of  by-the-son  it-icas-said,  ‘ by-me , 

ta5  asde  pap  kiyo.  Ebe  tero 

thee  in-being  sin  was-done.  Now  thy 


taS  aide 
thee  in-being 

na  rbha. 
not  remained. 
Tebe  se 

Then  he 

tha,  les-re 
was,  him-of 

phcti 

-Z iy-liim  liaving-run 

muli6-de  khobu 


jega 
worthy 
chhar.”  ’ 
keep''  ' 

dur-i 

far-even 


clinging  having-given  tlie-face-on  kisses 

baba,  Pans6r  na 

father , God  not 

cholitu  phi  me 


son  to-be-called 


* . r6h;V 
I-remained 

fehltra 

from-inside 

kagne, 
a-ring, 
honda, 
being, 
p8re. 
fell. 


Tone 
liy-liim 
gariyo 

having-brought 
lato-de  lwate 

feel-on  shoes 

klioa  honda, 
lost  being , 


62& 

k!y(0). 

was-done. 

Tu  mu 
Thou  ' me 
tethiyo 
from-there 
bape 

by-the-father 

dewivo 
• * 

having-gone 

dine. 

tcere-given. 

dekhiyo 

having-seen 

joga  na 
worthy  not 


apne-rig 

8ro-khe 

bolo 

je* 

‘ es-klii 

hi8-own-servants-to 

it-was-said 

that, 

* tliis-one-to 

achhe 

achhe 

jhurke 

bomao. 

HatJi6-de 

good 

good 

garments 

pul-on. 

Hand-on 

lao. 

Je 

®j  ye 

mera 

chohta  mua 

put. 

That 

to-day  this 

my 

- son  dead 

jma; 
lived  ; 


mila.’ 
was- got.' 


Tebe 

Then 


se 

they 


dm 

two 


sukha-de 

happiness-in 


K 


Teh-ra 

Him-of 


bSdra 

'tlie-elder 


chohta 

son 


dokhre-de 
the-fi  eld-in 


deua-do 

gone 


tha. 

was. 


Jebe 

When 


se 

he 


ghftro-nere 

pvija,  tone 

nachno 

giino 

suno. 

Tebe 

tene 

the-house-near 

arrived,  by-hirn 

dancing 

singing 

was-heard. 

Then 

by-him 

ek  rlgftf 

bodiyo 

puchho 

je. 

‘ mhare-kae 

yah 

ka 

a servant 

having-called 

it-was-asked 

that. 

* our(-house)-in 

this 

tchat 

hoi 

rbo  ? ’ 

Tene 

tSs-khi 

bolo 

je. 

‘ tera 

having-become 

remained  ? ' 

By-hirn 

him-to 

it-was-said 

that, 

'thy 

dud 

ae 

r6o-sG. 

Tere-babe 

te-khl 

bli81e 

younger-brother 

having-come 

remained-is. 

By-thy-father 

him-for 

well 

chdngc  ane-ri  tel  kkano-karl  kl-so.*  Ei 

healthy  coming-of  for  a-feast  made-is.'  This 

ruse-goa.  Blntre  deonda  bliaje-g6a.  Teh-ra 

he-became-angry . Within  going  he-refused . Him-of 

VOL.  IX,  PAST  IV. 


suniyo 

having-heard 
bab 
th  e-father 

4 L 


626 


WESTERN  PAHArI, 


asiyo 

having-become 


b a liarB  ‘ 
outside 

bolo  jo, 

it-tcas-said  that, 
tero  bolo 

thy  said-thing 
bi  na 

even  not 

korda. 

might-have-made. 
tore  sari  ghorehl 

thy  all  property 

kliano-karl  done.’ 

a-feast  was- given 


‘moe 
4 by-nie 

no! 

not-even 

ditto, 

was-given 


tes-khe  manaonda  pat&onda  laga. 

him-to  reconciling  coaxing  began . 

tore  tobol  tftkurl  kae-bSrso 

thy  service  attendance  for-several-years 
tala.  Tel  mn-kho  ck 

was-disobeyed.  liy-thee  me-to  a 

jelo.  ha  apne-sau-s8nge 

by- which  I my-own-friends-xoith 

Jobe  e tora  eja  cliohta 

TV  hen  this  thy  such  son 

ehliowrl  o-d  o kliewe, 

harlot s-on  was-caxised-to-be-eaten, 

Babe  tes-klie  jawab 

liy -the- father  him-to  answer 


Ohohte 
Hy -the- son 
kl, 

was- done, 
' chkfdtu 

kid 

khusl 

rejoicing 

jcnCs 

by-whom 

tae 

by-thee 


‘ tu 
4 Ih on 
mil -age 


to 

indeed 


aso,  se 
me- to  is,  that 
]5ro-tlm,  koal 

proper-was , because 

jlunda  hua-so ; 

liv  i n g became-is  ; 


mu-s5nge 
■me- with 
sob 

all 


dheri  r8e-s8. 

for-days  (i.e.  always)  remained-art. 


aja, 
came, 
tes-khe 
him- for 

dina  jo, 

was-given  that , 

jg-kifi 

Whatever 


tero 

thine 

loro 
thy 

gorao-goa-tba, 

losl-gone-was, 


so. 


Ilfio 

is.  For-us 

dad 

yonnger-broiher 
mile-goa.* 
got- went.' 


M' 

that 


• kliusl  hona 

rejoiced  to-become 
more-goa-tha,  ebe 
died-youe-was,  now 


627 


STANDARD  LIST  OF  WORDS  AND  SENTENCES 
FOR  THE  KlOjHALT  GROUP. 


VOL.  IX,  PART  JV. 


STANDARD  LIST  OF  WORDS  AND 


English. 

Kiuthall. 

Ha^uri. 

1.  One 

• 

• 

Ek  .... 

Ek 

• 

• 

2.  Two 

• 

• 

Do  .... 

DO 

• 

a 

3.  Three 

• 

• 

Chaun  .... 

Tin 

• 

e 

4.  Four 

• 

• 

igar  .... 

Char 

r. 

• 

5.  Five 

• 

• 

Panz,  panjh  . . 

PSch 

• 

• 

6,  Six 

• 

• 

2§h5  .... 

Chhfi 

• 

• 

7.  Seven 

• 

• 

Sat  . • • . 

Sat 

• 

• 

8.  Eight 

• 

• 

Atth  .... 

A«h 

• 

• 

9.  Nine 

• 

Nau  .... 

No 

• 

• 

10.  Ten 

• 

DaS  .... 

%Das 

• 

• 

11.  Twenty 

• 

Bis  . . . t 

Bi  . 

• 

• 

12.  Fifty 

« 

• 

Pajah  .... 

Pan  jab 

• 

• 

13.  Hundred 

• 

• 

* 

Sau  .... 

So 

• 

• 

14.  I 

f 

• 

.V 

A .... 

HSft 

. 

• 

15.  Of  me 

• 

• 1 

MSr&,  merfl 

Mora 

• 

• 

16.  Mine 

• 

• 

Mera,  merfl  . • 

.MOrft 

• 

• 

17.  We 

• 

• 

Harnf)  . . . . 

AsS 

a 

• 

18.  Of  ns 

• 

Mahra  (or  -0),  m&ra  (or  -o) 

Asada 

• 

• 

19.  Our 

- 

• 

Mahra  (or  -rt),  mara  (or  -fl) 

Asacla 

• 

• 

20.  Thou 

• 

• 

T ft  .... 

TO 

• 

• 

21.  Of  thee 

# 

• 

Terfi,  t5rO 

TOrft 

• 

• 

22.  Thine 

TSra,  tOro 

TSra 

• 

• 

23.  Yon 

• 

TnmS,  tussS  • 

TusS 

• 

• 

24.  Of  yon 

• 

Tum&hra  (or  -o) 

Tusada 

• 

• 

25.  Tonr 

• 

• 

! 

Tutnfthra  (or  -ro) 

! 

Tusatfc 

• 

• 

628— Kifttball, 


PHRASE8  FOR  THE  KlOjHALl  GROUP 


Simla  Sirftjl. 

i 

1 

siSr&chftll. 

English. 

Ek 

• 

• 

’ i 

®k  ... 

1.  One. 

DO 

• 

i 

Dni 

• 

2.  Two. 

Charm 

• 

• 

* i 

Chin 

3.  Three. 

Chftr 

• 

• 

• i 

Ch&r 

4.  Four. 

Panj 

• 

• 

• 

paj  ... 

5.  Five. 

Chho 

• 

• 

• 

Chha 

6.  Six. 

Sat 

• 

• 

• 

Sat  ' . 

9 

7.  Seven. 

Ath 

• 

• 

j 

Ath 

8.  Eight. 

Nau 

• 

• 

i 

i 

Nau 

• 

9.  Nine, 

Dafi 

• 

a 

i 

• i 

i 

DauS 

10.  Ten. 

B 16 

• 

• 

Bid  • . • 

• 

11.  Twenty. 

Paja 

• 

• 

• 

Ado  6a  u 

• 

12.  Fifty. 

San 

• 

San 

• 

13.  Hundred. 

a 

A . • 

• 

• 

• 

AS 

• 

14.  I. 

Mfr& 

• 

• 

• 

Mera,  m5rft  . • 

• 

15.  Of  me. 

Mgra 

• 

• 

• 

M&ra,  mBrO 

1 6.  Mine. 

AT,  ?,  aim 3,  83 

• 

Hume,  &tn& 

1 

• 

17.  We. 

Mahra 

t 

• 

Amflrft,  amflrfl,  amara, 
amarO,  amra,  amrO. 

18.  Of  us. 

Mahr& 

• 

• 

Am  Ora,  amOrO,  amara, 

am&rO,  amra,  amrO. 

19.  Our. 

i 

i 

Tfl 

• 

• 

Tn  . . . 

i 

1 20.  Thou. 

Tfrt 

• 

Terfl,  t$rO 

• 

1 

21.  Of  thee 

Torft 

m 

• 

i 

i 

22.  Thine. 

Tflai,  tflg 

• 

• 

TumO 

• 

23.  You. 

Tnanr 

• 

• 

Tum&r&,  tum&ro, 
tuflrO,  tnOr&,  tuOrO. 

tuara. 

24.  Of  you. 

Tnanro  . 

• 

Tumar&,  tnznarO, 
fcn&rO,  tnOr&,  tuOrO. 

tuara, 

25.  Your. 

KiSthali— 629 


English. 

• 

XiSthall. 

Hsf#rL 

26.  He 

• 

• 

Ss  . 

• 

Sfi  . 

e 

• 

• 

• 

27.  Of  him 

• 

• 

T$s-r&  . • 

• 

T8s-d& 

• 

• 

a 

• 

• 

28.  His 

• 

• 

Tds-rfi  . 

• 

T«s-d* 

• 

• 

0 

9 

29.  They 

• 

So  ... 

So 

• 

e 

• 

9 

80.  Of  them 

• 

Tin-ri,  tihnau-r5 

TInS-ra 

• 

• 

e 

a 

81.  Their 

• 

Tin-rft,  tihnau-r& 

TlnS-rft 

e 

• 

i 

e 

32.  Hand 

• 

• 

Hath 

Hath 

• 

e 

9 

e 

33.  Foot 

• 

I .at 

Pair 

• 

• 

• 

• 

84.  Nose 

# 

• 

Nak 

Nak 

• 

• 

a 

• 

35.  Eye 

• 

• 

AkkhS  . 

• 

Hakh 

• 

• 

• 

• 

86.  Mouth 

m 

# 

• 

MKh 

• 

Muh 

• 

• 

• 

• 

37.  Tooth 

e 

e 

Dand 

• 

Dand 

e 

• 

• 

• 

88.  Ear 

• 

• 

Kan 

• 

Kan 

e 

• 

0 

• 

39.  Hair 

• 

• 

Ba} 

• 

Kofi 

e 

• 

• 

’ • 

40.  Head 

• 

• 

MuncjL  . • • 

• 

Sir 

• 

• 

0 

• 

41.  Tongue 

• 

• 

Jib  • • » 

• 

Jib 

e 

• 

e 

42.  Belly 

• 

• 

Pet;  • 

• 

P«t 

• 

• 

• 

• 

43.  Back 

• 

Pith 

• 

Pith,  pithl 

e 

• 

• 

44.  Iron 

• 

Loa 

• 

Loha 

• 

• 

• 

• 

45.  Gold 

• 

• 

Sodna 

• 

SdinS 

0 

e 

• 

9 

46.  Silver 

• 

• 

Chaud  . • . 

• 

ChfidI 

• 

• 

• 

• 

47.  Father 

• 

• 

B&pfl,  bfto  a e 

• 

Baba 

• 

• 

• 

4 

48.  Mother 

• 

• 

Ami,  Ijl  • • e 

• 

A mm  ft. 

• 

• 

r 

49.  Brother 

• 

• 

Baift,  bad 

• 

Dada 

• 

• 

• 

1 

50.  Sister 

• 

• 

Bdbi,  bfth9  » . 

a 

BObO 

0 

e 

• 

• 

61.  Man 

• 

• 

MSchh,  thii?(J  • « 

• 

Ma^a 

• 

• 

• 

• 

52.  Woman 

• 

t 

J w&nas,  ohhgwyi 

• 

Jaw&^a* 

• 

e 

• 

630— Kittyhali, 


Slml*  SbtjL 

&Jrich8H. 

Enj 

I S8  . . . . 

• Sw,  s6  • , ! 

26.  He. 

1 T8s-rft 

. TSs-rO  . 

27.  Of  him. 

1 Tftw*  . 

TfiB-ro  . 

28.  His. 

so  . 

. SB8,  Bfl  . 

29.  They. 

1 Tinan-rft  . , 

TiS-rfi  ' . 

• 

J 30.  Of  them. 

I Tinau-rft  . , 

Titt-rO  . 

• 

i 

I 31.  Their. 

I 

1 Hftth  .... 

Ahth  , „• 

• 

32.  Hand. 

h*t  .... 

Bftg^S 

• 

{ 33.  Foot. 

1 

Nak  .... 

Nak  . . . 

• 

| 34.  Nose. 

Akh 

Akh 

• 

1 

] 35.  Eye. 

Ua  . . . . . 

Khab  . 

• 

36.  Mouth. 

Usd  ...  . 

Dad  , 

’ 

• 

37.  Tooth. 

Kan 

KSutliG  . 

# 

38.  Ear. 

.... 

Madal  . 

1 

• , 

39.  Hair. 

MSd  .... 

MSd  . . . 

• 

4-0.  Head. 

Jib  .... 

Jib  ... 

m 

4J.  Tongue. 

P<5t 

* • • • 

pet  ... 

• 

42.  Belly. 

PithI  .... 

Pitb 

• 

43.  Back. 

^obo  .... 

Loh 

• 

44.  Iron. 

S«no  .... 

S.m5  . 

. 

45.  Gold. 

Rttpo  . 

Rflpfl 

• 

46.  Silver. 

Baba  • . . . ] 

Babu,  bay 

« 

47.  Father. 

* 

[je.  ay  . . 

• 

48.  Mother. 

Uftdft,  bhfil  . . ] 

3hai,  bhaya  . . 

• 

49.  Brother. 

Uaa  * . . . 1 

Jads,  bone  . . 

• ' 

50.  Sister. 

Ma°hh  . . . . . * 

T&^iohh,  inuijohh  . 

t 

• * 

>1.  Man. 

^Btrt  . ^ r 

• • • L 

Ihhewfi  . 

e 

• t 

>2.  Woman. 

Ki5jh.ll — 63] 


English. 

Ki&tball. 

Hatfuri. 

53.  Wife 

Clihewfi 

• 

• 

Bahu 

• 

• 

• 

54.  Child 

Bagohr  • 

• 

• 

Bhaft 

• 

• 

• 

55.  Son 

• 

Beta,  bagehr  . 

• 

Bara  bhafl 

• 

56.  Daughter  . 

• 

Boti 

• 

Chlioti  . 

• 

57.  Slavo 

• 

Ali 

• 

Kama 

• 

• 

58.  Cultivator. 

Bastarfi  . 

• 

Pan 

• 

• 

59.  Shepherd  . 

Bud  ala 

• 

G a will 

* i 

i 

i 

60.  God  • 

Thaukur 

Parme^war 

! 

61.  Devil 

BhfU 

’ ! 

Lftd 

i 

62.  Sun 

Sfiraj 

Sfiraj 

i 

63.  Moon  • 

Jnhn 

Gbaud 

’ I 

i 

64.  Star 

Tara 

Tan' 

1 

1 

i 

65.  Fire 

• 

Ag 

A*r 

! 

66.  Water 

• 

C h 1 s • 

- 

Pan! 

. i 

67.  House 

• 

Gaulir 

• ; 

Ghar 

• 

68.  Horae 

• 

• 

Gohra 

i 

Ghfiya,  kOra 

■ 

60.  Cow 

• 

• 

Gaul 

• 

(iaje 

70.  Dog 

Sakari,  kukkar 

• 

Kfita 

* 

i 

i 

71.  Cat 

Ginda  (m.),  braill  (/.) 

• 

Bill 

• 

.i 

i 

72.  Cock 

Kukkra  . 

• 

• 

Kukhra 

• 

• 

1 

73.  Duck 

• 

Batakh  . 

• 

• 

! 

• | 

74.  Abb 

• 

Gadha 

• 

• 

Gadha 

• 

• 

75.  Camel 

• 

Ut 

• 

• 

at 

TTt  • 

• 

i 

76.  Bird 

< 

Chaykn,  panchhl 

• 

• 

Pauchhi  • 

• 

• 

1 

77.  Go 

• 

Do 

• 

Ja  • 

• 

* 

• 

78.  Eat 

• 

i 

i 

Kha 

• 

• 

Kha 

• 

• 

79.  Sit 

• 

Bstli 

• 

Baith 

• 

• 

• 

i 

% 

632— Xiathall. 


Simla  Sirftjt. 

S8  rich  511. 

English. 

Chilli  . 

• 

Bfltl 

• 

• 

5.‘5.  Wife. 

CkalitXi,  cbahta 

• 

LrtbrS  . . 

• 

54.  Child. 

Chhfiugta 

• 

Chliifgtfl,  may  ft 

• 

55.  Son. 

Chbiingtl 

• 

Chhagti,  maf  « 

56.  Daughter. 

Kam5o  . 

• 

Kanjin 

• 

57.  Slave. 

B5sun  . 

• 

B5sln 

• 

58.  Cultivator. 

BBrliala  • • 

Bedhala  . 

• 

59.  Shepherd. 

Thakdr  . . 

. 

' 

FSnAsor  . 

• 

• 

GO.  God. 

Kid 

• 

1 

Satan  . , 

• 

• 

61.  Devil. 

Dofl  . , 

j 

l 

Surnj 

• 

• 

G2,  Sun. 

Jun 

! 

1 

Julian 

• 

k 

63.  Moon. 

Tara 

! 

Tarfl 

• 

• 

04.  Star. 

A<?  ... 

• 

Air 

» 

• 

65.  Fire. 

Pa  lit 

Pa  iii 

• 

1 66.  Water. 

Gaukr,  g5hr  . 

* j 

Ghaur,  gauhr  . 

■ 

67.  House. 

G fib  pa  . . • 

Ghftjvs,  gohp?  . 

• 

• 

68.  Horse. 

Oart 

Giirt  . , 

• 

69.  Cow. 

Kfikar 

j 

i 

Kukur 

70.  Dog. 

T)hoda  . 

ft  ' 

Birall  . . 

• 

71.  Cat. 

Kftkhra  . 

t 

KukhfO  . * 

• 

72.  Cock. 

Botfckk  . « 

• 

Bfttok 

« 

73.  Duck. 

Gada  ■ • • 

• 

Gadfl  , • 

74.  Ass. 

(ft  ... 

• 

Ufc 

• 

75.  Camel. 

P<>klirfl  ... 

• 

Chorkn  , 

• 

76.  Bird. 

t>.l  ... 

• 

Va 

. 

77.  Go. 

Kha 

• 

Kha 

• 

78.  Eat. 

Potli 

• 

B£s  • • 

• 

• 

79.  Sit. 

i 

V0L.  IX,  PART  IY, 


KiSthall — 633 
4 u 


Kiflthall. 


English. 

£0,  Come  • 

81.  Beat 

82.  Stand  , . 

83.  Die 

84.  Give 

85.  Ilnn 
80.  Up 
87.  Near 

bb.  Down 

89.  Far 

90.  Before 

91.  Behind 

92.  Who 

93.  What 

94.  Why 

95.  And 

96.  Bat 

97.  If 

98.  Yes 

99.  No  . ’ . 

100.  Alas 

101.  A father  . 

102.  Of  a father 

103.  To  a father 

104.  From  a father 

105.  Two  fathers 

106.  Fathers  , . 


A ... 

. Tip 

r 

. tJbhft  0 . 

. M5r 

• DO  • a • 

Dauf 

. Ubha  . 

. NSfirS  . 

. Blifiida,  findhft 
. Dfir  • 

. Giioka  . • • 

. Fachhuka,  pichhauka 
. Kun 

. Kali 

. K5nnl-kli5,  kfl5 

. H5r  . . 

. Par  . . • 

. Jai 

. Ah 

. Nlh,  na  . 

. Bakh 

Iiapti 

. Biipn-ra  . 

Bapu-khe,  -hagO 
. Bapo-da,  -hagC  * 

. Do  bapfi . • . 

• Bapfi 


A • • a 

. Afar  i • 

. Ube-h0  . 

. Mar  • 

. Dfi  . 

Daup  . 

. Ub5 

. NSrft 

. Udfi  • • 

. Dfir 

. Age 

. Plchba  . . 

. Ki8 

. Kya 

. Kaft 

. PhSr 

. Par  . . 

. J6  . 

• Hi  . 

. Na  , 

. Dukh  . 

. B&O 

BaO-rt  . • . 

. BaO-khi  . . 

. BaO-tfi  . . 

t Oo  bag  . • 

. Bao 


Simla  SMjl. 

88rioh81i. 

English. 

Aj 

« a 

I i 

• a 

80.  Como. 

Pl$ 

• « 

Pit 

a a 

< 81.  Beat. 

Ubft  0 • 

• 

• • 

• 

UbO-hO  . 

• •. 

82.  Stand. 

M5r 

a a 

• 

toa 

• 

83.  Dio. 

Ds 

• a 

• 

Da 

• 

84.  Give. 

PhSfc 

a • 

• 

Big 

• a 

• 

85.  Hun. 

G&sh 

a a 

• 

Gad  • 

• 

* 

86.  Up. 

NSfa 

• a 

• 

Neyi 

• 

• 

87.  Near. 

Nit  ho  . 

a • 

Niudo  « 

a a 

• 

8^.  Down. 

Dflr  . 

• 

Dfir 

• a 

• 

89.  Far. 

Ags 

a • 

Agu 

• • 

• 

90.  Before. 

P&chhd  ■ 

« a 

Pichhfl  • 

• v 

• 

91.  Behind. 

j Kun-j&  . 

• a 

KunO 

• 

92.  Who. 

Ka 

a ■ 

Ka 

• 

• 

93.  What. 

Kan 

a a 

KaukhI  . 

a • 

94.  Why. 

TaT  . 

a • 

Taf,  tS8  . 

• 

95.  And. 

SidliO 

a a 

Par  . 

a a 

96.  But. 

Jai  # 

. a 

Ja  • • 

• a 

• 

97.  If. 

0 . 

i 

• a 

HSba 

• • 

i 

98.  Yes. 

i 

| Na  . 

i 

• a 

Na 

• 

• 

99.  No. 

Jhauri  . 

• 

ErS 

a 

100.*' Alas. 

Baba  , 

• a 

Baba 

• a 

101.  A father. 

Bftbs-r&  . 

• a 

Babu-r&  . 

a • 

102.  Of  a father. 

Babo-ka  . 

• • 

Babfl-khd 

• • 

• 

103.  To  a father. 

Baba- do  . 

• a 

• ■ 

Baba-da 

• • 

• 

104.  From  a father. 

Bo  b&bs  . 

a a 

. ] 

Do!  bibs 

• • 

• 

105.  Two  fathers. 

Bibs 

• • 

. 1 

BBbfl 

• • 

LOG.  Fathers. 

i®£aE— 685 


+ k a 


VOL.  IX,  PART  IV, 


Euglfoli. 

i 

i Kiflthttll. 

I 

Haggurl. 

107.  Of  fathers 

1 

. Baph-ra 

i 

BaO-ra 

• 

10  8 To  fathers 

! 

. Bapn-khA,  -hagA  . 

BaO-khS  . • . 

• 

109.  From  fathers  . 

. Bapfi-da,  -hagfl 

Ban-tfi 

• 

110.  A daughter  • 

. Betl  .... 

Bet! 

• 

111.  Of  a dan gh tor  . 

■ 

. Betl-ra  .... 

Bsti-ra  . 

* 

• 

112.  To  a daughter. 

. Bet I- k he,  -hage 

BpU-khS  . 

' 

• 

113.  From  a daughter 

. Beti-da,  -hftgfl  . 

B6ti-tfi  . 

• 

114.  Two  daughters 

. Dn  beti  .... 

Dfl  betiyS  . , . 

• 

Ilf).  Daughters 

. Beti  » « • . 

BStiyS . . 

• 

116.  Of  daughters  . 

. Beti-ra  .... 

BetlyS-ra 

• 

117.  To  daughters  . 

. Beti-klie,  -hage 

Betiya-khe 

118.  From  daughters 

. Beti-da,  -ha go 

Bctiyft-te  . . 

119.  A good  man 

. Ek  bhnlfi  mnclih 

Khara  a dm]  . . 

120.  Of  a good  man 

. Rki  bhale  mSchhfl-ra 

Khare  admi-ra  • 

121.  To  a good  man 

. Rki  bliale  machluvkhf*, 
-hage. 

Khare  adnu-khfi  , 

122.  From  a good  man 

. Rki  bhale  machhft-da,  -hago 

KharA  admj-t&  • 

123.  Two  good  men 

. Do  bhale  mnclih 

I)A  khar<5  adml 

124.  Good  men 

. Bliale  maclih  . 

Kliare  admi 

125.  Of  good  men 

i 

. ' Bhalo  m§ohhfi-ra  • . 

Khare  admlyi-ra  • 

126.  To  good  men  . 

i 

. Bhale  machhA-khe,  -hage  . 

j 

Khare  admiyi-jo. 

127.  From  good  men 

i _ : 

. Bliale  machhfl-da,  -liagfl 

| i 

Kbarg  adm!ya-t6 

128.  A good  woman 

j 

. : Rk  ts^zzari  jwanas  . 

Ek  kliari  jawapas 

129.  A bad  boy 

i 

. 1 Ek  nats6zza  (or  nataozzarA) 

1 bagehr. 

! i 

Ek  bura  chhotti  . 

• 

130.  Good  women 

• ; Tsfizzari  chhewrl  . . ! 

! * | 

KhariyS  jawagasS 

131.  A bad  girl 

' . i 

. Ek  natsSzzI  chflhti  . 

j * ! 

Ek  bun  chhokri 

• 

132.  Good  • , 

1 . | 

. ; Ig5zzara  (or  -rfl) 

j i 

Khara 

• 

133.  Better  • * 

„ ! 

# * (fis-da)  beh  ( better  than  ! 

j this).  | 

(T#s-l£)  khara 

• 

636— KiiJthali. 


Simla  Sirajl. 

. .. 

Sftroch&ll. 

English. 

B5b£  -ra  . • 

• 

• 

Babu-ra  - • • 

107.  Of  fathers. 

Babft-ka  . 

• 

• 

BabO-khO  . » 

108.  To  fathers. 

Baba-d0  . 

• 

Babfi-dO 

109.  From  fathers. 

ChAhti  . 

• 

• 

Chhigtl  . 

110.  A daughter. 

Cbohti-rS 

• 

• 

ChhSgtl-ra 

111.  Of  a daughter. 

Chohti-ka 

• 

• 

ChliHgti-khe 

. 

112.  To  a daughter. 

Cbohti-do  . 

• 

CbbggtI-do 

113.  From  a daughter. 

Do  chohtiyS  , 

• 

Dui  chbSgtl 

114.  Two  daughters. 

ChAhti  . 

• 

ChhSgti  • 

115.  Daughters. 

Chohti-ra 

• 

• 

Chliifgtl-ra 

116.  Of  daughters. 

Cbohtl-ka  • 

• 

• 

ChhSirti-kbe 

117.  Two  daughters. 

ChOhti-do 

• 

• 

CbliagtI-do  • ♦ 

118.  From  daughters. 

BhOla  mSchh  • 

• 

Bb51o  map  ebb 

1 19.  A good  man. 

BbOle  mSchh-ra 

• 

Bh&lfs  majkchhiS-ra 

120.  Of  a good  man. 

BhOle  machh-ka 

• 

Bh&le  ma^chho-kliS  . 

121 . To  a good  man. 

Bhtflo  niScbh-do 

• 

BholO  inarch hu-do 

122.  From  a tr^o  1 man. 

Do  bb51o  machh 

• 

• 

Dui  bhole  ma$rhh 

123.  Two  good  men. 

Bhole  macbb  . 

• 

• 

BliOlo  raanclib 

‘.j 

0 

0 

G 

n\ 

Bh8l£  machh-ra 

• 

• 

BhOlo  ma^chhO-ra 

125.  Of  got d men. 

Bb&lo  mSobb-ka 

• 

i 

Bhole  ma^cbho-kbO  . 

126.  To  good  men. 

Bhole  mSobb-do 

• 

Bhftla  ma^cblio-dO 

127.  From  good  men. 

Bhfcli  cbhcbpi  . 

• 

Blitfle  chhewri 

128.  A good  woman. 

Buro  cbobtO 

• 

Ek  uikamO  cbbsgtu  . 

129.  A bad  boy. 

Bhftli  chhObfi  . 

• 

Birth  91  clihewrl 

130.  Good  women. 

IiibX  cbobtl  • 

• 

Ek  mkiinu  mill  . 

131.  A bad  girl. 

Acbho,  bbblo  . 

• 

AcliliO 

132.  Good. 

AchhA,  bholo 

• 

(TSs-kin)  fiebbo 

i 

133.  Better. 

KiSthall— 637 


English. 

iSll.  Best  . 

135.  HigI*  . 

186.  Higher  • 

137.  Highest  . 

138.  A horse  • 

139.  A mare  . 

140.  Horses  . 

141.  Mares 

142.  A bull  . 

143.  A cow  . 

144.  BqIIb  . 

145.  Cows 

146.  A dog  . 

147.  A bitoh  . 

148.  Dogs  • 

149.  Bitches  • 

150.  A he  goat 

151.  A female  goat 

152.  Goats  • 

153.  A male  deer 

154.  A female  deer 

155.  Deer 

156.  1 am 

157.  Thou  art 

158.  He  is  . 

159.  We  are  • 

160.  You  are  • 


Kifithali. 

S8bbi-da  taSzzarft  (-ro) 

(Sab-tS)  khar& 

Uohta  (or  -to)  . 

tTohft  .... 

(fis-da)  uchta  (-to)  . 

(T8s-t8)  ttoha  . .- 

S5bbi-da  uohata  (-to) 

(Sab-tS)  Qoh& 

Gohfa  .... 

KOfS  .... 

Gohri  .... 

KOfl  .... 

Gohj*e  • • • . 

i 

Kflffl  .... 

Golirl  . 

KflyiyS  .... 

San  • . • • 

Bald  . . * % 

Gaul  .... 

GayS  .... 

San  . * . • 

Bald  . . . . 

Gaul  .... 

Gays  .... 

Sakari  . . • 

Kata  .... 

Sakaran  .... 

Ktttl  .... 

Sakar  .... 

Kilts  .... 

Sakari  .... 

Kutlys  .... 

Bakra  . • • • 

Bakrft  .... 

Bakri  • . • 

Bakri  .... 

Bakre  .... 

BakrS  . . ."  . 

Aran  .... 

Hiran  .... 

Arni  • • . 

Hirni  .... 

Aran  • . • % 

Hiran  . . . 

A 5ssfl)  asfi  . . . 

HSftbs  . 

Tu  ossCy  asO  • • 

TtthS  . ■’  . 

S«‘  'issa,  Osso,  as  a,  &sO 

SS  hs  . . . * 

HamS  fissu,  asft  • 

Ass  he  • . • • 

TumS  5sso,  asO  • . 

Tubs  hS  . . . . 

638— Kia^halt. 


Simla  SMjl. 

* 

SSriobSn. 

English. 

Sabbl-do  ftohho 

• 

• 

BfldS-khfi  Sohho 

I 

134.  Best.  , ' 

Uchh^fl  . 

• 

GS4 

• • 

185.  High. 

■r  a 

Uchhto  . 

• 

8 

(TOs-khii)  gai 

• • 

186.  Higher.  ^ 

* 

Sabhz  do  uchh{& 

8 

" | 

B&dO;khQ  ga§ 

* 

137.  Highest. 

Gohja  . . 

8 

"\ 

GohfO 

i 

• • 

138.  A horse. 

Gohri 

8 

! 

• | 

Gobyi  • 

9 • 

139.  A mare. 

GohjO  . 

8 

i 

i 

GohyO 

8 • 

140.  Horses. 

Gohfi  • • 

• 

Gobpi 

• * • 

141.  Mares. 

B8J5d;  . 

• 

i 

BS15d 

142.  A bull. 

Gao 

8 

GaO  • 

* 

143.  A cow. 

B515d  . 

• 

• 

Bol8d 

• . 

144.  Bulls. 

Gao 

Gawl 

8 • 

145.  Cows. 

Kakftr  . 

• 

8 1 

| 

Kukur 

8 

146.  A dog. 

Kukri 

• 

i 

Kukre 

• * 

147.  A bitch. 

Kfikar  . 

8 

Kukor  • 

! 

148.  Dogs. 

Kukri 

8 

i 

Kukri  . 

• 

149.  Bitches. 

Bfikra 

• 

j 

BakrO 

• 

150.  A ho  goat. 

Bakri  . • 

• 

• 

BakrO 

• • 

151.  A female  goat. 

BakrO  ■ • 

• 

• 

Bakre 

i 

8 

152.  Goats. 

Horin 

• 

■ 

! Orln 

• 

153.  A male  deer. 

H5rnl  . 

4 

8 

Orln 

8 

154.  A female  deer. 

H6rnl  . 

• 

8 

Orln 

• • 

155.  Deer. 

A.3  bo,  6ao,  5b8 

8 

• 

An  8sflr,  asO  8U 

8 

156.  I am. 

i 

Tu  ai,  b6,  SbO,  *Bs8 

• 

TO  osO,  so,  asa,  sa 

8 

157.  Thou  art. 

So  au,  o9  5,  so,  6flO,  580 

So,  6so,  b6,  asa,  sa 

• 

158.  He  is. 

1 

£ 8,  so,  BsO,  5s8 

• 

AmO,  6bO,  OsO,  sfi. 

8 

i 

159.  We  are. 

Tag  o,  so,  5so,  #s8 

8 

• 

TnrnO  6bo,  pft,  flea, 

8& 

: 160.  You  are.  m 

\ 

| •# 

KittthftH— 639 


English. 

KifithaH. 

161.  They  are  # 

Sa  5asa,  fissfl,  &s&,  asfl 

Sa  h« 

• 

• 

• 

162.  1 was 

i 

J A tha,  thlya 

• • 

Haft  thft  . 

• 

• 

163.  Thou  wast 

1 

Tft  tha,  thlya  . 

• 

Tit  tha  . 

• 

• 

• 

164.  He  was  . 

Ss  tha,  tluya  . 

• 

Sft  thS  . 

• 

165.  We  wore 

' HamS  the,  thiyS 

Asa  tha  . 

a 

• 

• 

166.  You  were 

Turn?  the,  thiyS 

• 

Tubs  ths 

• 

A 

• 

167.  They  were 

So  the,  tliiya  . 

• 

8e  ths 

• 

• 

1 68.  lie  ... 

0 

• 

11a 

• 

169.  To  he  . 

Onn,  slinu  • 

• 

• 

• 

170.  Being 

Hum!  a 

• 

Hunda 

• 

r 

171.  Having  been  . 

OS-ra  (or  -rfi)  . 

lloi-ka  . 

• 

9 

172.  I may  bo 

A flit,  film  . 

Haft  haft 

a 

• 

173.  I shall  he 

A fthflmn 

• 

Haft  hftga  dga 

• 

174.  I should  be 

A Sri,  flhft 

• 

• 

175.  Beat 

Tip 

• 

Mai 

• 

A 

176.  To  beat  , . . j 

1 

Tlp^u 

Mama 

177.  Beating  . . . ! 

Tip-da  . • 

^MdrdS 

• 

178.  Having  beaten  . 

Tipe-ra  (or  -rfi) 

Miirl-kS  . 

• 

• 

• 

179.  I beat 

V 

A tipft 

Had  mart! 

• 

• 

• 

180.  Thou  beatest  . * . 

Tfi  tipo  . 

Td  marS 

• 

• 

• 

181.  Ho  beats  . . , 

Se  tipa,  tipo 

Ss  mars  . 

! 

• 

• 

• 

182.  We  beat. 

Ham  8 tipfi  . 

A 

Ab<3  marS 

• 

• 

183.  You  bent . 

Tume  tipa,  tlpfi 

• 

TusS  marO 

• 

• 

184.  They  beat 

Se  tipa,  tTpfi 

» 

8S  marS  . 

• 

• 

185.  I heat  (Past  Tend)  . 

Mfin  tipi  • • 

• 

MS  marSyft 

• 

• 

• 

186.  TI.uu  be&tesl  ( Vast 
Tt  use). 

Tfie  tipa.  . 

• 

TS  mftiSyft 

• 

• 

• 

187.  He  heat  ( Past  Tense) 

Tinlfi  Bpft 

• 

TinlyS  m&r8y& 

• 

• 

640 — Kiilthali. 


Simla.  Slrftjl. 

SftrScli&lI. 

m 

English. 

S3  an,  0,  8,  BO, 

8sa,  8so 

« 

S3  obO,  bo,  Asa,  sa 

• 

lhj.  They  are. 

K.  ta,  tha 

• 

• 

■ 

Aft  thrt  . 

• • 

102.  I was. 

Tu  ta,  tha 

• 

• 

• 

Tii  tho 

9 

103.  Thou  wast. 

S3  ta,  tha 

• 

• 

• 

So  thO  • 

• • 

164.  lie  was. 

£[  til,  tho 

• 

A me  thlo  . 

• • 

105.  We  were. 

Trio  t3,  the 

• 

• 

• 

TuinG  the 

• • 

100.  You  were. 

S<!  id,  thS 

• 

9 

Se  the  . • 

• • 

167.  They  wen*. 

Hrt 

« 

• 

• 

0 

• » 

| 

ins.  Ho. 

Olu,H  . 

• 

• 

• 

Opa 

• a 

169.  To  be. 

Hundil  • 

• 

• 

• 

Onda 

• • 

170.  Being. 

Hft'-ra  . 

• 

• 

• 

Oiy3 

• • 

171.  Having  been. 

Hi!  u 

• 

• 

Ail  3 fi 

• • 

172.  I may  be. 

A hula  . 

• 

• 

. v 

• Ail  • 

i 

j 

• • 

173.  I shall  bo. 

.... 

•• 

174.  I should  be. 

Pit 

■ 

• 

Pit 

• • 

175.  Beat. 

Plts.ifl 

v 

Pit  pa 

• • 

170.  To  beat. 

Pit  da 

• 

• 

Piula 

* 

177.  Beating. 

Pi<e-nl 

• 

• 

Pit  5 

• • 

178.  Having  beaten. 

V 

A pitfi  . 

• 

• 

• 

Aft  pita  . 

• • 

179.  I beat. 

Tn  pit*\  pita 

• 

• 

• 

Ta  pita  . 

• • 

ISO.  Thou  beatest. 

S3  pitO  . 

a 

• 

• 

| So  pita  . 

| 

• 

181.  He  beats. 

2 pi^ti 

• 

m 

• 

; AmO  pits 

• • 

182.  We  boat. 

Tas  pita 

• 

• 

Tume  p!t3 

• » 

183.  You  beat. 

S3  pl$3  . 

• 

% 

• 

Ss  pits  . 

• • 

184.  They  beat. 

Mas  pita, 

• 

• 

• 

Mfti  pits 

• 

1S5.  1 beat  (Past  Tense). 

Tog  pita 

• 

• 

• 

Ta?  pita  . 

1 

166.  Thou  beatest  (P.14 
l\m  so). 

T3un3  pi(£ 

a 

a 

« 

Titf  pita 

II 

187.  He  beat  (Past  Tense) 

Kimball — 641 

4 N 


vot,.  IX,  PABT  IV, 


v 

English.  * 

’ Kimball. 

I 

Ha$<jLuri. 

i . 

188.  We  beat  ( Vast  Tense ) 

HamS  tipa  • • 

i 

. ■ As9  marSya  • 

• 

189.  You  beat  ( Past  Tense") 

Tume  tlp& 

. TusG  marSya 

190.  They  beat  ( Past 

Tense). 

Tihna  tipa 

. Tlno  mar8y& 

• 

191.  I am  beating1  . 

fcv 

A tipda  lng§-rff& 

. Htt9  marne  lag I -ray a 

192.  I was  beating  . 

v 

A'tlpn-tha  • 

. Hla  marl  rayfc-tha 

• 

193.  I hml  beaten  • 

Mflq.  tlpa-tha  . 

. MS  murSya-tha 

194.  T may  beat 

A fipft 

„ Haft  nuir9 

195.  I shall  beat 

'v 

A tipfima,  tipila 

. 1159  marftga 

190.  Thou  wilt  beat  • 

Tu  tipela . 

, T9  marga 

197.  He  will  boat 

So  tlpflla  . 

. S3  marga 

• 

198.  Wo  shall  beat  . 

Home  tlpfime  . 

. A so  marge 

199.  You  will  beat  . 

Tume  flpfile 

. l use  marftgS  . 

• 

200.  T hoy  will  beat . . 

So  tipple . • 

. Se  marge 

• 

201.  I should  beat  . 

A tlpfi  . 



202.  I am  beaten 

A tipa  jau 

. Hs9  mfir$ya  geya 

• 

203.  I was  beaten 

A tipa  gfiii 

. Ha9  marSyu  geya-tha 

• 

• 

204.  I shall  be  beaten 

X i 

A tipa  jaSma  . 

Hsu  maroya  gaya-httga 

205.  I go 

V 

A deu  . • . 

* 

IIa9  j&ii  .... 

206.  Thou  goest 

Tii  dr* we  .... 

T9  jae  .... 

207.  He  goes  . 

So  dew  a,  tJ<5wG  • 

SS  ja8  • % • 

208.  We  go 

Hame  deu 

Ab6  jae  . 

209.  You  go  . 

Tume  dewfi,  d<3wfi 

Tas<5  jao 

210.  They  go  . 

i Se  dewa,  dewfl  • 

1 Se  ja9  . • • • 

i 

211.  I went  . 

1 

| A dewa  .... 

1 

i 

! H59  g5y& 

! 

212.  Thou  wentest  . 

T' ; dewa  .... 

i 

T9  g$ya  . . . ■ ' 

21G.  He  went.  . • 

Ss  <j<5w&  .... 

i 

Sfi  g£y&  • . • 

214.  We  went . . 

HamS  cjew§  . . | 

AaS  gayd 

J 

642  — Kiuthall. 

Simla  Sirfijl. 

SSrScbSlI. 

' iftiglish. 

E pit*  .... 

AmS  pits 

188.  We  beat*  (Past  Tense). 

Tag  pita 

TumS  pits 

189.  You  beat  ( Past  Tense), 

Tins  pita 

Tine  pita 

190.  They  beat  (Past  Tense). 

X pits  r8bS  ft  . 

Aft  ’pitu-lftgs-roa-sft,  5ft 

191.  I am  beating. 

pitu-sfl. 

A pile  r8h&  t& 

A3  pitu-tha 

192.  I was  beating. 

Mo8  pita  ta 

Mfli  pito-thfl 

193.  I had  beaten. 

A plfcu  • 

Aft  pitn  ■ • • • 

i 194.  I may  beat. 

i 

A pitula 

Aft  pltftld 

i 

i 195.  I shall  beat. 

1 

ta  pi^dia 

Ta  piila  .... 

1 

j 196.  Thou  wilt  beat. 

Ss  pi  tela,  pltlfi 

S3  pitls  .... 

197.  lie  will  beat. 

! 

S pitftmS,  pitmS 

AmS  pltulO 

| 

s 198.  We  shall  beat. 

Tag  pixels,  pitls 

Turae  pitsls 

i 

199.  You  will  beat. 

i 

Sa  pitale,  pltla 

S3  pitls  . 

200.  They  will  beat. 

, 201.  I should  l>eat. 

A pita  gsa  « 

Aft  pits-jau-su  . 

202.  I am  beaten. 

A pita  goa  ta  • 

A3  pitS-gSa 

203.  I was  beaten. 

■> 

A pita  jaaia  • 

An  pits-jaula  . 

204.  I shall  be  beaten. 

A • • • • 

A3  dsu  - • 

j 

205.  T go. 

j Tu  deft  , 

Tft  dftwfl 

j 

. i 206.  Thou  goest. 

i 

So  dea  . 

SSft  ddwft  • 

1 

. j 207.  He  goes. 

i 

£j  (JeA 

i 

Amo  dou 

I 

. ! 208.  We  go. 

1 

TaI  $ao  .... 

Tnmd  d3wd,  deft 

I 

. j 209.  Yon  go. 

i 

S3  deft  .... 

S3  dSwS,  d^6  • 

i 

. j 210.  They  go. 

A ddwa  . . . 

A3  dswa  . 

J 21 1.  I went. 

j 

Tft  dewa 

Tft 

. ; 212.  Thou  wen  test. 

i 

S3  d3Wd 

S3  d^wft  » • * 

. ! 218.  He  went. 

IS  d^wd  . 

i 

Am 3 <}3wd  • 

. 214.  We  went. 

I 

i 

- 

KiBthall— 648 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IT, 

4 s i 

Knpl'ali. 


Kiuthnll. 


H&$<JurI. 


215.  You  went  • • Turn!  dewO 


Tubs  gays 


216.  They  went.  . . ! Ss  dcwe  • 


Ss  gayS 


217.  Go 


218.  Going 


. DOundit  • 


Janda 


219.  Gone  • 


. (jflii  • • • • | Gaya  . • • • I 


220.  What  is  your  name  ? Ter  a hah  nS  8ssO  p . ; TOra  kya  naw  ? 


2*21.  How  old  is  thie  horse  ? fis  gohjO-rl  kah  umm5r  Is  gko^e-ii  ky&  rnnar  hS  ? . 

5ssO  P 

i 

222.  How  far  is  it  from  Etkia-da  Ka&nlr  kitna  dur  Kasmlr  etha-te  kitnl  cHlr 

here  to  Kashmir  ? ! asa  ? ho  ? 

223.  How  many  sons  aro  Tore  bao-rS  gauhrs  kitnS  Tere  bawa-rS  ghar  kitnS 

there  in  your  father’s  bagehr  asa  ? maths  ha7  ? 

house  ? : A _ 

2*24.  I have  walked  a long  A aj  bahnta  handa  . . \ HatS  aj  barlyS  dfirn&-tS  ay  a 

way  to-day.  | 

225.  The  son  of  my  uncle  MsrS  kake-riv  chOlita  tes-rl  Mere  chachu-ra  put  tSs-riya 
is  married  to  his  | bauliue-satki  blfi  asa.  baihan-sathl  bya  hS. 

sister.  !,  i 

226  In  the  house  is  the  Cliitte  gchre-ii  zln  tSs  ! Bago  ghore-ri  jin  ghar- hi 
saddle  of  the  wliito  gauhrS  asa.  | rakhii-rl. 

horse. 

227.  Put  the  saddle  upon  Tes  pande  zln  tsar  . . i Jin  pithl-parO  rakhl-do  . 

his  back.  i i 

I ! 

228.  I have  beaten  his  son  MoS  tes-ia  choktfi  chllS-  | Mai  tSs-re  putfi-jo  bahut 

with  many  stripes.  ; sathl  tlpfi.  j kuteya. 

229.  He  is  grazing  cattle  So  tibbe-pandS  piisu  fcgdro  . j O uthrl  dbara  par  pasua 

on  the  top  of  the  bill.  j ebaraya  karO-ft. 

2:10.  He  is  sitting  on  a Se  tes  clalo  nhete  gohre-  j 0 dalo-kcth  gkOye-parO 

horse  under  that  tree,  j j ande  b$th&  asa.  . | eharu-ra. 

231.  His  brother  is  taller  Tes-rfi  hhaia  teg-ri  bauhne-  . Tes-rii  bhai  t&s-te  {than 

than  hie  sifter.  da  ISbfi  asa.  hivi)  lama  a. 

1 ! 

232.  The  prico  of  that  is  Tes-rii  mftl  dfihe  rupoyii  asa.  ; TctO-da  mol  dhal  rupaiye  a. 
tffro  rupees  and  a half. 

233.  My  father  lives  in  Mera  bao  t5s  mhathrO  Mora  baO  t8s  chhOtlya  jhun- 


that  small  house. 


gauhrO-da  rauha. 


giyaraa. 


234.  Give  this  rupoe  to  him  Eh  rupdya  t&s-kh§  da  . ! E rnpaiya  e-jo  do 


235.  Take  those  rupees  Se  rnpOyO  tes-hago  urfi  lo  . E rupaiye  t5s»te  lel-10  • 

from  him.  j 

23G.  Beat  him  well  and  , Tes  ftchha  tip  or  ro££I-sAtliI  Es-jo  ain  kutl-k6  raso-kaue 
bind  him  with  ropes.  bank.  badliO, 

237.  Draw  water  from  the  ' Kfie-dfi  ohig  a^i  . . ’ Kfce-tO  pa^ii  cbakl-10  . • 

well.  j ! 

238.  Walk  bef«Dre  me  . MS  da  gao-ka  dS  . . | MS-td  age  cbal  • • 

!.  ! . 

239.  W hose  bey  comes  be-  X ’baO-pha  piohhau-ka  koc-  T5-tO  plchhO  k5s-ra  bhau 

hind  you  ? ra  chokta  AO  ? hai  ? 

240.  Prom  whom  did  you  S6  tusse  kos-phfi  loa-tha  ? . E te  k5s-t6  lfcya-hai  P • 

buy  that  ? 

241.  From  a shopkeeper  of  j G5-rfl  bfiniye-pha  • • 1 GSw-ro  hatanlyO-td  • 

tho  village.  I 


G14— KiSthall. 


Simla  Sirftjl. 


£&rackftl] 


Er.gliab. 


Tu8 

TuraO  dewO  • 

215.  You  went. 

Sd  (Jdwfl  .... 

Se  d^wO  • . . 

216.  They  went. 

9«  .... 

.... 

217.  Go. 

DGunda  .... 

Deunda  . . 

218.  Going. 

l)Cwa  .... 

PSvra  .... 

219.  Gone. 

TerO  nawo  ka  6 ? 

TOro  ka  naO  re  ? . 

220.  What  is  your  namo  ? 

E ghoya  ketl  umari-ra  ? 

Es  gnhfG-rO  ka  umor  asa  ? 

221 . llow  old  is  this  horse  ? 

Ith-da  Kashmir  kitnfl  dfir 
SO  ? 

TchhO-kiu  Kosmlr  ketrl  dOr 
asa  ? 

222.  How  far  is  it  from  here 
to  Kashmir  ? 

TerG  bftp-rG  keti  obohto  6 ? 

Tore  babu-re  kettG  chhang- 
tu  asa  ? 

223.  How  many  sons  are 
there  in  your  father’s 
house  ? 

Aj  a dur  tSi  h&i^da  . 

Ail  aj  bhouto  hiindo  , 

224-.  I have  walked  a long 
way  to-day. 

Merc  kakG-rd  chobtG  8s- rl 
bilhn  anl  so. 

Mere  kakO-re  ohhSgtu  tes- 
rl  dodl-ro  jiijrO  liuo. 

225.  The  sen  of  my  uncle  is 
married  to  his  sister. 

✓ 

Sukle  gohyO-ri  jin  gauhrfl  8. 

Sukle  gohre-rc  kiithe  ghoro 
bl  litre  iisa. 

226.  In  the  house  is  tho  sad- 
die  of  the  white  horse. 

Jin  £s-ri  pit  hi -gas  chhap 

Tes-rl  plthe  gasi  kathe  piirO. 

227.  Put  tho  saddlo  upon 
his  back. 

Mo  8s-rO  ohohtO  chlhtO  pita. 

Mill  tes-rO  ehhSgtu  chhlte- 
k8iv  pltO-sO. 

2‘28.  I have  l>eaten  his  son 
with  many  stripes. 

Se  tea  df&hrO  gord  clewanda. 

Soo  tlr  gasi  b5hchc  ebaro 
asft. 

229.  Ho  is  grazing  cattle  on 
the  top  of  the  hill. 

Se  tes-rukh-nlthe  gohfG  g&s 
0. 

SeO  tOs  blkh-tholl  goh|*e- 
gaso  bfitha-sa. 

230.  lie  is  sitting  on  a horse 
under  that  tree. 

TGs-rfi  bli&I  t£s-ri  bauhne-da 
lamba  0. 

TGs-rii  bhaya  t8s-ri  bOnO- 
kifl  lftba  asa. 

231.  His  brother  is  taller 
than  his  sister. 

T£s-rf)  mol  dkiil  rupo 

T8thn-rO  mol  dbal  rnpayft 
asa. 

232.  Tho  price  of  that  is  two 
rupees  and  a half. 

Mera  baba  t8a  nildG  gauhro- 
da  r8-0. 

MerO  babfi  chhflte  gborO- 
do  rofc-sa. 

233.  My  father  lives  in  that 
small  house. 

E rupo  t8s  do  . 

fijs  rupaye  es  dOo 

231.  Give  this  rupee  to  him. 

TOs-da  seja  rupea 

Tiyo  rupaye  tOs-kiit  Or 
kor. 

235.  Take  those  rupees  from 
him. 

T8s  aohhO  plte  bl  8r  rasiye 
bl  bane. 

T8s  acbho  pit  te8  rcstO 
kori  banh. 

236.  Beat  him  well  and  bind 
him  with  ropes. 

Bfto-do  pan?  khleh  . 

KfiG-kifl  pan!  gar 

237.  Draw  water  front  the 
well. 

Mtt-do  gao-ka  chill  , 

Mill  agd  chid  . 

238.  Walk  before  me. 

T n pachhO  kBs-rfi  chohta 
ajo  ? 

Turani  poebbi  kas-ra 

mftytt  asa  ? 

239.  Whoso  boy  comes  be- 
hind you  f 

Tfl?  k5s-dft  ginft  ? . 

Tume  seO  k5s-d<3  ginG- 
tbo  ? 

240.  From  whom  did  you 
buy  that  ? 

Cl  aS-rO  Oki  b8niye-da 

Goffc-rG  baiilye-kiO  . 

241.  From  a shopkeeper  of 

( the  village. 

' 

am 


047 


The  Satlaj  Group. 

The  River  Satlaj  forms  the  northern  boundary  of  the  tract  of  country  consisting  of 
the  Simla  District  and  its  connected  Hill  States,  including  the  western  portion  of  the 
State  of  Bashahr.  To  its  north  lie,  on  the  west,  the  State  of  Suket,  and,  going  eastward, 
the  Siraj  tract  of  Kulu.  The  language  of  Suket  is  Suketi,  and  will  not  be  discussed  here 
(vide  pp.  757  ff.)«  The  meaning  of  Siriij  has  been  explained  on  p.  593.  The  word 
signifies  the  kingdom  of  Siva,  i.e.  the  Highlands.  There  are  several  tracts  in  the  Punjab 
Himalayas  called  by  this  name.  We  have  already  met  with  one  Siraj  in  Simla.  There 
is  another  south-west  of  Kashtawar  far  to  the  west  of  the  country  with  which  we  are 
now  dealing.  Finally,  there  is  the  Kulu  Siraj.  This  is  the  hill  country  between 
the  ltiver  Bias  and  the  River  Satlaj,  and  consists  of  a high  range  dividing  two  systems 
of  valleys,  -one  feeding  the  former  and  the  other  the  latter  river.  At  one  place  the 
two  rivers  are  loss  than  thirty  miles  apart.  The  northern,  or  Bias,  system  of  valleys  is 
knoAYU  as  Inner  Siraj,  and  the  southern,  or  Satlaj,  system  is  known  as  Outer  Siraj. 

South  of  the  Satlaj,  in  the  Simla  Hill  States,  there  is  a similar  system  of  valleys 
also  connecting  Avith  that  river.  Along  the  river,  and  in  its  vicinity,  on  the  southern 
bank  lie,  from  Avest  to  east,  the  States  of  Bliajji,  Sangri,  parts  of  Keonthal  and  Kuuihar- 
sain,  the  Kotguru  (Kotgarh)  ‘rtlaqa  of  Simla,  and  the  State  of  Bashahr.  Bhajji  has  been 
already  disposed  of  (vide  p.  550).  Its  language  is  Kinthali.  So  also,  on  the  east,  Kochi, 
the  principal  Aryan  language  of  Bashahr,  has  been  described  on  pp.  613  ff.  There  remain 
the  portion  of  the  south  side  of  the  Satlaj  Valley  opposite  Outer  Siraj,  and  including  the 
State  of  Sangri,  parts  of  Keonthal  and  Kumharsain,  a small  portion  of  Bashahr,  and  the 
Kotguru  * aldqa . This  tract  is  locally  known  as  Sadoeli  or  Sodoch. 

The  language  of  this  tract  is  closely  allied  to  that  spoken  across  the  Satlaj  in  Outer 
Siraj,  and,  for  convenience  of  reference,  these  two  are  put  together  as  forming  the  Satlaj 
Group. 

The  language  of  Inner  Siraj,  on  the  Bias  side  of  the  watershed,  is  different,  and  is 
allied  to  Kului. 

The  Satlaj  group  forms  a linguistic  stepping  stone  between  the  languages  of  the  Simla 
Group  and  those  of  the  Kulu  Group.  It  consists,  as  explained,  of  tAAro  dialects,  viz. 
Sodochl  spoken  south  of  the  Satlaj,  and  Outer  Siraj!  spoken  north  of  that  river.  Returns 
have  been  received  for  the  number  of  speakers  of  SSdoclii,  but  not  for  those  of  Outer  Siraji. 

It  lias  been  reported  that  the  total  number  of  speakers  of  both  kinds  of  Siraji  is 
50,551.  Of  these,  we  may  estimate  20,000  as  speaking  the  Outer  dialect. 

We  may,  therefore,  put  the  number  of  speakers  of  the  Satlaj  Group  of  dialects  as 
folloAVS : — 


Sod  A chi — 

Sangri  * 

Keonthal. 

Kumharsain 

Bashahr 

Kotgarh 

Outer  Sirfijl 


Total 


2,606 

3.01*6 

6,039 

3.65* 

3,564 

18,S9X 

20,001) 

383*93 


648 


WESTERN  PAHARI. 


Both  §5d0chi  and  Outer  Siraji  have  been  described  by  the  Rev.  T.  Grahame  Bailey 
in  his  Languages  of  the  Northern  Himalayas.  He  calls  S6dochi  ‘ Kotguru.’  For  the 
purposes  of  this  Survey,  specimens  of  §6dochI  have  been  received.  These  agree  exactly 
with  Mr.  Bailey’s  Kotguru.  No  specimens  have  been  received  of  Outer  Siraji.  This  is 
a matter  of  small  importance,  as  i§5d6chl  and  Outer  Siraji  present  very  few  points  of 
difference. 

As  a specimen  of  Sbdoclil  there  are  appended  a version  of  the  Parable  of  the  Pro- 
digal Son,  and  the  ordinary  list  of  words.  In  the  grammatical  sketch  I have  freely 
utilized  the  account  given  by  Mr.  Bailey.  I have  noted  auy  points  in  which  Outer  Siraji 
differs.  The  information  given  regarding  the  latter  is  entirely  taken  from  that  gentle- 
man's work. 

Vocabulary. — As  in  oilier  Paharl  forms  of  speech,  the  Vocabulary  contains  many 
words  strange  to  ordinary  Hindi.  The  following  are  a few  that  have  been  collected  from 
Mr.  Bailey’s  work,  Mr.  Diack’s  Kulu  Dialect  of  Hindi,  and  other  sources.  Some  of  the 
words  are  Stidochi  and  others  are  Outer  Siraji,  but  no  doubt  all  are  intelligible  over  the 
whole  area.  Words  only  noted  in  Outer  Siraj  are  marked  ‘ O.  S.’ : — 
dgde,  before. 
dkkh,  the  eye. 

dl,  a weaving  machine  (0.  S.). 

dr  nan,  to  be  defeated. 

dr sd,  on  this  side. 

iitshau,  see  hdtshon. 

anhnau,  or  an# an,  to  be,  to  become. 

ant,  a plough. 

hdh,  a father. 

bdgnan,  to  run. 

bagur,  wind,  air. 

bdhrlau,  a load. 

bdi,  bde,  bhdj,  a brother. 

baibi,  see  bfihn. 

baili,  the  evening  meal  (O.  S.). 

barerd,  a brother  (O.  S.\ 

bauhri,  much. 

batin,  a forest,  jungle. 

bdictd,  one  of  the  slanting  roofs  of  a house  (O.  S.). 
bednau,  or  hbdnau,  to  call,  summon. 
bedisan,  seed. 
be  hr,  a sheep. 
betnau,  to  sit. 

befhit,  a low-caste  servant,  a slave. 

bhori,  great,  excessive. 

bijd,  drought  (O.  S.). 

bitau,  good,  beautiful. 

boddau,  great,  large. 

bodkau , great,  excessive. 


SATIiAJ  GROUP. 


64,9 


bodnau , see  bednau. 
bold,  an  ox. 

brailau , fem.  braill,  a cat. 

bn,  a grandfather  (O.  8.). 

biihn,  baihn,  a younger  sister. 

but,  a tree. 

chan,  ready. 

chantiau,  to  make. 

chaun,  three. 

chel,  a younger  sister. 

chhedri,  see  tsheorl. 

chhbtu,  see  trdibtu. 

chir,  a plot  of  cultivated  land  (0.  8.). 

chiukhu,  fem.  chiukhl,  a small  bird. 

ddhr,  a hill. 

dal,  an  elder  sister. 

daihrau,  a day,  the  sun. 

daihre,  daily,  continually,  always. 

ddljl,  poor,  indigent. 

ddnau , to  place. 

dand,  a tooth. 

dan,  sunshine. 

daman,  to  go. 

dlian,  the  belly  (O.  S.). 

dholl  jdnau,  to  tumble  down  (O.  S.). 

dlumi,  the  master  of  a bethu  (O.  8.}. 

dol,  a plain  (O.  S.). 

dgadan,  cold. 

dzai,  if,  that. 

dzlbh,  the  tongue. 
dgonau,  a man,  a person. 
dzorkl,  a fish  (O.  S.). 
debt,  a hill-top,  pass  (O.  S.). 
digoth,  digotli,  the  moon. 
gde,  upon. 
gas,  up. 
ganhr,  a house. 
geo,  ghi. 

ghln , compassion. 
ghorchl,  property,  possessions. 
gordnau,  to  be  lost. 
gohfau,  a horse. 

grdsnl,  a household  god  (O.  S.). 
grau,  a village. 
gu\uaw,  sweet. 

VOI„  IX,  PAST  iv. 


<550 


WESTERN  PAHARl 


hdndnau,  to  walk. 
hatth , a hand. 

hdtshan,  hdtsau,  dtshau,  good. 

liidze , yesterday.  In.  (O.  S.)  hij. 

hdknan,  little,  small. 

horth , a Avife  (O.  S.). 

hdtsau , little,  small  (O.  S.). 

hub  hi , up. 

hundi , down. 

I,  tj,  a mother. 

ichhnau,  to  como  (O.  S.). 

jut,  the  mouth. 

j hot  nan,  to  light. 

jhirnau,  to  draw  (water). 

jhutnau,  to  drink  (O.  S.) . 

joe /man,  to  yoke,  anl  jdchnau,  to  plough. 

jolkd,  clothes  (O.  S.). 

Jcde,  near. 

Jcagn},  a ring. 

kdlle,  to-morrow. 

kenki,  alone,  separate  (O.  S.). 

khdkkh,  the  corner  of  the  mouth  (O.  S.). 

khdssan,  much  (O.  S.). 

khech,  khets,  a field. 

khennau,  to  give  to  eat. 

khdrdnt,  the  beams  at  the  gable  ends  of  a house  lor  supporting  the  framework  of 
the  roof  (O.  S.). 

Moran,  upright,  standing. 
khdtnan,  to  serve,  to  do  service. 
konak , Avlieat  (O.  S.). 
konord,  a winnowing  tub  (O.  S.). 

Idgti,  a field. 
lainau,  to  take. 

Idnau,  to  apply,  appoint  (lag and). 

Idt,  a foot. 

lolotd,  a haystack  (0.  S.). 

Ibtnau , to  fall. 
mdhtrau,  i.q.  mhdtrau. 
mdntjgau,  a bed  (O.S.). 
mdndgha,  in,  within,  from  in. 
mdndchh,  man, 4,  a man. 
mass,  meat. 

mdtri,  a mortgage  (O.  S.). 
merd,  kindness  (O.  S.l. 
mhdtrau,  little,  small. 


SATLAJ  GROUP. 


mondor,  a roof  (O.  S.). 

muh,  the  face. 

naitau,  hot. 

nanl,  a wife. 

nau,  a name. 

neddhi,  neri,  near. 

neicol,  low-lying  land  (O.  S.). 

nikkau,  bad  (O.  S.). 

mnau,  to  take  away  (O.  S.). 

or,  ot  her,  another  ; and. 

oi'td porta,  hither  and  thither  (O.  8.). 

oru  lainau,  to  take  away.' 
otdfiau,  to  put  to  oru;  side. 
olnau,  to  go  to  one  side,  to  turn. 
painau,  sharp. 

pdnd,  the  top  story  of  a house  (0.  S.), 

paneunau , to  give  to  drink. 

pdrm,  beyond. 

pdtshd,  behind. 

phdlnau,  to  meet. 

phudl,  a shepherd. 

phbroz , the  day  before  yesterday  (0.  8.). 

pindi , a house  (O.  S.). 

pimit,  an  egg. 

pitnau,  to  beat. 

pitshu , behind  (O.  S.). 

piith,  the  back. 

pohlu,  ponohol,  hay  (O.  S.). 

polrau,  a shoe. 

par,  but. 

pot,  pet,  the  belly. 

polseli,  a blanket  (O.  S.). 

rack,  rdclii,  night. 

randan , clean  (O.  S.). 

rdndu,  a husband. 

rauhnau,  raunau,  rdnau,  to  remain. 

riau,  bad,  ugly. 

rigor,  a servant. 

saigornau,  to  make  (O.  S.). 

Sail  fan,  a fox. 

8du,  a friend,  companion. 
tielau,  cold. 

sithe,  with,  together  with ; with,  by  means  of. 
6ittau,  white  (O.  S.). 

Sobhlau,  good,  beautiful,  well  (O.  S.). 

8dhrdj,  highland  (—Sira,])  (O.  S.). 
idlokhrati,  chaff,  husk. 

VOJ..  IX,  PABT  IV. 


652 


WESTERN  FAHlRf. 


sorl an,  a plain  (O.  S.), 

.(orn,  a boy,  a son  (O.  S.). 
srdl,  hair. 

snhon,  wild  hay-grass  (O.  S.) ; a largo  roof-beam  (O.  S.). 
sulai,  laity  (O.  S.). 
sftnau,  gold. 

sut In  a n , to  lie  down,  to  sleep. 

thuruau,  to  inn. 

tichchhan,  sharp  (O.  S.). 

tot,  tot,  down,  below. 

tsagan , well,  healthy  ( cliangd ). 

tshdh,  buttermilk. 

tshdkau,  swift  (O.  S.). 

tsheon,  chheort,  a woman,  a wife. 

ts/kiiau,  to  beat  (O.  S.). 

tshdtd,  chhdtft,  a boy,  a son. 

tsornau,  to  graze,  eat  grass. 

ul7,  a cave  (O.  S.). 

utshtrau , utshtau , utstran , high,  lofty. 
nznan,  uzunau , to  rise,  arise. 

Pronunciation. — The  pronunciation  of  SftdGehi  and  Outer  Siraji  follows  the  usual 
Western  Pnliari  lines.  The  letter  a is  almost  always  pronounced  as  the  o in  hot,  and  is 
then  so  transliterated.  There  is  the  same  continual  change  of  a linal  d,  to  ft  or  o.  Thus 
we  have  tshdtn,  but  much  more  often  tshdtn,  a son.  Unlike,  however,  the  other  Simla 
dialects,  the  letter  o , whether  original  or  a secondary  development,  is  always  changed  to 
a u when  linal,  and  often  undergoes  the  same  change  when  not  final.  Thus  the  Hindi 
hand,  to  become,  is  represented  in  Sbdochi  by  aunau  or  onhnau.  Sometimes  we  even 
find  6 becoming  au,  as  in  ronau  or  r aunau,  the  Hindi  ralmd,  to  remain.  Similarly,  the 
letter  e often  becomes  ai,  as  in  lainau,  Hindi  lend,  to  take. 

The  letter  ch  often  becomes  ts,  as  in  chhdtu  or  tshutii,  a son,  and  similarly  j becomes 
z,  as  in  uzunatt,  for  ujunau,  to  arise,  or  dg,  as  in  (jgtbh,  for  jtbh,  the  tongue. 

The  letter  h is  often  dropped,  as  in  otnau,  to  go  to  one  side,  Hindi  hatnd  ; .(elan, 
equivalent  to  the  Kashmiri  sehol'1,  cold.  Sometimes  the  h is  retained,  but  is  placed  after 
the  vowel  which  it  originally  preceded,  as  in  aunau  or  auhnan,  the  Hindi  hand,  to 
become.  The  same  is  the  case  with  aspirated  sonant  consonants.  Thus,  the  aspiration 
is  dropped  in  yeb  (cf.  Kashmiri  yrv) , clarified  butter  ( yhi ),  and  is  transferred  in yauhr , for 
ghar  or  ghor,  a house  ; in  gohrd,  a horse ; and  in  daihrau , usually  written  dhairau,  a day. 

A medial  soft  consonant  is  sometimes  dropped,  as  in  Idnau,  the  Hindi  lagand,  to 
apply.  Similarly  the  letter  r of  the  genitive  termination  ran  is  invariably  dropped,  so 
that  we  have  hdthlb  for  hdthl-rb , of  an  elephant. 

The  letter  t (especially  when  representing  an  older  tr),  as  usual,  is  liable  to  be 
changed  to  ch.  Thus  we  have  chaun,  three;  jechnau , Hindi  jbtnd,  to  yoke;  and  rack, 
Hindi  rat,  night. 

Nouns. — A very  common  termination  for  nouns  and  adjectives  is  tan  (or  trau) 
added  without  changing  the  meaning.  Thus  we  have  bdhrtau,  a load,  Hindi  bhdr;  and 
utstan  or  ntsirau,  high,  Hindi  Solid. 


SATLAJ  GROUP. 


663 


The  declension  of  nouns  as  a whole  closely  follows  that  of  the  Simla  dialects,  but 
there  are  divergencies  of  importance. 

The  genitive  termination  ro  of  Simla  drops  its  initial  r,  and  becomes  au  (or  6), 
which  is  added,  like  a true  termination,  to  the  main  word.  Thus  the  genitive  of  yauhr, 
a house,  is  yauhr  au  or  yauhrd,  and  of  talibtl,  a girl,  tshotlau.  It  may  be  noted  that  in 
SainjT,  a dialect  of  the  adjoining  Kulu  Group,  the  reverse  course  is  followed,  the  b being 
dropped  and  the  r retained.  The  case  of  the  agent  takes  the  termination  ai  (or  e)  as  in 
tshotlai  (-<?),  by  tl u;  girl. 

In  the  case  of  nouns  ending  in  an  (a,  b)  or  a,  the  termination  of  the  nominative 
is  dropped,  and  the  genitive  (singular  or  plural)  termination  is  emi,  that  of  the  agent  being 
eyai.  Thus  from  ybhrau,  a horse, .the  genitive  (singular  or  plural)  ybhreau  ( ybhreb ),  and 
the  agent  (singular  or  plural)  ybhrayai  i-eyP). 

The  other  cases,  as  elsewhere,  are  formed  with  postpositions  added  to  an  oblique 
form.  In  the  case  of  masculine  nouns  ending  in  an  (a,  b,  or  ft),  the  oblique  form> 
singular  or  plural,  is  made  by  changing  au  to  at  or  e.  Thus,  ybhrau,  a horse,  oblique 
singular  or  plural,  ybltrai  or  ybhre.  in  the  case  of  masculine  nouns  ending  in  a con- 
sonant, the  oblique  form,  singular  or  plural,  is  made  by  adding  «.  Thus  yauhr , a house, 
oblique  form,  singular  or  plural,  yauhrd. 

In  the  case  of  feminine  nouns  ending  in  a consonant,  the  oblique  form,  singular  or 
plural,  is  made  by  adding  7.  Thus,  hi'tJtn  or  baihn,  a sister ; oblique  form,  singular  or 
plural,  baini.  In  the  case  cf  all  other  nouns,  the  oblique  form,  singular  or  plural,  is  the 
same  as  the  nominative  singular. 


The  nominative*  plural  of  masculine  nouns  in  au  (a,  b,  u)  is  made  by  changing  the 
au  to  at  or  a.  Thus,  ybhrau , a horse  ; ybhrai  or  ybhre,  horses.  In  tin*  case  of  feminine 
nouns  ending  in  a consonant,  it  is  formed  by  adding  /.  Thus,  baihn,  a sister  ; baihni > 

sisters.  Outer  Siraji,  however,  has  no  nasalization  (baihn/).  Tn  the  case  of  all  other 

nouns,  the  nominative  plural  is  the  same  as  the  nominative  singular. 

Tin*  vocative  of  masculine  nouns  ends  in  a in  the  singular,  and  in  b in  the 

plural.  In  the  case  of  feminine  nouns  it  ends  in  e in  the  singular,  and  in  b or  e in  tlu- 

plural. 

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  plural  has  tin*  same  form  as  the  singular,  except  in  the 
vocative,  and  in  the  case  of  nominative  plurals  of  masculine  nouns  in  au  (a,  b,  it)  and  of 
feminine  nouns  ending  in  a consonant. 

The  following  table  gives  these  changes  in  a succinct  form  : — 


Nom. 

Gen.  ain£\ 

A^r.  sing. 

Obi.  sin^. 

Vo 0. 

Vof. 

Nom.  ring. 

plur. 

ami  plur. 

ami  plur. 

and  plur. 

8;.u$r. 

plur. 

gdhrau  (J,  0),  a horso 

gohrai  (£) 

j 

; gShriiiti  (o) 

ijr.hreyai  (e) 

gdhrai  (e) 

i 

| (foil  red 

gdhr&d 

gauhr%  a house 

yauhr 

j ganhrau  (fi) 

gauhrai  (e) 

gaulir  a 

i yauhrd 

gauhru 

hdthh  an  elephaut 

hat  hi 

i bathiau  (d) 

i 

hdthlai  (e) 

hat  hi 

j fulthii 

laithiya 

tfih&tly  a girl 

tshd/i 

; 

| tshdtiau  (0) 

Uhdtlai  (e) 

tshdtl 

tshdtl  ye  i 

ishdliyo 

hUh#  or  baihn , a sister  . 

baihni  (0. 

SJ  baihnau  (0) 

baihnai  (e) 

baihni 

■ baihne  J 

baihnti 

baihni ). 

■ 

i 

1 

65-1- 


WESTERN  PAIIARI. 


According  to  Mr.  -Bailey,  the  vocative  singular  of  bdb,  a father,  is  irregular,  being 
bdbb,  hut  in  the  specimen,  ihc  regular  form,  bdbd,  is  always  given. 

The  genitive  (singular  or  plural)  of  gao,  a cow,  is  gated, , and  its  agent  gaioai. 

As  regards  the  formation  of  cases,  the  genitive  termination  is,  as  usual,  adjectival, 
changing  to  ai  or  e when  agreeing  with  a masculine  noun  in  the  oblique  singular  or  in 
the  plural,  and  to  l when  agreeing  with  a feminine  noun.  The  masculine  oblique 
singular  of  gohrean  is  gdhreai  (-<?.)  or  gdhrai  (-«?). 

Sometimes  in  the  parable,  instead  of  the  regular  termination  an  of  the  genitive,  we 
come  across  the  fuller  form  ran  (rd),  masculine  singular  ; oblique  and  plural  rai  (re)  ; 
fern,  ri.  This  is  evidently  borrowed  from  Kiatlmli. 


The  postposition  of  the  dal ive-acc u^ative  is  lai  (of  which  le  and  the  are  variants) 
or  ke.  That  of  the  locative  is  de  or  dl,  though  sometimes,  in  the  parable,  we  come 
across  the  Kiuthali  adjectival  do.  For  the  ablative  the  postposition  is  Jed,  or  tliakd.  Ma 
means  ‘ from  in.’  Outer  SirajI  has  ke,  from,  just  as  we  shall  see  that  Inner  SirajI  has 
kd. 


Adjectives  call  for  no  remarks.  Those  in  an  (d,  d,  ft)  change  to  ai  (e)  when  agree- 
ing with  masculine  nouns  in  the  oblique  singular  or  in  the  plural,  and  to  i i when  agree- 
ing with  feminine  nouns. 

Comparison  is  made  as  usual,  the  t hing  with  which  comparison  is  made  being  put  in 
the  ablai  ive. 


Pronouns. — The  first  t, 

Sing. 

Xom. 

Agent 

Obi. 

(«en. 

Plur. 

Nom. 
Agent  ) 
Old, 

Gen. 


ro  personal  pronouns  are 
I. 

mi  (O.  S.  hi) 
owl 
md,  mi, 
merau  {-d) 

ha,  ne,  ltd  me 

llama , hdmd 
jndhran  (-</) 


declined  as  follows  : — 
Thou. 

Hi. 

I at. 
td.  Id. 
teran  (-0). 

turnd,  tinnS. 

tuma,  tumd. 
thdrau  (-0). 


In  tlie  nominative1  plural,  the  final  nasal  may  he  omitted.  Thus  hame,  etc. 

The  Demonstrative  Pronouns,  also  used  as  pronouns  of  the  drd  person,  have  three 
genders  in  the  singular,  when  used  as  substantives.  When  used  as  adjectives,  the  mas- 
culine form  is  used  whatever  may  be  the  gender  of  the  noun  with  which  they  are  in 
agreement.  Thus,  in  the  parable  we  have  ted  (not  tilth)  mulkhd-re  ekl  mania  songe* 
with  a man  of  that  country. 


S AT  LA  J GROUP. 


655 


He,  she,  it,  this. 

i 

He,  she,  it,  that. 

Maoc. 

| j 

! ' ! 

i 

Neut.  j 

i 

Mast*. 

Fern. 

Neut. 

Sing*— 

Norn. 

Agunt 

Obi. 

Gen. 

jau  O’fi),  Sh 

(0.  S.  also  e) 

euai  (-e) 

eft,  rs 

Sh-rau  (-rd) 

jau  {jd)t  eit,  fih 

ai  (S) 

aid  (ed) 

; 

aiau  (-0) 

(0.  S.  Sssn) 

s 

jau  (jd),  eu,  eh 

euai  (-e) 

&tth 

! St  than  (-ft) 

! 

i 

| . 

I i 

A 

mu  (so),  sai  (se) 
(Q.  S.  also  dh) 

tint  (0.  S.  tel) 

teut  tc8 , tell 

ten  an  (-ft),  teh - 
ran  (-rft),  t&8-  j 
rau  (-rft) 

sau  (sd),  sai  (sS) 

' tai  (te) 

(0.  S.  tai) 

i 

j tail,  ted 

' taiau  (-ft) 

(0.  S.  tsssd) 

, sail  (sti),  tai  (ti) 

(0.  S.  Mi) 

i 

j tint  (0.  S.  tit) 

j tetth 

tetthau  (-3) 

J 

Plnr. — 

“ "V" 

Nora. 

jai  (jl),  cii 

sai  ( 8e ) 

Agent 

hmi  ( tne ) 

tine 

Obi. 

ind 

find 

Gen. 

In  an  {7  no).  7 man.  (-o) 

iinau  (find). 

tindau  (-ft) 

Note  the  jfmin  jau,  im-sining  ‘ tliis-.*  The  same  uni*  <<f  a form  resembling  the  relative  jironoun  also  obtain*  in  Rajasthani. 


The  Relative  Pronoun  fhau  or  <fcun,  wlio,  which,  is  declined  as  follows.  Sin",  a". 
feunl  or  (izim,  old.  <_h<ma,  gen.  < hau-ro . The  plural  is  the  same  as  the  singular,  except 
that  the  ag.  is  ilsunii/ai  or  d^lnnjai. 

The  Interrogative  Pronoun  kun,  who,  is  declined  exactly  like  (Iznn,  Iis  neuter 
is  kai  ( ke ),  gen.  kiuico. 

Indefinite  Pronouns  arc : kdi,  anyone,  someone  (ag.  kunl,  gen.  kosul),  and  kichh, 
anything,  something.  Dzan  kunl  or  < jgun  kunl  is  ‘ whoever,’  and  dgan  kichh  or  < igun 
kichh  is  ‘ whatever.' 

VERBS— A.  Auxiliary  Verbs  and  Verbs  Substantive. 

The  Verb  Substantive  in  the  present  takes  the  form  ft,  dsn,  or  (O.  S.)  ftssft,  all  of 
which  are  used  for  all  persons  of  both  numbers.  In  theiirst  person  singular  and  plural, 
we  also  find  the  form  a.  O.  S.  has  also  & in  the  first  person  singular. 

The  past  tense  is  tau  {to),  pi.  tni  (te) ; fern.  sing,  and  plur.  ti.  We  occasionally  come 
across  the  KiSthali  l'orms  thaw  ( tho ),  that  {the),  thl.  As  usual,  this  does  not  change  for 
person. 


656 


WESTERN  PAHArI. 

A negative  Verb  substantive  is  no  hi  aiuthi , I am  not.  It  does  not  change  for 
number  or  person.  Outer  Siraji  has  at  hi  instead  of  aiuthi. 

B.  Active  Verb.  — Infinitivo  pit  nan  {-nd,  -no),  to  strike.  After  r we  have  nan 
instead  of  nan  as  in  tsornan,  to  graze.  Outer  Siraji  has  optionally  -nu  instead  of  -no. 

Present  Participle  pitdau  i- da , -do),  striking  After  a vowel  the  termination  is 
ndan,  as  in  jdndan,  going.  So  rauhndau,  ratindau , or  rdndau,  remaining, 
from  rauhnau,  raunau  or  rdnan , to  remain. 

Past  Participle,  pitau  (-a,  -o),  struck. 


Irregular  are  : — 

anhnan  or  aitnan,  to  be,  to  become, 

past  part,  fthan,  item 

dennau , to  go,  deiiau 

laggnau,  to  be  joined,  lagan 

janau , to  go,  goau  or  gnu,  plur.  gnat,  gai  ; fern,  get 

kornau,  to  do,  kiau 

denan,  to  give,  dinau  (O.  S.  dennau) 

lainau,  to  take,  is  regular. 


The  Outer  Siraji  ichlmau,  to  come,  has  its  past  participle  do. 

Future  Passive  Participle,  piinan,  meet  to  be  struck. 

Same  in  form  as  the  Infinitive,  but  declinable  as  an  adjective. 

Conjunctive  Participle,  pited,  having  struck  (in  compounds,  pit i).  Outer  Siriiji, 
pite-kore. 

Adverbial  Pres.  Part.,  pitdd , while  striking. 

Ncun  of  Agency,  pitnedld. 

Impcrat.  2 sing,  pit,  strike  thou. 

2 plur.  pitau  (O.  S.  pita),  strike  ye. 

In  this  form  Mr.  Bailey  doubles  the  final  consonant  of  the  root.  Thus,  pitt, 

pittau. 

Present.  Used  Doth  as  a Present  Indicative  and  as  a Present  Subjunctive,  and  in 
Outer  Siraji  as  a Future  ; I strike,  I may  strike  (O.  S.  I shall  strike j,  etc. 


Sing.  ’ 

Tlur. 

1. 

pilu 

pili,  pita 

2. 

pita 

pita 

3. 

pita 

pita 

It  will  be  observed  that  the  second  and  third  person  of  both  numbers  have  all  the 
same  forms. 

dnau,  to  come,  has  : — 


Sir-. 

Plur. 

1. 

du 

di, 

2 & 3. 

a 

A 

SATLAJ  GKOUP. 


657 


deutfau,  to  go,  has: — 

Shift.  Plur. 

1.  deu  deioi,  deiod, 

2 & 3.  . deiod  deiod 

. % - “ • 

A Definite  Present  may  he  formed  with  the  past  participle  of  the  verb  laggnau,  and 
the  present  paigbfciple,  as  in  mtt  pitdau  lagan  aundau , I am  beating,  equivalent  to  the 
Hindi  mat  mdrtd  lagd  hold  (hit). 

The  Imperfect  is  formed  from  the  present  by  adding  tan  (to)  (plur.  tai  (Id)  ; f.-ni. 
ti)  to  the  present.  Thus  mu  pilii  tan,  I was  beating. 

Or  it  may  be  formed  on  the  same  principle  as  the  present  definite.  Thus,  mu 
pitdau  lagan  aundau  tan,  I was  striking. 

The  Past  Conditional  is  simply  the  present  participle,  and  does  not  change  for  per- 
son. Thus,  mu  pitdau,  (if)  I bad  struck. 

The  Future  is  thus  conjugated: — 


Sing. 

Plur. 

1. 

pitmU,  pifh 

pilme,  piti,  pita 

2. 

pita, 

pita, 

3. 

pita 

pita 

It  will  be  seen  that,  this  tense  is  the  same  as  the  present,  except  that  it:  has  addi- 
tional forms  in  the  first  person  singular  and  plural.  In  that  person,  deunav , to  go,  makes 
demit,  dome.  Outer  Siraji  has  no  forms  in  mu  or  mS. 

The  past  tenses  arc  formed  from  the  past  participle  as  usual,  and  need  no  remarks. 

Thus : — 

mu  deltan,  I went. 
mat  pitau,  I struck  him. 
mU  deuau  tan,  I had  gone. 
mat  pitau  fan,  I had  struck  him. 

Mr.  Bailey  gives  as  a continuative  compound,  a phrase  corresponding  to  mu  pitdau 
f'auhii,  I continue  to  fall.  The  present  participle  is  also  used  in  inceptive  compounds, 
as  in  sau  raumlan  lagan,  he  began  to  dwell  (with  a man  of  that  country'.  It  is  also 
used  as  an  infinitive  of  purpose,  as  in  sau  snngrai  tsd  rila  u Id  an,  he  appointed  him  to 
feed  swine. 

The  conjunctive  participle  in  l is  used  in  various  verbal  compounds,  as  in  lopoddiol 
mukau  (when),  he  had  completely  wasted. 

Mr.  Bailey  draws  attention  to  an  idiomatic  use  of  the  genitive  with  the  present 
participle,  the  latter  being  used  in  a passive  sense.  Thus,  jan  kitdb  teue  neht  porhdi,  as 
for  his  (part),  this  book  is  not  being  read,  i.e.,  he  cannot  read  this  book ; mere  neht 
deundau,  as  for  my  (part),  there  is  not  going,  i.e.,  I cannot  go. 

The  usual  verb  for  ‘ to  go’  is  cleunau.  Janan  is  mainly  employed  in  composition. 


VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


4 P 


658 


[ No.  I.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group* 

WESTERN  PAIIARI  (S6D0CHI). 

qq*t  qrq  qti  # i <?Nt  qf  qt#t  % 

^Tqft  qpft  qfqiT  wt  #ftqfqt  qfT  7T3?  *£5%  f I ##t  ftft  ffaT 

# qrqqft  qrft  qfft  i ft#  ##  ^ # ftft  ^r?rr  ^rm  qfii  qrft 

• * 

qift  qr*q  qT  qqT  ft  #ft  ft  I qft  qTqft  qT#t  snqq^-ft 
qrq^Tft  ftft  i #ft  qrft  wrft  qrqqTft  gqft  i qft  iter  g^naT  % 
qft  qn 36  q^  I qft  ft  qft  qT^ft  ^ift  I qft  ft  ?Ni  g^TT  f 
q^t  qm^r  w\  f¥ft  qnqt  i ftft  ft  qroft  qrfq^t  qt  gq^  qrfqi 
qrrft  i qft  #1  gqr  f q%  ffq  qqrtqr#  fqf  ^rrq^  fte  htt  <ft  i 
q-gs  # ftr  f"ti  fqrw  qT  q^T  ft  i qft  # ftq  ^rri  i qT<rq  ft 
q #ft  # qf  qTqT  qqq  iiqf  ftqf  q^  *TTqT  ftqT  qnrcr  ?§T%  «jfs% 

# ftzt  g#t  fl^T  I f qmft  ftqt  wft  qrqt  l tfqft  sgft  qTq% 

qTqT  qrrq  # #q?  i q^r  qt  ft*q  # qTqT  f m qrrq  qTwrr  qrrq 
qqft  qrft  ^fft  I q qft  qft  ftft  qT  ftft  l g # qft 

ftqqrr  qrrqft  w i qft  ft  *q#t  ^4t  i qrqq  qTqT  qrr#  qrH#  i 
qft  t qft  ^T  ft  qqft  qsrq  qrq  %ft  i q*ft  fN  ft  i STfr 
#®q  #fT  ft  ftft  ftft  I q^q  fteq  # ftft  q qTqT  4 qf  qrrq 

Gy  Cy  C\ 

Mi^RTT  qrrq  qqft  qrft  wft  i if  qft  qft  frz:  ft*r%  qr 
fNft  i qq?q  qTq  qrqw  ftq^T  # qt^  # q^ft  qfT  ft#  qT«ft 
qq>  # q#ft  i qq?q  wtm  q qrfnft  qn^  qrmT  q qtq#  qpift  i 
TNTT  # TfT«ft  ft^  ^ft  i qft  # # ^ fte  g^# 

^ fqtf  ftqqt  wzh  qfTq^  t#  qft  fq#t  I # ^ft  ffft  qmft  II 
q^  Wte  #^T  qt  T#  I irft  ^ ^TT  ftft 

qrq^ft  qpft  I m qqfr  ftqqr  # qrfqq  ^ ^ qqit 

«n<q  i ftft  qt^t  ?f3i  qr  nil  qr^t  qi#  m qrq  qtqiqT#  ?# 

# t I ^ I qalr  q!^#  fteqt  fq^  i #ift  qTq  ^ qqm 


SATLAJ  GROUP  (SoDOCHi).  659 

\ i?t%  HTwt  i f?ft  oro  wto  ott  ^rHrt  i ^ 

# i ftft  frft  lr  oft  oro  fr  fo%  fN% 

^4  i -fMPfti  frt  ftor  ot  oiifl  i W %ft  ?n4f  oNft  oor  %qb  ft 

•TT  ftft  %3T  OJT  tf  ft  0fT3i  Wt  ?|ft  T^Tft  \ ift  oft  4rft 

ftft  oft  *nft  orft  wo€t  % ott4  Sr  ot  ft  ot4*  ^Toiooft  *ft  1 
ot%  0^  # ft*ft  o wt^  ?£  ot  f f%  ftrr  1 ^ f 000  ^t,  ^ 

1 wf  # *fft  ooT^ft  %^ir  i^il^  ot4  ftft 
ftft  ft  fft  ftfft  faft  of  t4  fHrt  ^ xift  f*o#t  ftft  11 


VOL.  IX,  PAST  IV. 


4 P 2 


660 


[ No.  I.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAIIAET  (SOeOCIII). 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 

Eki-biibe  doi  tshotu  tai.  Tlna-iuA  hokne-tshotue 

Of -one-father  ftco  sons  icere.  Th  eni-from  -among  by-the-younger-son 

bolau,  * he  bn  bit,  apni-gborclu-mandjgba  dzau  mbrau  bsdau  {bra, 

it-icas-said,  * O father , thi ne-own-property-f rom-in  ichat  my  share  falls 

toil  xnu-lhai  ilb.’  TobI  lini  tina-lai  iipni  gkorehl  badi. 

that  me-lo  give.'  2/ien  by -him  tliem-lo  his-otcn  property  was-dirided. 

Tliorai  daihrai  uai-tai,  tlnl-tsliotue  iipne-bAdbi  ghflrchi  kotihi 

A-fcw  days  become-ioere , by-that-son  of-his-own-share  the-property  together 

kbreo  dur-de&i-ri  saili-ke  deuau.  Teti  apni  glibrehi 

having-made  a-far-conntry-of  journey-to  it-icas-gone.  There  his-oicn  property 

{adjurne-ill  lopodiiwl  dial.  Join  sari  gliorehi 

debauchery-on  having-squandered  icas-giren.  IVhen  all  property 

Jfipodft  \vi  muknu,  tebi  teii-mulkha-de  bfiddau  kill  pbrau. 

having-squandered  he-comple/ed , then  that-country-in  a-great  famine  fell. 

TobI  sail  bftrldau  dftlji  fiau.  Tebi  sail  leu-mulklta-re  oki-inan^S-sbiiire 

Then  he  eery  poor  became.  Then  he  that-counlry-of  a-man-with 

raundau  lagan.  Tin!  san  Apni-lagti-do  sun, lira  i tsardau  laau. 

dwelling  began.  By-liim  he  his-own-Jields-in  stcine  feeding  was-oppointed. 

Told  sau  smigro-rc  boche-atuul6-£olf>kre-sif  lie  apuau  pot.  bhbra-tau. 
Then  he  the-swine-of  remaining-being-hnsks-with  his-otcn  belly  filling-teas. 

Tbfi-lai  or-kbi  kiclili  na  dca-tau.  Tebi  teu-lai  sooh  ai. 

IJim-to  other-anyone  anything  not  giring-was.  Then  him- to  thought  came. 

Apne-ji-de  sHoliati  d/.ai,  * meri-baba-kae  jetre  rii$r  belliu 

JTis-oicn-soul-in  it-was-thought  that , ‘ my-father-near  as-many  servants  slaves 

Asa,  t,Ina-kae  khaue-badtie-lai  rbti  inukti  on.  Mn  lagan-mui  dau 

are.  them-near  eating-dividing- for  bread  'much  was.  I occupied-being 

blink  hail  mordau.  Mil  obi  nzueb  apne-biiba-kae-lai  dbu. 

hungry  (am-)  dying.  I now  having-arisen  my -own -father-near- to  may-go. 

Tbii-kb  bolii  dzai,  “baba,  tnO  ta-kae  POrmcsra-kafi  bddkau  papi 

Him- to  I- may -say  that,  “ father , I thee- near  God-near  great  sinner 

uau.  ALn  obi  terau  tsbotu  bulue  ibgau  ml  rauhau.  Mu-lai 

became.  I now  thy  son  to-say  worthy  not  remained.  3Je(acc.) 

bki-rigbra-bbrabbri  rokli.”  ’ Tebi  sau  klibrau  iizuau.  Apne-babA-kaJai 

a-ser  cant-like  keep Then  hr  standing  arose.  His-own-father-near 


661 


SATLAJ  GROUP  (SODOCIli). 


aau.  Tebi  sai  bhOrl  dur  tau,  tetri  teue-babe  berau. 

he-came.  Then  he  great  distance  was,  then  by-hisfather  he-icas-seen. 


Dekhl 

ghln 

ki. 

ThurSO 

teue-muha-dl  pOppI 

dlnl. 

Having-seen 

pity 

was-made. 

Having-run 

his-f ace-on  kisses  iceve-yi  ven. 

Teue-tsliOtiie 

teu-lai 

bolau. 

‘c  baba,  mu  ta-kae  PiSrmesra-kae 

bOd kau 

By-his-son 

him-to 

it-was-said, 

* 0 father, 

I thee-near  God-near 

great 

papl  uau. 

MS  ebl 

terau  tshOtu 

bOlne  jogau  na 

rauau.’ 

sinner  became.  I note  thy  son  to-say  worthy  not  remained .’ 

Teue-babe  apne-rigdra-lai  bolau  djsai,  ‘sObhl-ka  bitai  jurkai 

By-hisfather  his-oion-servants-to  it-was-said  that,  * all- than  good  garments 
anau,  ou-lai  bOdheau;  ouf?-batthA-de  kagnl  laau,  lata-d6  polrai  laau. 
bring,  this-one-to  put-on;  this-one's-hand-on  a-ring  put,  foot-on  shoes  put. 

Hama-lai  khanau  junau  kliuSl  aune  dcau.  Kl-lai  dz.ai 

TJs-to  eating  drinking  happiness  to-become  give.  What-for  that 

me  ran  jau  tsliotu  muau-tau,  phire  jiundau  uau;  gOraau-tau,  obi 

my  this  son  dead-teas , again  tiring  became;  lost-teas,  note 

mill-gOau.*  Sai  kbu£l  aundi  liigl. 

got-xeent .’  That  happiness  being  began. 


Teuau  bOddau  tsliotu  kbetsa-dO  tau.  Join  sau  gauhra-setbe 

II  is  elder  sou  1 he- field-in  teas.  When  he  the-house-ncar 

pujau,  till!  natsnau  gauau  sunau.  To  ekl-rlgOra-lai  bodeo 

arrived,  by -him  dancing  singing  tcas-heard.  Then  a-servant-to  having-called 


puebhau 

dzai, 

‘ kai 

jau 

lage-auiule-korde  ? ’ 

Tlnl 

it-ivas-aslced 

that. 

* what 

this 

(they-) employed-bei ng-(are-)doi ng  ? ' 

By -him 

bolau 

tcii-lai, 

* terau 

bbau 

Aau  ; 

tore-babe  kbanakari 

ki, 

it-was-said 

him-to, 

‘ thy 

brother  came; 

by-th  y-fa  (her  a-feast 

was-made. 

kl-lai  dzai  teu-lai 

sau 

bbojau 

Isagau 

jiundau  milau.’  Tettli-I-gae 

what-for  that  him-to 

he 

well 

healthy 

living  teas- got.'  That- 

-even-upon 

sau  nOraj 

uau. 

Blntre  do 

uiidau 

hbajau.  Tgttb-l-gae 

teuau 

he  angry  became.  Within  going  lie-refused.  Tliat-even-upon  his 


bab  bare 
father  outside 

dzai,  ‘ etrl 
that,  ‘ so-many 


aau.  Teu-lai  pdloundau  lagan.  Tin! 

came.  Ilim-to  remonstrating  began.  By -him 

l>8rSi  tS-sitbe  mulindc  kbotde  fu. 

years  thec-icith  in-living  in-serving  became  (passed). 


bolau 

it-icas-said 

Kebie 

Evev-even 


terau  bOl  ua  Otaau. 


Tai  merl-tai  kebi  ek  clibelu  bi 


thy 


icord  not  icas-put-aside. 


By- thee  me-for  ever  one  kid  even 


na  din  au,  jOttli-ka  mu 
not  was-gicen,  which- from  I 


bi  saii-soiige  kbusl  rOondau. 

also  friend-with  happy  might-hare-remained. 


Jebi  "terau  tskotii 
When  thy 


aau,  (izini  ten 
came,  by-whom  thy 


sari  gbOrclu 
all  p roper  ty 


tsbe6rl-ke  moral, 
harlots-to  tcas-ivastrd, 


son 


602  WESTEBfrf  '‘PA.IIARI. 

taT  eh-ri-t&f  khanakarl  kx.’  \ Babe  teu-lai  bolau, 

by-thee  him-of-for  a-feast  was- made.'  By-the-father  him- to  it-was-said, 

*8  tshdtu,  tu  to  mS-sbiige  daihri  rauba.  !Qzau  mS-kae  a, 

* O son,  thou  verily  me- with  (for-)  days  remainest.  What  me-near  is, 

sau  s5b  tSrau  a.  Hama-lai  kbu&L  mbnaunl  cheije,  ki-lai 

that  all  thine  is.  TJs-for  happiness  to-be-celebrated  is-proper , what-for 

dzai  terau  bbai  m5rl-goau-tau,  tebl  jiundau  phirau ; 

that  thy  brother  having-died-gone-was,  then  living  returned ; 

gttral-goau-tau,  ebi  mili-goax!.’ 

having-been-lost-gone-was,  now  having-been-fonnd-went .* 


standard  list  of  W05D3d  AN^PHRASES  in  THE  SODOCHI 


English. 

8$d$chi.  "*■ 

English. 

Sttddchi, 

— — --  - 



1.  Ono 

. Bk. 

26.  Ho  . 

SO,  sau. 

2.  Two 

Doe,  doi. 

27.  Of  him 

Tdh-ro,  tOs-ro,  totlo. 

3.  Three 

Chaun. 

28.  Ills 

Teh-rfi,  tOs-ro,  tOfto. 

4.  Four 

Igar. 

29.  They 

Sai. 

5.  Five 

Panj. 

30.  Of  them  . 

TlnaO,  tlnO. 

C.  Six 

Chbe,  chhau. 

31.  Their  . 

Tinao,  tlno. 

7.  Seven 

; Sat. 

1 

j 

32.  Hand 

. liatth. 

8.  Eight 

Ath. 

33.  Foot 

Lat. 

9.  Nine 

Nau. 

I 

34.  Nose 

Nak. 

10.  Ten 

1 Dus. 

i 

i 

35.  Eyo  ... 

Akkli. 

11.  Twenty  . 

: bij,  bi. 

i 

36.  .Month 

M 3h. 

12.  Fifty 

Pajah. 

37.  Tooth 

Dand. 

13.  Hundred 

! 

i 

1 

San. 

38.  Ear 

Kan. 

14.  I . . . j 

Ma. 

39.  Hair 

Sral. 

15.  Of  me  . . . j 

Meiau,  mere. 

10.  Head  . . . j 

MuikJ. 

16.  Mine  . . . J 

.Me rau,  mero. 

i 

11.  Toiiguu  . . . ! 

iJzibb. 

17.  Wo  . ! 

1 

| 

Harne,  hame,  ha  me,  harne. 

1 

42.  Belly  . . J 

Pet-,  p<5t. 

18.  Of  us 

i 

Mabro. 

13.  Back  . t | 

Fifth. 

19.  Our 

j 

Mali  in. 

11.  Iron 

’ i 

Lr»ha. 

20.  Thou  . . | 

1 

T, 

15.  Gold 

1 

j 

j Sun an. 

21.  Of  thee 

* 

Terau,  tero. 

46.  Silver 

j 

< Hu  pan. 

1 

22.  Thine 

FOraii,  terfl. 

47.  Father 

1 Bab. 

23.  You  . . j 'j 

Cuine,  turn?,  tnn.ie,  tunie. 

48.  Mother 

i'- 

24.  Of  you  . . 1 

'haro. 

...  4 

49.  Brother  . 

Bae. 

Ab  

, »'  . 

RKflrtnhf— f>63 


English. 

Sftdftoht 

English. 

SSddchl. 

51.  Alan 

• 

M&yhchh,  mSrd. 

78.  Eat  ... 

KhS. 

52.  Woman  . 

• 

ChhCwrI,  tflbSwpI. 

79.  Sit  ... 

Bs$. 

53.  Wife 

• 

Nani. 

80.  Come 

A. 

54.  Child 

JMhafcfO,  cliho$5,  igh0(u. 

81.  Boat 

Pit. 

55.  Son 

Chhrttfi,  tshfltfi. 

82.  Stand  . . . j 

Khftfft,  au. 

56.  Daughter 

• 

Chhrttl,  fcghotl. 

i 

83.  Die  . . . | 

1 

Mor,  Mor. 

57.  Slave 

. 

Br»tlifi. 

i 

84.  Give  . . . j 

1 

Ds. 

58.  Cultivator 

. 

Baaan . 

85.  Bun 

Th nr,  bSg, 

59.  Shepherd 

• 

Phufil,  bakriila. 

86.  Up  . . . i 

Ga£,  hflbht. 

60.  God 

• 

Naran. 

j 

87.  Near 

Ncr*»  nflddhl. 

61.  Devil 

• 

Kakas. 

88.  Down 

i 

Tol,  t51,  hflndl. 

62.  Suti 

• 

Snraj,  daihrA 

89.  Far  ... 

L)nr. 

63.  Moon 

Dzfith,  (iz5th. 

90.  Before 

Agdo. 

64.  Star 

• 

- 

Tara. 

i 

91.  Behind  . 

Patgha. 

65.  Fire 

• 

• 

Ag. 

92.  Who 

Kui?. 

66.  Water 

• 

• 

Paul. 

93.  What 

Ka 

67.  House 

• 

• 

Gauhr,  ghaur. 

n 

94.  Why 

Kila,  kllai. 

68.  Horse 

• 

Grthpfl,  ghflro 

95.  And 

A,  or. 

69.  Cow 

• 

GaA 

96.  But  ... 

Sidhfl,  p5r. 

70.  Dog 

• 

Kukai\ 

97.  If  . 

Dzai. 

71.  Cat 

• 

Brailfi. 

98.  Yes  ... 

0. 

72.  Cock 

• 

Kukklirrt. 

99.  No  ... 

Ni. 

73.  Duck 

• 

Batak. 

i 

100.  Alas 

Jharl. 

74.  Ass  . 

• 

• 

GadhA 

101.  A father  . 

Bab. 

75.  Camel 

a 

• 

£V. 

Uf. 

102.  Of  a father 

B&bd. 

76.  Bird 

• 

7- 

Chiftkhl. 

103.  To  a father 

B&ba-lai. 

77.  Go 

•*w 

• 

]?8w. 

104.  From  a father  . 

1 

Baba-ki. 

664 — SSdftcht 


English. 

SSdOcht 

105.  Two  fathers  • 

DoS  bftb. 

106.  Fathers  . 

Bftb. 

107.  Of  fathers 

BAM. 

108.  To  fathers 

Baba-lai. 

109.  From  fathers  . 

Babi-ka. 

110.  A daughter 

Xghoti. 

111.  Of  a daughter  . 

Xgbotio. 

112.  To  a daughter  . 

Xgbotl-lai. 

113.  From  a daughter 

Xgh.ttl-ka. 

114.  Two  daughters 

Doc*  fahoti. 

115.  Daughters 

Xghoti. 

116.  Of  daughters  . 

Xabotio. 

117.  To  daughters  . 

TsMtldai. 

1 IS.  From  daughters 

X§h<5tl-ka. 

119.  A good  man 

Haislifi  ma^oclih. 

120.  Of  a good  man 

Hatshfi  ma^chho. 

121.  To  a good  man 

I Ilntsht)  ma^chha-lai. 

122.  From  a good  man 

H Stake  ma nchh A-ka . 

123.  Two  good  men 

hatshS  ma^ochh. 

124.  Good  men 

Hfttflhe  mA^Schh. 

125.  Of  good  men  . 

Habile  ra&tyclihd. 

126.  To  good  men  . 

Haiaho  ma^ckhA-lai. 

127.  From  good  men 

Ha  bib 5 ma^ckliA-ka. 

128.  A good  woman 

Hatshl  Lshowfl. 

129.  A bad  boy 

Rlw  talifltn. 

130.  Good  women  . 

Hatshl  tahdwfl. 

131.  A bad  girl 

Rlw  tahoti. 

VOL.  JX,  PAST  If. 


English. 

Stfd&hl. 

132.  Good 

* 

Atahfi,  hatfihfl* 

133.  Better 

(Fh-thaka)  hatgho. 

134.  Best 

(Soblil-ka)  hataho. 

135.  High 

Utahtfl,  utshtffl. 

136.  Higher 

(Eh-thaka)  utskto. 

137.  Highest  . 

(Sobhl-ka)  utflhto. 

138.  A horse  . 

Gflhrfl. 

130.  A mare  . 

Gfihrl. 

140.  Horses 

G^hfai. 

141.  Mares  . . 

Gfihrl. 

142.  A bull 

j Bald. 

143.  A cow  . . . J 

i 

Ga^. 

i 

144.  Bulla  . . . | 

Bold. 

i 

145.  Cows  . . . : 

j 

Gal. 

146.  A dog  . . . j 

i 

JCukar. 

147.  A bitch  . 

Kukri. 

148.  Dogs 

Kukar. 

149.  Bitches  . 

Kukri. 

150.  A he  goat 

Baki>3. 

151.  A female  goat  . 

Bakii. 

152.  Goats 

Bakr<5. 

153.  A male  deer 

Ral. 

154.  A female  deer  . 

Halfll  (doubtful). 

155.  Deer 

Ral. 

156.  Iam 

MS  a,  a,  asa. 

157.  Thou  art . 

Tu  a,  asa. 

158.  He  is 

So  a,  asa. 

S8daclu— 665 

•V  q 


Eoglish. 

Sftdochl. 

159.  We  ore  . 

HamS  5,  a,  ana. 

160.  Ton  are  . 

Turn 5 ft,  asa. 

161.  They  are  . 

Sai  a,  Ssa. 

162.  I was 

MS  tau. 

163.  Thon  wast 

Tfi  tau. 

164.  He  was  . 

So  tau. 

165.  We  were 

Hame  tai. 

166.  Ton  wero  . 

Tume  tai 

167.  They  were 

i 

Sai  tai. 

168.  Be  • 

Au. 

169.  To  be 

i 

. Aui^au,  auboau. 

170.  Being  . 

j 

i Aundau,  nuhndau. 

171.  Having  been  . 

I 

j Aufio. 

172.  I may  be 

i 

' MS  aufl. 

i 

173.  I shall  be  . 

MS  aum3. 

174.  I should  be  . . j 

i 

••• ••• 

175.  Beat  « • • 

i 

Pit. 

i 

176.  To  beat  . 

i 

Pitman. 

| 

177.  Beating  . 

Pitdau. 

178.  Having  beaten 

Pity5,  pit£i5. 

179.  I beat  . 

MS  pits. 

180.  Thou  beatoBt  • 

TS  pita. 

181.  He  beats 

So  pita. 

182.  We  beat  • . 

HamS  pit!,  pits. 

183.  Ton  beat.  » * . 

TumS  pits. 

184.  They  beat 

Sai  pits. 

185.  I beat  (Past  Tense)  . 

MaT  pi  tau. 

English. 

&d£chl. 

186,  Thou  beatest  (Pas/ 
Tense). 

Tai  pi  tau. 

Ib7.  He  beat  ( Past  Tense ) 

Tin!  pitau. 

188.  We  beat  ( Past  Tense) 

HamS  pitau. 

189.  Tou  beat  (Post  Tense) 

Turn!  pitau. 

190.  They  beat  ( Past 

Tense). 

Tine  pitau. 

191.  I am  beating  . 

M3  pitdau  lSgau  aundan. 

192.  I was  beating  . 

M3  pitdau  lSgau  aundau 
tau. 

193.  I had  beaten  . 

MaT  pitau  tau. 

194.  I may  beat 

M3  pits. 

195.  I shall  beat 

M3  pitmU. 

196.  Thou  wilt  beat . 

Tu  pita. 

197.  He  will  beat  . 

SO  pits. 

198.  We  shall  beat  . 

HamS  pitroS. 

199.  Tou  will  beat  . 

TumS  pita. 

200.  They  will  beat  . 

Sai  pita. 

201.  I should  beat  . 

202.  I am  beaten 

MS  pitau  jftS. 

203.  1 was  beaten  . 

MS  pifau  gau. 

204.  1 shall  be  beaten 

MS  pitau  j&xntt. 

205.  I go 

MS  4os. 

206.  Thou  goest 

TS  $6wS. 

207.  He  goes 

So  <JOwS. 

208.  We  go  . 

HamS  4SwI. 

209.  ¥ou  go  . 

TumS 

210..  They  go  . 

Sai  dOwft. 

211.  I went  • 

MS  gdflan* 

212.  Thon  wenteet  . 

Tft  gOflau. 

«66~ SWoriu 


English, 

gSdfcht. 

English. 

Sftdfchi. 

213.  He  went  . 

i 

So  <Jdflau. 

228.  I have  beaten  his  son 
with  many  stripes. 

Mai  dh-rd  tflhdtu  chhiuntai* 
ke  pitau. 

214.  We  went . 

Ham?  45&&i. 

229.  He  is  grazing  cattle 
on  tho  top  of  tho  hill. 

So  <Jdgai  ch&rdau  dahr&- 
gad  lagO  aundau  fisu. 

215.  You  went 

TumS  defiai. 

230.  He  is  sitting  on  a 
horse  under  that  tree. 

Sd  ten  biita  pftro  gdhjd- 
gae  bdsau  aundau  a. 

216.  They  went 

Sai  ddiiai. 

231.  His  brother  is  tailor 
than  his  sister. 

Eh-rd  bad  eh-rl  baih^i-kft 
utshtd  a. 

217.  Go 

pea. 

232.  The  price  of  that  is 
two  rupees  and  a 
half. 

Teb-rd  mol  dhahd  rupayyd 
a. 

218.  Going  . * 

Poundaa. 

233.  My  father  lives  in 
that  small  houso. 

Merau  bub  tes  mahtfd 
gaulira-dl  rauha. 

219.  Gone 

Petiau,  gau. 

234.  Givo  this  rupee  to 
him. 

Rs  rupayyd  t&s-lai  de. 

220.  What  is  your  name  ? 

Terd  kd  nau  ? 

235.  Take  those  rupees 
from  him. 

Tina  rupayyd  teu-ka  dr  ft 
lai. 

221.  How  old  is  this  horso? 

222.  How  far  is  it  from 
here  to  Kashmir  P 

223.  How  many  sons  are 
there  in  your  father’s 
house  ? 

224.  I have  walked  a long 

way  to-day. 

fift  jdhreai  kai  umar  & ? 

Kasmlra  tai  Inda-ka  kdtre 
dur  asa  ? 

Tore  babu  gauhra-dl  ketrd 
tslidtii  asa  ? 

M3  az  dura  tat  ha^ddd. 

236.  Beat  him  well  and 
bind  him  with  ropes. 

237.  Draw  water  from  the 
well. 

238.  Walk  before  me. 

239.  Whoso  boy  comes  be- 

R5sl-dl banyd  ten  khftb 
pit. 

Kfte-ka  paol  jhipd. 

Mu-ka  agdi  hai^d. 

i T*-pa  andau  kaurd  tghdfri 

225.  Tho  son  of  my  uncle 
is  married  to  his 
sister. 

226.  In  the  house  is  tbo 
saddle  of  the  white 
horso. 

Mere  kakdau  tghdtfi  dh-rl 
baihi^l  songo  baiuau  aun- 
„ dau  asa. 

Sukld  ghd^eai  kathl  gauhra- 
de  asa* 

hind  you  ? 

240.  From  whom  did  yen 
buy  that  ? 

241.  From  a shopkeeper  of 

! * ? 

! TaT  jau  kaua-ka  laid  ? 

! 

Graue  ok  baple-ka. 

227.  Put  tho  saddle  upon 
his  back. 

Kathl  pitthl-gau  da. 

tlio  village. 

i 

1 

i 

VOL.  IX  PAST  IV. 


SJSdOohl— <5C7 
4 q 2 


660 


Kulu  Group. 

The  Kulu  subdivision  of  the  Kangra  District  includes  the  two  Tahsils  of  Kulu  and 
UJL  , Plach  or  Siraj,  together  with  the  outlying  cantons  of  Lahul 

Where  spoken.  1 _ 

ana  bpiti.  -Lahul  and  Spiti,  situated  respectively  on  the 
headwaters  of  the  Chcnab  and  of  the  Satlaj  river  systems,  between  the  mid  and  western 
Himalayas,  belong  rather  to  Tibet  than  to  India,  and  in  them  the  languages  spoken 
belong  to  the  Tiboto-Burman  Group,  and  do  not  concern  us  at  present.1 

The  Kulu  and  Siraj  Tahsils  lie  on  the  hither  side  of  the  Mid-Hi inalay an  range, 
and  belong  to  India  proper.  Here,  except  in  a few  isolated  spots  such  as  Malana  in 
Kulu,  the  language  is  Indo- Aryan,  and  belongs  to  the  western  Paharl  Group.  The 
principal  river  of  the  Kulu  Tahsil  is  the  Bias.  The  ltiver  Sainj,  running  east  to  west, 
joins  the  Bias  at  Larjl,  near  tin;  western  boundary  of  the  subdivision. 

Siraj  lies  between  the  Sainj  and,  on  the  south,  the  Satlaj.  It  is  cut  into  a northern 
and  southern  half  by  the  Jalori  or  Suket  range?.  The  northern  portion  being  known  as 
Inner  Siraj,  and  the  southern  as  Outer  Siraj. 

As  has  been  explained,  ante , p.  593,  the  name  * Siraj  * means  * the  kingdom  of 

Siva,’ and  hence  ‘highlands.*  The  language  of  Outer  Siraj 

Languages  forming  the  Group.  . , , t,  , . . 

torms  a member  of  the  Satlaj  Group  of  W estern  Pahari 
languages,  and  has  been  described  on  pp.  617  IT. 

The  language  of  Kulu  proper  is  known  as  Kului  or  Kululit. 2 That  of  Inner 
Siraj  is  kuown  as  Inner  Siraji.  In  the  Valley  of  the  Sainj,  there  is  a distinct  dialect, 
akin  to  Inner  Siraji,  which  Mr.  Grahame  Bailey  names  SainjI. 

We  have  no  figures  for  the  number  of  speakers  of  Inner  Siraji  or  Sainji.  All  than 

are  available  arc  the  figures  for  the  total  number  of 

Number  of  speakers.  speakers  of  both  Siraj  dialects  including  Sainji.  These 

have  been  given  as  50,551,  and  we  have  estimated  on  p.  6 fc7  that  the  number  of 
speakers  of  Outer  Siraji  may  be  taken  as  2(),000.  We  may  roughly  estimate  the 
number  of  speakers  of  Sainji  at  10,000,  and  give  the  remaining  20,551  to  Inner  Siraji. 
Separate  figures  for  Kului  have  been  received,  and  we  may  therefore  give  the  total 
number  of  speakers  of  the  Kulu  Group  of  dialects  as  follows:—— 

Kului 54,080 

loner  Siraji  (estimated)  ..........  20,;>51 

Sainji  (estimated)  ....  .......  10,000 

Total  . 81,631 


' The  Lahul  and  Spiti  languages  ate  dealt  with  in  Vol.  Ill,  Part  I,  of  this  Surrey,  pp.  09  It.  and  SI!  IT. 
a The  Kului  languago  does  not  stop  at  the  western  boundary  of  Kulu.  Separating  Kulu  f.om  the  Kangra  \ al’ey 
proper  lios  the  mountainous  Kangra  canton  of  lhingShal,  which  is  very  spar.ely  populated.  Jvoito  (or  L.iia)  lrangSh.il 
contains  but  a single  small  village.  South  (or  Chiral  Bangahal  is  divided  north  and  south  by  a mountain  range  into  an 
eastern  and  a western  half.  The  eastern  half,  containing  only  eighteen  scattered  hamlets,  belongs  linguist lealN  to  hum,  am. 
here  a mixture  of  Kului  and  Mandat  (the  language  of  Man.li  State)  is  spoken,  which  for  convenience  of  class]  neat  ion  may 
be  looked  upon  as  identical  with  Kului.  Thi  western  half  of  Clihdta  Bangui, al,  known  as  I5ir  Bung5l.nl  belongs  lingui-tically 
to  Kangra. 


670 


KUt-UT. 

Kului,  or  Kujuhi,  is  spoken  in  Kulu  proper,  i.e.,  in  the  Kulu  Valley  on  the  Upper 

Bias.  It  possesses  most  of  the  peculiarities  of  the  Western 
peC,al  p<cu,,ant,es'  Paharl  dialects  already  described,  but  presents  a few  inde- 
pendent features.  Although  it  has  the  usual  Western  Paha?!  tendency  to  pronounce 
a like  the 'd  in  * hot,’  and  d like  6 or  d,  this  is  not  so  universal  as  in  the  Simla  Group. 
This  is  specially  the  case  in  regard  to  the  letter  d,  which  is  very  commonly  preserved. 
Wo  also  find  the  Simla! change  of  t derived  from  an  old  tr  to  ch,  and  the  pronunciation 
of  ch,  as  ts,  but  these  peculiarities  are  again  not  so  marked  as  in  Simla.  In  the  declen- 
sion of  nouns  we  may  note  that  masculine  nouns  ending  in  a consonant  have  an  oblique 
Jorm  ending  in  e or  a,  and  that  similar  feminine  nouns  have  an  oblique  form  in  i.  The 
postposition  of  the  dative  is  be,  and  na  is  used  both  for  the  locative  and  for  the  ablative. 
The  demonstrative  pronouns  have  distinct  forms  for  the  feminine,  but,  so  far  as  noted, 
none  for  the  neuter.  The  word  for  ‘ he  is  ’ is  sd  or  he,  and  for  * he  was,*  tl  or  thd.  The 
Present  and  Imperfect  tenses  of  the  active  verb  aro  formed  by  adding  d to  the  root,  and 
then  suffixing  the  appropriate  tense  of  the  verb  substantive.  So  formed,  they  do  not 
change  for  number  or  person.  The  distinguishing  mark  of  the  future  tense  is  the  letter 
l,  and  the  past  participle  usually  ends  in  u,  but  sometimes  in  d. 

Kului  is  briefly  referred  to  in  Adclung’s  Mithridates  (Berlin,  1806,  Vol.  I.,  p.  294). 

In  1871,  the  Rev.  W.  J.  P.  Morrison  laid  before  the 
American  Oriental  Society  a Kului  Vocabulary  which  was 
not  published,  but  regarding  which  some  remarks  by  the  Rev.  S.  H.  Kellogg  are 
printed  on  p.  xxxvii  of  Vol.  X.  (1871)  of  the  Journal  of  the  Society. 

The  first  serious  study  of  Kului  is  contained  in  Mb.  A.  H.  Diack’s — The  Kulu 
Dialect  of  Kindi : some  Notes  on  its  Grammatical  Structure,  icith  Specimens  of  the  Songs 
current  amongst  the  Feople,  and  a Glossary  (Lahore  1896). 

The  late  Mr.  E.  O’Brien  prepared  some  notes  on  Kului  and  Gadi,  which  were  put 
into  type.  He  did  not,  however,  live  to  prepare  his  notes  finally  for  the  press,  and  they 
never  got  beyond  the  stage  of  being  in  proof.  Finally  the  Rev.  T.  Grahamc  Bailey 
prepared  a general  account  of  all  the  Dialects  of  Kulu  for  the  new  edition  of  the  District 
Gazetteer,  and  these  have  been  republished  in  his  Languages  of  the  Northern  Himalayas, 
issued  by  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  in  1908. 

In  the  following  pages,  the  freest  use  has  been  made  of  Mr.  Diack’s  and  Mr.  Bailey’s 
works,  and  I gladly  take  this  opportunity  of  acknowledging  the  assistance  I have  derived 
from  their  labours. 

Kului  is  invariably  written  in  a form  of  the  Takri  character.  The  letters  differ 

slightly  in  Upper  Kulu  on  the  one  hand,  and  in 
Lower  Kulu  and  Siraj  on  the  other.  The  following 
plate  shows  the  forms  which  the  letters  take  : — 


Authorities. 


Written  character. 


KTJ^TJf. 


071 


The  Kujui  Alphabet  - 

When  letters  are  separated  by  a comma,  the  letter  or  letters  before  the  comma  are 
used  in  Upper  Kulu,  and  those  after  the  comma  in  Lower  Kulu  and  8iraj. 


r 

Vowels. 

Consonants. 

(ha 

l 

ha 

a 

ka 

4a 

3>$- 

bha 

b,  ]? 

& 

✓ > ✓ 

kd 

kha 

u 

4ha 

ma 

>».  S-c 

• 

t 

c 

ga 

XL 

ya 

®»(0 

i 

gha 

ta 

7 

ra 

r 

hi,  ki 

*1 

or 

* 

cha 

9^,-0 

tha 

la 

«,  u 

<? 

chha 

da 

-c 

(va) 

ku , ku 

or 

e,ai 

7 

dha 

Z?,  c 

da,  8a 

T\,J? 

Jha 

na 

b>7 

ha 

kd,  kai 

6 , au 

& 

Ha 

? 

pa 

X 

thti 

P 

ko,  kau 

(a 

u 

pha 

Z,JL 

Ira 

X 

Ya  is  usually  indicated  by  initial  *,  and  tea  by  initial  w.  Thus  yd,Qj^wa. 


672 


WESTERN  PAHAkI. 


As  full  Vocabularies  are  given  by  Mr.  Diack  and  by  Mr.  Bailey,  it  is  not  necessary 
‘ Vocabulary  to  deal  with  the  matter  at- any  length  here.  Gene- 

rally speaking,  the  Kulu!  Vocabulary  resembles 
, that  of  other  Western  Paharl  dialects,  with,  as  usual,  some  local  peculiarities.  The 
following  are  a few  words  mainly  taken  from  Mr.  Bailey’s  longer  list,  which  have  not 
been  recorded  in  the  Vocabularies  given  abovo  for  the  Simla  dialects : — 


al si,  lazy,  foolish. 

amnia,  a mother. 

bardg,  a leopard. 

bhrotu , a load. 

bolt,  a way,  path. 

bidnnd,  wind. 

buttd,  a tree. 

chitthd  or  chitthd,  black. 

chhet,  a field. 

chhatfi,  maize. 

dag  or  dhog,  a hill. 

ddtind  or  dannd , an  egg. 

dhunna,  to  meet,  to  be  obtained. 

dzhauftid  or  jhaurnd,  to  fall. 

di£tn  or  Jo,  a wife. 

end,  ejnd  or  echhnd,  to  come. 

gahi  or  ghat,  a bear. 

gandu,  wise. 

ga&,  rain. 

grd,  a village. 

hernd,  to  see. 

hutshd  or  huchchha,  small. 

jew , the  body. 

jo  or  dsbl,  a wife. 

kemd,  to  do. 

kdnalc,  wheat. 

lahrt,  a wife. 

lummd  patina,  to  lie  down. 
mdndzd,  a bed. 
mafd,  ugly. 
noshnd,  to  go. 
pauvtd,  to  fall. 

pdddhrd,  a plain,  level  ground. 
rdmrd,  good. 

6et#d>  to  throw. 

Setta , white. 
slkhd,  meat. 

Hr,  hair. 

Subhid,  good,  beautiful,  clean. 


KUJiTJl. 


67S 


Sohfii,  a boy. 
takfd,  swift. 
totta,  hot. 
tghdkd,  swift. 
uthfd,  high. 
yd,  a mother. 

Pronunciation. — There  is  a tendency  to  shorten  long  vowels,  as  in  lioth  or  hath,  a 
hand ; konn,  instead  of  the  Hindi  kdn,  an  ear.  As  will  be  seen  from  these  examples,  a 
short  a is  usually  pronounced  like  the  6 in  * hot.’  A final  long  d of  tadbhava  masculine 
nouns,  such  as  ghdfd , is  often  changed  into  o or  u,  but  this  is  not  so  general  as  in  the 
Simla  dialects,  in  which  the  change  is  the  rule.  In  Kului  it  is  most  often  observed  in 
the  case  of  past  participles,  as  in  du,  com e;'Md«,  eaten;  pin,  drunk;  keru,  done  ; janu, 
known.  But  even  here  some  participles  more  often  end  in  d,  e.g.  hud,  become ; nottlid , 
gone  ; god , gone  ; betthd , seated ; dhind,  given.  We  also  often  find  the  termination  u in 
infinitives,  as  in  honu,  to  become  ; dunu,  to  come ; kernu,  to  do  : but  we  may  also  have 
hona,  dund,  and  kervtd.  In  the  case  of  nouns  substantive  the  d termination  is  the  most 
common,  although  some  few  words,  such  as  6ohru,  a boy,  always  have  u. 

The  consonantal  changes  noted  in  the  Simla  dialects  also  occur  in  Kului,  but  arc  not 
so  frequent. 

Final  s is  often  changed  to  h,  as  in  bras  or  brah,  rhododendron.  Instead  of  initial 
kh,  we  have  chh  in  the  word  chhet,  a field.  The  tendency  of  the  Simla  dialects  to  trans- 
fer the  aspiration  of  words  like  ghdrd,  a horse,  also  occurs,  but  is  not  so  universal.  For 
instance,  we  have  both  ghdrd  and  gohfd.  Similarly  we  have  ghdi  or  gdhi,  a bear. 

A curious  instance  of  hardening  a soft  consonant,  and  at  the  same  time  of  inverting 
the  position  of  consonants  is  given  by  Mr.  Diaok  in  the  name  of  the  month  magslr,  which 
is  pronounced  kaSmtr. 

In  the  Simla  dialects  ch  is  often  pronounced  to,  and  j is  often  pronounced  z or  <lz. 
These  changes  also  occur  in  Kului,  but  are  not  so  common.  As  examples  we  may  quote 
hotohd  or  hochchhd,  small ; tohekd,  for  chhekd,  swift ; jdnd  or  dzdnd,  to  go  ; and 
faonghd,  a foot,  for  Hindi  janghd,  the  leg. 

When  t was  originally  followed  by  an  r-sound,  it  often  became  ch  in  the  Simla 
dialects.  This  also  occurs  ih  Kului,  but  principally  in  the  dialect  spoken  in  the  Lower 
Valley.  Thus  we  have  Upper  Kulu  trait  hut  Lower  Kulu  chin,  * three,’  representing 
the  Sanskrit  trayah  or  trini ; and  Upper  Kulu  rat,  but  Lower  Kulu  rat  or  rdch,  night, 
representing  a Sanskrit  rdtri. 

As  in  the  Simla  dialects,  there  is  a preference  to  the  sound,  instead  of  s.  Numerous 
examples  will  be  found  in  the  specimens. 

tfOUIlB. — As  in  the  Simla  Pahari  dialects,  the  plural  is,  as  a rule,  the  same  as  the 
singular.  The  only  exceptions  are  tadbhava  masculine  nouns  in  d and  femi- 
nine nouns  ending  in  a consonant.  The  former  make  the  nominative  plural  oy 
changing  d to  8 ; thus  ghdfd , a horse ; ghore,  horses.  The  latter  add  i in  the  nominative 
plural.  Thus,  behn,  a sister ; behni,  sisters.  The  oblique  cases  of  the  plural  are  always 
the  same  as  those  of  the  singular. 

The  oblique  case,  singular  and  plural,  of  tadbhava  masculine  nouns  in  d is  made  by 
changing  the  d to  A Thus  ghdfd,  obi.  sing,  and  plur.  ghdfe. 

▼pi»  IX,  VAKT  IT.  * R 


674 


WESTERN  PAHArI. 


Masculine  nouns  ending  in  a consonant  make  the  oblique  form  singular  and  plural 
by  adding  a or  e.  Thus  ghor,  a house,  obi.  sing,  and  plur.  ghord  or  ghord. 

All  nouns  ending  in  i or  u have  the  oblique  form  the  same  as  tbe  nominative. 
Thus  admi , a man,  obi.  sing,  and  plur.  fidmi  ; befit  a daughter,  obi.  sing,  and  plur.  belt  ; 
mdnhu,  a man,  obi.  sing,  and  plur.  mdnhu. 

Feminine  nouns  ending  in  a consonant  make?  the  oblique  form  by  adding  i.  Thus, 
behn,  a sister,  obi.  sing,  and  plur.  behni. 

Nouns  have  also  a case  of  the  agent  singular  or  plural  formed  by  adding  e to  the 
oblique  form.  But  if  the  oblique  form  already  ends,  or  can  end,  in  e,  this  e is  dropped 
before  the  e of  the  agent  ease.  Thus  ghord , a horse,  obi.  form  ghore , ag.  ghdfe  ; ghor , a 
house ; obi.  form  ghord  or  ghore,  ag.  ghore ; mdnhu , a man,  obi.  form  mdnhu,  ag. 
mdnhue-,  behn,  a sister,  obi.  form  behni,  ag.  behnie. 

The  above  cases  are  shown  more  conveniently  in  the  following  table : — 


Ntnn. 

i Plur.  | 

i 

Obi. 

Sing,  and 

Plural. 

Ag.  Sing. 

! and 

! Plural. 

I 

gliGrt i,  a horse 

... 

i 

...  ghdr§ 

<jhdre 

ghore 

ghflr,  a honse  ... 

... 

ijhdr 

ghfird,  ghflre  ■ 

ghtir* 

ddwi,  a man 

...  ; admi  1 

\ admi 

ddmle 

manh  u , a man  . . . 

... 

...  mdnhu 

i 

mdnhu 

mdnhue 

betit  a daughter 

belt 

1 

j heti 

betie 

behn , a sister 

... 

...  behni 

l * ‘ 

beh  nl 

behnie 

According  tc  Mr.  Diack,  all  nominatives  plural  are  formed  by  adding  an,  and  the 
oblique  form  of  ghord  is  ghdra,  but  I have  not  noted  any  instance  of  this  in  the  speci- 
mens ; nor  have  I met  it  elsewhere. 

According  to  tbe  specimen,  feminine  nouns  ending  in  consonants,  sometimes  have 
the  oblique  form  like  the  corresponding  masculines,  endinrr  in  d or  e instead  of  i.  Thus 
we  have  burl  chald-na,  (wasted  his  substance)  in  bad  conduct ; and  eki  dure-re  deid-be, 
to  a country  of  distance,  i.e.,  to  a far  country,  in  which  dur  is  feminine. 

The  cases  are,  as  usual,  formed  by  postpositions  added  to  the  oblique  form.  There  are 
rd,  of ; be,  to ; rl  tai  or  ri  tde,  for ; na,  from ; na,  in;  mohjhe  or  mdhje,  in ; mdhjhe-na, 
from  in;  sdhghe,  with,  together  with,  or  with,  by  means  of ; dgge,  near,  towards,  to 
near. 

After  verbs  of  speaking  be  and  sdhghe  are  used  indifferently,  as  in  tei-be  bol  or  tei- 
sohghe  bol,  say  to  him.  The  ablative  of  comparison  is  formed  with  na.  Tlius,  behgd- 
na  lo>nbd,  taller  than  the  sister  (sentence  ^31).  Observe  that  na  means  both  ‘in’  and 
‘ from.'  The  former  meaning  is  not  mentioned  by  Mr.  Bailey. 

The  genitive  postposition  is,  as  usual,  an  adjective,  being  rd  when  agreeing  with  a 
masculine  singular  noun  in  the  form  of  the  nominative,  and  changing  to  re  when  agree- 
ing with  a masculine  noun  in  the  oblique  singular  or  in  the  plural,  and  to  ri  when 
agreeing  with  a feminine  noun. 

Adjectives  in  d (o  or  e)  are  similarly  treated. 


KTHiUi. 


675 


Pronouns. — The  first  two  personal  pronouns  are  declined  as  follows.  Forms  given 
by  Mr.  Diack,  and  for  which  I have  no  other  authority,  are  marked  with  an  asterisk. 


I. 

• Sing, 

Norn.  hail,  me*,  mu* 

Ag.  • mat 

Dat.-Acc.  mu-br,  mSme 

Abl.  m& -va,  mUn,  mu-ana * 

Gen.  mera 

Plur. 

Norn.  dsse,  ham*,  home * 

Ag.  dsse 

Dat.-Acc.  ansa -be,  sattse*,  sume* 

Ahl.  dssd-nu,  dsxdv,  hamana* 

Gen.  duad-rd,  mhdrd*,  assdn-rd,* 


Thou. 

tu,  than* 
tai 

tau-be,  tu-oe* 

taii-na,  taun,  thau-ana* 

tend- 


tnsse,  him* 

tnsse 

tussd-be 

tn.ssd.-na,  tussdn 
tussd-rd,  tusrd,  thamurd* 


In  the  case  of  all  pronouns,  the  dative  postposition  be  is  also  pronounced  toe  or  e*\ 
The  Demonstrative  Pronouns,  which  are  also  used  as  Pronouns  of  the  third 
Person,  are  declined  as  follows.  They  have  feminine  forms  in  the  singular,  but  nothing 
corresponding  to  the  neuter  forms  of  the  Simla  dialects  has  been  noted  : — 

This.  That. 


— - , 

" 

■ 

Masc. 

Ft‘tn. 

1 

i 

Muse. 

Sing. 

j 

1 

t 

Notn. 

ih 

ph 

sail 

son 

Ag. 

el*  i 

I 

i 

te\p 

t£sse 

Obi. 

ei 

li 

£68* 

i 

1 

j 

i 

-->i 

iftt 

i 

Plur. 



i 

i 

j 

, 

1 

Nom.  1 

! 

eh 

t? 

I 

Ag. 

j inks 

i 

i 

i 

t tnhe 

Obi. 

j Inha 

i 

! 

tfnhs 

In  the  specimen,  the  form  m or  oi  (once  in  each  form)  occurs  instead  of 
phrase  is  ul  (oi)  joga<  nahi , I am  not  worthy  of  that. 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


te'i. 


Tho 


4i  il  2 


d76 


WESTERN  PAHARf. 


The  Relative  and  Interrogative  Pronouns  axe  declined  as  follows.  As  usual, 

the  latter  has  a neuter  : — 


1 

Who. 

Who  ? 

Sing. 

I 

Norn. 

js 

hup 

Ag. 

jUnlt 

kaniS 

Obl. 

j6s 

kdB 

Plur. 

Nom. 

5$ 

kun 

Ag. 

jlnhe 

kinhe 

Obl. 

jfnha 

kinhd 

The  neuter  interrogative  is  Ay,  what?  dat.  ki-be,  why?  kdi  is  anyone,  someone; 
kiclih , anything,  something  ; je-kichh , whatever. 

Verbs.  A. — Auxiliary  Verbs,  and  Verbs  Substantive. 

The  present,  1 am,  etc.,  is  sd  ; plural  mi  or  si,  used  for  all  persons.  If  the  subject 
is  feminine,  si  may  also  be  optionally  used  in  tin;  singular.  Mr.  Bailey  also  gives  the 
following,  but  I have  not  come  across  it  elsewhere.  It  is  the  same  for  both  genders : 


Sing. 

Plur. 

1.  he 

he 

2.  he 

hd 

3.  he 

hd 

The  negative  verb  substantive  is  neh  dthi , I am  not,  etc.,  used  for  all  persons  of  both 
numbers.  According  to  Mr.  Diack,  dthi , by  itself,  can  also  be  used  affirmatively,  and  a 
•common  loeal  variant  is  asli.  Mr.  Uiack  also  gives  nisd,  as  an  alternative  negative 
form. 

The  past  tense,  I was,  etc.,  is  ti,  used  throughout  for  both  genders,  both  numbers, 
and  all  persons.  In  the  vernacular  character  the  word  is  often  spelt  thi,  but  the  correct 
pronunciation  appears  to  be  ti,  and  I have  so  transliterated  it  whenever  it  oeeurs.  In- 
stead of  ti,  we  may  have  thd,  masc.  plur.  the,  fern.  sing,  and  plur.  thi,  used  exactly  as  in 
Hindi. 

B. — Active  Verb. 

The  Infinitive  ends  in  nd,  or  nd,  which,  after  l,  r,  or  r,  is  changed  to  nd  or  nd. 
Thus  hdtid,  or  hoiriu,  to  be  ; milnd,  to  be  joined  ; dzhaurnd  or  j haurnd,  to  fall ; mdrnd  or 
mdrnu,  to  strike.  We  may  note  the  word  end,  ej nd  or  echhnd , to  come,  and  also  that 
the  Hindi  Tcarnd,  to  do,  is  sometimes  represented  by  lcdrnd,  but  more  often  by  Tcernd. 

The  Present  Participle  ends  in  dd,  or,  after  a vowel,  in  ndd.  Thus  mdrdd,  strik- 
ing ; dendd,  giving.  Irregular  is  hundd  from  hona,  to  become.  From  end,  etc.,  to  come, 
we  have  endd,  ejdd  or  echhdd. 


KTJf.UI. 


077 


The  present  participle  is  used  in  inceptive  compounds,  as  in  saw  gdrju  hundd  Idgd , 
he  began  to  be  poor  ; te  khuSi  kerde  Idge,  they  began  to  make  rejoicing.  It  is  also  used 
as  an  infinitive  of  purpose  as  in  ieie  sat t surd  chdrdd  bhejjd,  he  sent  him  to  feed  swine. 

The  Past  Participle  is  usually  formed  by  adding  u to  the  root,  but  sometimes  we 
have  d instead  of  u.  Thus  mdrd,  beaten  ; hod,  become.  The  following  past  participles 
are  irregular  : — 


end,  ejtid,  or  echhytd,  to  come,  past  part. 

aw,  plur.  de ; fern,  di 

noshed,  to  go 

S» 

notthd 

beshud,  to  sit 

)) 

betthd 

jdnd,  to  go 

» 

god 

dend,  to  give 

S3 

dhina 

patina,  to  fall 

ss 

pod 

lagged,  to  be  joined 

ss 

Idgd 

mdrnd,  to  die 

39 

mud 

The  verbs  lend,  to  take,  and  kernd,  to  do,  form  their  past  participles  regularly. 
Thus,  leu,  keru ; ‘ to  hike  away  ’ is  nend,  past  participle  neu. 

In  the  specimen,  the  past  participle  of  milnd , to  be  joined,  is  once  given  as  milud 
( gold  milud,  he  fell  on  his  neck).  Elsewhere  it  is  mild.  Similarly,  we  have  mar  ad 
forming  the  passive  voice  in  sentences  202  and  203. 

The  Future  Passive  Participle  is  the  same  in  form  as  the  infinitive.  Examples 
in  the  specimen  are  : — 

mU  ghdre  nai  jdnd,  for  me  it  is  not  to  be  gone  into  the  house,  i.e.,  I should  not 
enter  the  house. 

khusi  kerni  hor  khuSi  hond,  happiness  is  to  be  made,  and  happy  is  to  be  become, 
i.e.,  we  should  make  rejoicing  and  be  happy. 

In  the  hist  phrase,  khuSi,  as  is  often  the  case,  is  used  once  as  a substantive,  and  once 
as  an  adjective. 

The  Conjunctive  Participle  ends  in  i or  ie.  The  form  in  i is  principally  used  in 
intensive  compounds  as  in  bdndi  dhind,  he  divided.  When  used  as  an  ordinary  conjunc- 
tive participle  ke  is  added,  as  in  Hindi.  Thus,  mdri-ke,  having  struck.  In  such  a case, 
however,  the  form  in  ie  is  much  more  common,  thus  marie,  having  struck ; kdrie,  having 
done.  In  the  vernacular  character  we  often  have  id  instead  of  ie.  Thus,  in  the  speci- 
men, ulihie,  having  arisen,  is  written  ntthid. 

This  form  of  the  participle  is  used  in  completive  compounds,  as  in  khdrch  kdrie 
nibhu,  expenditure  was  completely  done,  i.e.,  all  was  expended. 

The  second  person  singular  of  the  Imperative  is  the  same  in  form  as  the  root,  and 
the  plural  adds  «.  Thus,  mar,  strike  thou ; mdrd,  strike  ye.  Erom  end,  etc.,  we  have  e 
or  ej,  come  thou. 

Mr.  Bailey  mentions  a polite  imperative  in  eit,  as  in  mdreit,  be  pleased  to  strike. 

The  Old  Present,  corresponding  to  the  Hindi  mat  mar seems  to  have  fallen  out 
of  use.  The  ordinary  present  is,  however,  formed  from  it.  The  old  form  was  mdrd,  for 
all  persons,  of  both  numbers,  and  the  modern  present  is  formed  by  adding  the  present  of 
the  verb  substantive  to  this.  Thus,  mard-sd  (or  si,  etc.,  as  above),  I strike,  thou  strikest, 
etc.,  for  all  persons  of  both  numbers. 


678 


WESTERN  PAHArI. 


A Present  Definite  is  formed  by  suffixing  sd  to  the  present  participle.  Thus 
mdrdd-sd,  I am  striking ; but  the  final  d,  in  this  case,  is  usually  dropped,  so  that  we  get 
mar  das  (plur.  mardes  ; fein.  mardls),  for  all  persons.  Another  way  of  forming  the 
present  definite  is  to  employ  lag  ft  hundd-sa , with  the  present  participle.  Thus  sau 
mdrdd  lagd  hundd-sd , he  is  striking. 

The  Imperfect  is  formed  like  the  Present,  substituting  tl  (or  thd,  etc.),  for  sd. 
Thus  sau  mdrd-tl  or  mdrd-thd,  he  was  striking.  Thd,  of  course,  changes  for  number  and 
gender,  but  mdrd  remains  unaltered.  Or  we  may  follow  the  lines  of  the  present  definite. 
Thus  sau  mdrdd-thd,  or  sau  mdrdd.  Idgd  hurt dd -thd. 

As  in  Hindi,  the  Past  Conditional  is  the  simple  present  participle,  as  in  had 
mdrdd,  (if)  I had  struck. 

The  Future  » thus  conjugated : — 

* I shall  st  rike,’  etc. 


SING.  I PLUB. 


Mate. 

! Fern. 

| ' 

Masc- 

i 

Fom. 

i 

1. 

mdrau,  mdrnu 

i 

indraft,  mdrtiU 

i 

mdrau , mdrnii 

i 

mdrau,  marnU 

2. 

mfirlS 

mdrlt 

indrle 

mdrlt 

3. 

marlci 

marll 

! 

indrle 

marli 

Mr.  Diack  gives  mdresa  as  an  optional  form  of  the  first  person  singular. 

When  the  root  of  a verb  ends  in  a vowel,  the  n and  the  l in  this  tense  are  usually 
doubled.  Thus  from  end,  to  come,  we  have  evnu  and  elld,  and  from  khdtid,  to  eat, 
khdnnu  and  khdlld. 

A curious  form  occurring  in  the  specimens  is  khdnim,  let  us  eat,  and  liomm,  let  us 
become.  These  arc  possibly  variant  forms  of  the  first  person  plural  future. 

The  tenses  formed  from  the  past  participle,  call  for  no  remark.  They  are  formed, 
and  used,  exactly  as  in  Hindi. 

Thus : — 

Past,  had  du,  I came. 

mat  maid,  I struck  him. 

Perfect,  had  du-sd,  I have  come, 

mat  mdru-sd,  I have  struck  him. 

Pluperfect,  hau  du-tl  (or  -thd),  I bad  come. 

mat  mdrd-tl  (or  -thd),  I had  struck  him. 

There  is  a distinct  Passive  Voice.  In  the  Infinitive,  Present  Participle,  and 
Future,  i is  added  to  the  root.  Thus  murinu,  to  be  beaten ; mdrindd,  being  beaten ; 
hau  marinnu , I shall  be  beaten.  For  the  other  tenses,  the  Past  Participle  in  ud  (see 
above)  seems  to  be  used,  as  in  hau  mdrdd  sd,  I am  beaten ; hau  nidrud-ti  (or  -thd),  I 
was  beaten. 


K.UIA1I. 


679 


The  Passive  is  often  employed  to  express  ability,  as  in  mdrmdd-sd , it  can  be  struck, 
i.e.,  striking  is  possible;  mere  neh  mdrtndd , as  for  my  (part)  it  cannot  be  struck,  i.e., 
I cannot  strike. 

Causal  Verbs. — The  following  are  a feAv  examples  of  causal  verbs  : — 
plnd,  to  drink  ; pidnd,  to  give  to  drink. 
khdnd,  to  eat ; Jchidnd,  to  give  to  eat. 
tsornd,  to  graze  (intransitive) ; tsar  rid,  to  graze  (cattle). 

Sunna,  to  hear ; Sine  and,  to  cause  to  hear. 

The  following  specimen  of  Kului  is  a version  of  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son, 
written  in  the  local  TakrI  character.  Opposite  each  page  is  a word  for  word,  and  line 
for  line,  transliteration  and  translation.  The  usual  list  of  Ivului  words  will  be  found  on 
pp.  705  ff. 


[No.  I.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


680 


Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAHART  (KULTJI)- 

en  ^ 

ft  ftlpM&r&t 

5.  'ey? f >n  <?*i£  ?/-£ £ 

S'  $ ijh^P 

^ yfjtp  tg£ 

fjywtf'fiy?  fofTc$rP  sit$Q£% 


681 

No.  •■] 

ydo-aryan  family. 

Central 

Group. 

, 

WESTERN  PAHARl  (KTJLTJI). 

TRANSLITERATION 

AND  TRANSLATION. 

Eki-manhu-re 

dul 

beto 

tl. 

One-man-of 

two 

sons 

were. 

Tlnlia-infiBjltc-na  hochclibo-bete 

bapii-soiigho  bolu, 

* I baba, 

mal-m8ta- 

Them- 

in-from  by-the-younger-son  the-father-to  it-was-said, 

* 0 father, 

the-property - 

ri  ji 

i band  mfi-be 

pujja-sa 

mu-be  de.’ 

Tebbc  teie 

tl- 

of  ichat  shai'e  me-to 

arrives 

me-to  give' 

Then  by-him  the - 

nha-he 

bandl-dhina. 

Ilor 

thore  dhiare 

pichehbe  hochcbbe-bc- 

m-to 

it-was-divided-(and-)given. 

And 

a-few  days 

afterwards  by-the-younger-so - 

ie 

sfibh-kichh  kfittlic 

kftrie. 

eki-durii-re 

dc5a-be 

nfi- 

■n 

everything  together 

having-made , a-distance-of 

country-to 

it-was- 

itha. 

Hor  tOkkhe 

apna 

mfil 

burl-chala-na 

dabau 

gone. 

And  there 

his-own 

property 

bad-conduct-in 

teas- wasted. 

Ilor 

jobbii  s8bh  khflrcb 

k5rie-nibhu, 

tei-de^a-na 

bSdda 

And 

when  all  expenditure 

icas-made-completely, 

tliat-country-in 

a- great 

nfikal 

famine 

tol.  ix, 

p6u,  hfir  sau 

fell,  and  he 

i PART  IT. 

garju 

poor 

bunda-laga, 

being-began. 

Tebbbc 

Then 

tei-deSe- 

that-country. 

4 s 

682 


WESTERN  PAH!#!. 


f'f.Ml  q%  ZiC  >>l  t 

^ fill  zf'S/tTfifi  A/?/" 

e'i<PxX'&l 

«•  £FX  i r/^?  -c^V)  ^ v//^ 

zfW/V^V^  fftCui  x/?zp^^if 

dhr£  75ft?f'Jpy  ^ >?  >?r/fP 

Sirhffz£p^?  f ' P ^ ^ 


10. 


KTH.TJ1. 


683 


*t8 

8ki"b8dde*admi-agg8 

jai-pujju.‘ 

TebbhS 

tci8  sau 

ap- 

•of 

one-great-man-near 

having-gone-he-arrived. 

Then 

by -him  he 

his- 

nS-chbeta-na  sura  ebarda  . 

bhejju.  Hor 

tel-b8  bbabh 

ti  • 

tinhc- 

own-fields-in  swine  feeding 

wassent.  And 

him-to  tcish 

was  that  * icith -those- 

tektc, 

jinha-b8  sur 

kha(a)-sl,  apna 

pet  bhSrnu, 

* p8r  kol 

«0)- 

husks, 

which  (acc.)  the-swine  eat,  my-own 

belly  I-will-jill / but  anyone 

hi:n- 

b8 

nfii  denda-tl. 

Tcbbho  ho£i-na 

aia  ( for  aic) 

bolQ,  * 

mere-ba- 

to 

not  giving -was. 

Then  senses-in 

having-come 

it-ioassaid, 

* my -fa - 

ba-r8 

ketre  bhuridara-b8  bohii  roti 

si,  p8r 

hau  (for  hau) 

bliu- 

ther-of 

how-many  servants-to  much  bread 

is,  but 

I 

by-hun- 

kho 

mfirda-laga-hunda-sa. 

Hau  (for  hau) 

utthia  ( for  utthie) 

apne 

ba« 

ger 

dying-am. 

I 

having-arisen 

my-own 

fa- 

ba-agg5  jannu,  hor  tel-b8  bolnu. 

ther-near  will-go,  and  him-to  I-will-say 


ft 

that, 


**  I baba,  mai  sflrga-ra 

“ 0 father,  by-me  heaven-of 


hor  t6ra 
and  of-thee 


daroh 

sin 


keru, 

was-done, 


hor  abbhe  hau  (liau)  ui  joga 

and  now  I (of-)  that  worthy 


nalri  je 
not  that 


pkiri  tSra  beta 

again  thy  son 


bolnu, 

I-will-say, 


mu*l,8  apne  eki-bburldara-mflnjhe 

me  ( acc .)  thine-own  one-servant-among - 


'•  na 

from 

VuL-  IX,  PART  IV. 


eki-bhupldara-sahi 

one-servant-like 


bana.”  * 
make."  * 


Tcbbho  ulthio  apiie- 

Then  having-arisen  his-own 


4 s i 
* 


69i 


WESTERN  PAHi-Ri. 


jfpt's&fijT' 

cC<sr?2ifj%<{?  ‘yrntf 

xPffifyypi fijfl# 

tf7- -a  Gjtjt9 

5.  &?  £ mi  f/ic^q/y^ 

Jg'Zg  fftSSU’SgXl v «?2 
'fffGti)  yv~r<GJrj  sp£  >7-C$,fi 


C'*tG?  y*Xim  t/h’rjrijTD y$i 


J^sdnuG lilPy^G  iiW#J4ji)M. 


10.  yjs?  7'  ^fttuhnS'^z) 


KUj.Pl. 


je  te  (for  tel) -be  herie 

that  him  (acc.)  having-seen 


685 


baba-agge 

chClu, 

hor 

father-near 

he-went, 

and 

baba 

dea 

81) 

father(*to) 

pity 

came , 

a,  her 

bohu 

map! 

ed,  and 

many 

kisses 

ba,  mai 

s5rga-ra 

hor 

ther,  hy-me 

heaven-of 

and 

sau  6jjhi  dur  ti 

he  atill  far  teas 


hor  thor-marie  sau 

and  having-run  he 


dhinl. 

were-given. 


Bete 

By-the-son 


tera  daro(h)  keru ; 

of -thee  sin  was-done ; 


t§(t§i)*r5 

him-of 

tei-re  g8}6  mi|u- 

him-of  on-neck  toaa-join • 


tel-be  bolu,  ‘el  ba« 

him-to  it-was-said , * 0 fa* 


abbhe  hau  (for  hau)  81  joga 

now  I (of-)that  worthy 


nai 

not 


je  phiri  tera  beta 

that  again  thy  son 


bolnu.’ 
I-will-aay .* 


Babe  apne-naukra- 

By-the-father  hia-own-aervmta* 


b& 

bolu 

je, 

* achch  (h)  i-na  achchhl 

pd&ak 

kholia  (for  -e) 

an, 

to 

it-was-8aid 

that, 

‘good- than 

good 

dress 

having-opened 

bring, 

hor 

tel-bfi 

la ; 

her 

tei-re 

b5tha-na 

mundarl, 

dz&ngha-na  ju- 

and 

him-to 

apply 

; and 

him-of 

hand-on 

a -ring, 

feet-on 

sho- 

tie 

la; 

hor 

asa  (for  assc) 

khamm  hor 

khu§l 

homrn. 

ki-b8 

je  me- 

en 

apply 

; and 

we 

may-cat  and 

happy 

may-be. 

what-for  that  m- 

ra 

5(h) 

beta 

mua-ti. 

abbhe 

jlu-sa ; 

khoa-ti,  abbhe 

rai- 

y 

this 

son 

dead-waa , 

now 

alive-is  ; 

lost-teas,  now 

go- 

lu- 

sa.* 

Tfibbhe 

te 

khu4i 

kerde  lage. 

t-is: 

Then 

they 

happiness 

making  began. 

Hor 

t&I-ra 

bOdda  beta 

chheta-na 

tl. 

Jebbhe 

ghora-bhetl 

au, 

And 

him-of 

the-great  son 

the-field-in 

was. 

When 

house-near 

he-came, 

G86  WESTERN  PAHS.?!. 

V5  /?£*id>*>&ss  i$Pc2fl 


iKclfr^y^f  5 Ji'j 

*?2  n ^ ty&i 

ftr*?0  ^^>°P‘ •vie)  ffrfyzffr 
>0.  f^cftjzfp  sff fifty  ^£i  i/fc&rtsP  £ <f? 
z'tf) £6?£cty?  £% y&z )Tx^fffi)*t& 
ftpsPtP&fc9  vyrg >?i -ftTfii rT'Pf^)n^6V £ 

k$  Mir)) P^n<)^  (P  *3J$ffi£ni(P  ettCtfyiwy 


KTJLTJl. 


687 


gftnS  nachne-ri  chhcr  Sun!.  Tebbhe  5k  piada  Sadhia  {for  Sadhic) 

singing  dancing-of  noise  was-heard.  Then  a footman  having-called 

puchchhu  je,  *6(h)  ki  sa?’  Te(bbh)e  tcl-s6nghe  bolu  je,  ‘tera  bhau  au, 

it-was-asked  that,  ‘ this  what  is  ?'  Then  him-to  it-was-said  that , ‘ thy  brother  came. 


hbr  tore-babe  b6ddi  dharam  keri, 

ki-b8 

je 

sau  raji 

khuSi 

milu.’ 

and  by -thy -father  a-great 

feast  was-made , 

what-for 

that 

he  well 

happy 

was-got.' 

T6(i)e-raisle  sdtthu  je, 

* hau(hau/or  mQ) 

ghdre  nai 

jana.’ 

Tebbhe 

tei-re-ba- 

On-that-reason  {?)he-angered  that. 

‘for-me  in- 

■ the- house  not 

{is-)it-to-be-gone.' 

Then 

by-his-fa- 

be  bare-bare  6jia,(  for  -e)  sau  pfttiau.  Teie  baba-be  bada- 

ther  outside  having-come  he  was-advised.  By-him  thc-father-to  answ- 

1 dhina  je,  ‘ etri-bSrSa  liau(hau)  tori  te(b)  1 kerda  r6liu,  hor 

er  was-given  that,  * so-many-years  I thy  service  doing  remained,  and 

kad(h)i  tere-boB-na  duja  nabi  chfila,  P6r  taT  kadbl  ck  chbe]u  mu< 

ever  thy-speech-from  apart  not  went.  But  by -thee  ever  one  kid  me- 

be  nahi  dbina  je  apne-mitra-s8nghi-s<Snghe  khusl 

to  not  was-given  that  my-own-friends-along-with  happiness 

kerda.  Jebbhe  tera  e(b)  beta  au,  junto  tera  mal  chhom-ra- 

1-might-have-made.  When  thy  this  son  came,  by-whom  thy  property  harl- 

ada-bS  kbiail,  tai  tei-rl-ta!  bftddi  dbamm  korl.’  Te(i)e  tel- 

ots-to  was-caused-to-be-eaten,  by-thee  ldm-of-for  a-great  feast  was- made'  By-liim  him - 

bfi  bolu,  * el  betea,  tfi  sodae  mu-aggc  sa,  bor  je-kichb 

to  it-was-said,  * 0 son,  thou  ever  me-near  art , and  whatever 

ffleni  sa,  sau  tera  sa.  Por  kliuSl  kerni,  bor  khuSi  bona,  jfiru- 

toine  is,  that  thine  is.  But  happiness  to-be-done,  and  happy  to-be-become,  necessa- 

ti,  ki-be  je  tera  e(h)  bhau  rnua-ti,  sau  jiu;  khoa-ti,  sau  milii. 

ry  was,  what-for  that  thy  this  brother  dead-was  he  lived;  lost-um,  he  was-got. 


688 


INNER  SIRAJT. 

The  country  in  which  Siraji  is  spoken  has  been  described,  and  the  estimated 
number  of  its  speakers  has  been  given,  in  the  introduction  to  the  Kulu  Group.  Here 
it  will  be  sufficient  to  offer  a brief  sketch  of  its  grammar. 

This  is  mainly  based  on  the  account  of  the  dialect  given  by  the  Rev.  T.  Graham 
Bailey,  in  his  Languages  of  the  Northern  Himalayas , but  the  specimens  given  below 
•halre  also  been  carefully  analyzed,  and  a number  of  additional  forms  found  in  them  have 
been  added.  On  the  whole  these  specimens  illustrate  a language  practically  identical 
with  that  described  by  Mr.  Bailey.  They  consist  of  a version  of  the  Parable  of  the 
Prodigal  Son,  coming  from  Placli,  the  chief  town  of  Inner  Siraj,  and  on  pp.  706  ff.  of 
the  usual  List  of  Words  and  Sentences. 

Vocabulary.— The  Vocabulary  of  Inner  Siraji  is  much  the  same  as  that  of  Kului 
and  of  the  Simla  dialects.  The  following  few  words  may  be  noted.  Most  of  them  are 
taken  from  Mr.  Bailey’s  longer  list 
bags,  outside. 
bauhu,  much. 
be&nd , to  sit. 
bet  ft,  a woman. 
chei,  a younger  sister. 
chliet  or  khech , a field. 
chiiigru  or  chelii,  a bird. 
chilthd,  black. 
dannd,  an  egg. 
darerd,  far,  distant. 
dardh , sin. 

dhgdrd  or  dihdro,  a day. 
dzoth  or  tsanani,  tile  moon. 
gdhd,  a stream. 
gts,  up. 

hotshau,  little,  small. 

Ihnb  or  ijno,  to  come. 

Ij,  a mother. 
jShu,  before. 

jhutnd  or  fund,  to  drink. 
file,  down. 
kanet,  the  ear. 
katdb,  a book. 
lchech  or  chliet,  a field. 
lachhrm , a cow. 
man4sau,  bad. 
mdrau,  foolish,  ugly. 
mihasi , a buffalo. 
ndnd  or  ndsndt  to  go. 


INNER  SIR&jl. 


689 


nauS,  a stream. 

nidtd,  nigghd,  or  tdtd,  hot. 

nihdl,  a plain. 

ntnd,  to  take,  to  take  away. 

nist,  lazy. 

pind  or  jhuttyd,  to  drink. 

rack,  night. 

ramrd , good,  beautiful. 

sardj,  a hill. 

satdz,  wise. 

sefd,  near. 

*6 it  law , white,  clean. 
dobhld,  good,  beautiful. 
drddl,  hair. 

tdtd,  nidtd , or  niggha,  hot. 
thumb,  to  run. 
ichchhd,  sharp. 
fadnani  or  dsdth,  the  moon. 
fall  e led,  swift. 
fatknd,  to  beat. 
iijhc,  up. 
unclhe,  down. 
ic  hit  or,  inside. 

Pronunciation. — This  is  the  same  as  in  the  Simla  dialects.  There  is  the  same 
sound  of  « as  the  d in ‘hot’,  and,  as  in  Simla,  a final  d is  absolutely  interchangeable 
with  b.  It  is  also,  as  in  Outer  Sirajl  and  Sodhochi,  equally  interchangeable  with  an. 
So  that,  for  instance,  the  word  ghord,  a horse,  is  equally  often  pronounced  ghdro, 
and  g hora u.  As  in  Simla,  some  of  these  words,  such  as  ddhru,  a son,  end  in  it.  Most 
Past  Participles  end  in  an  or  ii,  and  Infinitives  end  in  either  d,  d,  or  an. 

The  letter  a is  sometimes  substituted  for  an  unaccented  i.  Thus,  the  name  Sira j 
is  locally  pronounced  Sardj,  and  kitdh,  a book,  becomes  kaldib. 

The  dropping  of  an  aspirate,  and  the  change  of  position  of  an  h,  as  in  gohrd  for 
ghord , a horse,  do  not  seem  to  be  so  common  in  Inner  Sirajl  as  in  the  Simla  dialects,  but 
the  other  consonantal  changes  noted  there  are  frequently  met  with.  Thus  t derived  from 
an  old  tr  is  represented  by  ch  in  such  "words  as  chen,  three  ; rack,  night ; khech,  a field, 
and  ch  and  j are  pronounced  as  fa  and  ds  or  z respectively  as  in  fadnani,  the  moon ; 
t Izlbh , the  tongue. 

When  we  have  8 in  Hindi,  we  often  have,  as  usual,  an  6 pronounced  as  ah,  in  Inner 
Siraji,  as  in  Sdbhld,  good ; dittau , white.  To  put  the  matter  another  way,  Sanskrit  d is 
usually  preserved.  But  this  is  not  always  the  case,  as  the  Sanskrit  darira  is  represented 
by  8arlr,  not  darir,  a body. 

Declension* — The  nominative  plural  is  usually  the  same  as  the  nominative  singular. 
But  tadbhava  nouns  in  d (o,  aw,  w)  change  the  final  d,  etc.,  to  e.  Thus  ghord,  a horse, 
pi.  ghdfe.  Perm-nine  nouns  ending  in  a consonant  add  d in  the  plural.  Thus  bhln, 
a sister,  plural  bhina.  The  oblique  form  plural  is  always  the  same  as  the  oblique  form 


690 


WESTERN  PAHARl. 


singular.  Tlie  oblique  form  singular  of  tadbhava  nouns  in  a (d,  au,  u)  ends  in  e.  Thus 
ghdfd,  obi.  sing,  and  plur.  ghore.  Masculine  nouns  ending  in  a consonant  add  a to  make 
the  oblique  form.  Thus  ghdr,  a house,  obi.  sing,  and  plur.  ghord.  In  the  case  of  all 
nouns,  masculine  or  feminine,  ending  in  i or  u,  the  oblique  form  is  the  same  as  the 
nominative  singular.  Feminine  nouns  ending  in  a consonant  make  the- oblique  form  by 
adding  d.  Thus  bhin,  a sister,  obi.  sing,  and  plur.  bhind. 

The  Agent  case,  which  is  also  used  as  a Locative,  is  generally  formed  in  the  case  of 
masculine  nouns  by  adding  e,  or  by  changing  a final  d (o,  au,  u)  to  e.  Thus  ghdfd,  a 
horse ; ghore,  by  a horse,  or  by  horses : ghdr,  a house ; ghore,  by  a house  or  houses, 
or  in  a house  or  houses : hdthi,  an  elephant ; hdthie,  by  an  elephant  or  elephants. 

But  in  the  case  of  feminine  nouns  the  agent  case  is  tho  same  as  the  oblique  form. 
Thus,  idhri,  a girl ; Sohri,  by  a girl  or  girls  : bhin,  a sister ; bhind,  by  a sister  or  sisters. 

These  changes  are  conveniently  shown  in  the  following  table,  to  which  the  vocative 
forms  are  also  added 


Nom.  Sing. 

Nora, 

plur. 

Obi.  sing, 
and  pi  nr. 

! 

Agent  sing, 
and  plural. 

1 

! 

Voc. 

Sing. 

Voc. 

plnr. 

ghdrd,  a horse  . 

ghore 

rjhdfe 

glare 

ghdrdd 

* ghd fid 

gh6rt  a honse  . 

ghftr 

ghflrd 

ghdre 

ghdra 

! ghdrd 

h&thi,  an  elephant 

hdthi 

hdthi 

hdthie 

hdthto 

i 

! hathIO 

idhri , a girl 

stihri 

tolirl 

idhri 

illhrtS 

SOhrld 

bhin,  a sister 

! 

bhind 

bhind 

bhind 

bhin?. 

bhlnS 

Most  of  the  postpositions  are  the  same  as  in  the  other  Western  Pahari  dialects  and 
in  Kului,  but  there  are  a few  peculiar  to  Inner  Siraji.  The  following  are  the  more 
common : — 


rd  (ro,  rau),  of. 

be,  to.  Also  used  for  the  accusative  like  the  Hindi  ko.  This  is  the  same  as  in 
Kului. 

ri  toni,  for,  for  the  sake  of. 
monje  or  mohjhe,  in. 
paraunde,  on. 

lerd,  nd,  ka,  age,  from,  and  all  also  used  to  form  an  ablative  of  the  instrument. 

As  usual  the  postposition  rd  (ro,  rau)  is  an  adjective,  its  masculine  singular  oblique 
and  its  masculine  plural  being  re,  and  its  feminine  being  ri. 

Adjectives  call  for  few  remarks.  As  usual,  only  those  ending  in  a (d,  au,  u) 
are  mutable,  making  the  masculine  oblique  singular  and  the  masculine  plural  in  <?,  and 
the  feminine  in  I. 


INNER  SIR  A.  J I. 


691 


Comparison  is  usually  effected  with  the  help  of  the  ablative  postposition  ka,  as  in 
bhitya-ka  Idmmd,  taller  than  the  sister  (sentence  231),  and  in  sobbhi-ka  lommd,  tallest  of 

all. 

Pronouns.— The  first  two  personal  pronouns  are  thus  declined— 


I. 


Sing.  Nom. 

ha,  haft 

Ag. 

mat 

Gen. 

merd  {-o,  -au) 

Obi. 

ma,  md 

Plur.  Nom. 

dsse,  hdmme 

Ag. 

dsse,  hdmme 

Gen. 

d8sdrd  (-3,  -au) 
mhdrd  {-6,  -i 

Obi. 

d88d,  hdmd 

Thou 

tit 

tat 

terd  (-0,  -ati) 
ta,  tii 

tiisse,  tomme 
tiisse,  tomme 

tmsara  (-o,  -an),  thdrd  (-o,  - au ) 
tit 88a,  tommd 


The  dative  singular  sometimes  appears  under  the  forms  mambhe  and  tambhe,  instead 
of  ma-be,  ta-be,  respectively.  Thus,  tai  chhelii  mambhe  net  dino,  thou  didst  not  give  to 
me  a kid. 

The  Demonstrative  Pronouns,  which  arc  also  used  as  pronouns  of  the  third 
person,  are  declined  as  follows.  In  the  singular,  they  have  feminine  forms,  but  the 
neuter  forms  observed  in  the  ease  ol‘  some  of  the  Simla  dialects  have  not  been  noted  :— 


This  ' That 


, i 

Masc. 

■ 

Fom. 

Mas o. 

Fem. 

Sing. — 

| 

Nom.  .... 

to,  yS 

to,  ye 

saUy  sa 

•«au,  «a. 

Ag.  .... 

id , eue 

#sse 

tin,  tens 

i i 

t#sse 

\ 

Obi.  .... 

iu  eii 

#83$ 

j 

tea 

tmn 

Plur.— 

Horn.  .... 

IT, 

a 

tsn. 

Ag.  .... 

13, 

ed 

tid 

1 

Obi.  • • • • I 

| is,  sas 

ted,  t$de 

VOU  XX,  PART  IV. 


4 t 2 


692 


WESTERN  PAlIARl. 


The  demonstrative  pronoun  sau,  when  the  object  of  a verb,  is  often  attached  as  a 
termination  to  the  verb  which  governs  it,  and  then  drops  its  final  vowel,  and  becomes 
simply  s.  Thus,  de-s,  givo  it.  Sometimes,  exactly  like  the  similar  s in  Kashmiri,  it  is 
used  quite  pleonastically,  and  refers  to  an  object  already  expressed,  as  in  d&b  sungor 
khale-8 , what  the  swine  will  oat  it,  in  which  the  ‘ it ' represents  the  ‘ what  * and  the 
whole  simple  means  ‘ what  the  swine  will  eat 

The  Relative  and  Interrogative  Pronouns  are  declined  as  follows.  The  Inter- 
rogative has  also  a neuter  form  which  is  described  immediately  after  the  paradigm  : — 


i 

i 

i 

Who,  which,  that 

| Who, 

which 

i 

i 

Ma<c.  | 

i ! 

i era.  ! 

i i 

i 

! Ma<c.  1 

i 

Fern. 

Sing. — 

i 

Nom. 

iho,  <l£nn 

ijzd , <Jzun 

knn 

k u n. 

! 

Ag.  . 

ijzeue 

tjzfsse 

kunl 

kesse. 

Obi.  . 

<Jzia 

<lz<*ssJ 

has,  kdsd 

kes8d. 

j 

j 

y- 

Plnr. — 

1 

Nom. 

<h 

cd 

kond. 

Ag.  . 

j ijzeae 

kas,  kdsd. 

Obi.  . 

; ijzerl 

hunt. 

The  Neuter  Interrogative  Pronoun  is  ke,  what  ? Its  oblique  form  is  kl,  as  in  kl-be, 

whv  ? 

«. 

The  Indefinite  Pronouns  are  kbl,  anyone,  some  one,  and  kitsh,  anything,  some- 
thing. I have  not  noted  any  examples  of  the  oblique  forms  of  these,  nor  are  they  given 
by  Mr.  Bailey. 

The  following  Pronominal  adjectives  may  be  noted  : — 
ierd,  iehrd,  or  yehrd , like  this. 
terd,  tehrd,  like  that. 
herd,  kehrd , like  what  ? 
etrd,  this  much,  plur.  this  many. 
tetrd,  that  much,  plur.  that  many. 
ketrd,  how  much  ? plur.  how  many  ? 

As  usual,  instead  of  the  final  d of  all  these,  we  may  have  o or  au. 

THE  VERB.— A.— Auxiliary  Verbs  and  Verbs  Substantive.— The  Present 
tense  of  the  Verb  Substantive  is  dsd  or  sd,  I am,  thou  art,  etc.,  which  does  not  change 
in  conjugation,  being  used  for  all  persons  of  both  numbers  and  both  gendors.  There 
is  a negative  verb  substantive  nth  (or  nit)  ado , (I)  am  not.  It  has  a masculine  plural 
nth  (nit)  dde,  and  a feminine  singular  and  plural  nth  (nit)  ddl , but  it  does  not  change 
for  person. 


INNER  SIRAJJ. 


693 


The  past  of  the  verb  substantive  is  thl,  I was,  thou  Avast,  etc.,  which,  like  dm,  is 
immutable,  and  does  not  change  for  gender,  number,  or  person. 

B. — Active  Verb. — The  Infinitive  ends  in  nd  (no,  nau),  which,  after  l,  r,  or  r is 
changed  to  nd  (no,  nau).  Thus  tsiknd  (taikno,  tgiknau),  to  strike ; pdrnd,  (-no,  -nau) 
to  fall. 

The  Present  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  dd  (do,  dau)  to  the  root.  Thus,  tsikddu 
(tsikdo,  tgikdau),  striking.  As  in  other  Western  Paharl  Dialects,  this  participle  is  used 
in  Inceptive  compounds,  as  in  ted  khu$i  karde  Id  ye,  they  began  to  make  rejoicing,  and 
also  as  an  Infinitive  of  purpose,  as  in  teue  teu-be  sunyor  tsdrdd  bheju , he  sent  him  to 
feed  swine. 

When  the  root  of  a verb  ends  in  a vowel  or  in  a single  h,  n is  inserted  before  the 
dd.  Thus  from  khdnd,  to  eat,  pres,  part,  khdndd , and  from  rauhnd,  to  remain,  pres, 
part,  rauhndd. 

The  following  present  participles  are  slightly  irregular  : — 
hand,  to  become,  pres.  part,  hundd. 
laund , to  take,  „ „ laulndd. 


The  verb  ihnd  or  ijnd,  to  come,  makes  its  present  participle  ihndd  or  Ijdd,  and 
ndnd  or  ndsnd,  to  go,  makes  its  present  participle  ndndd  or  ndsdd. 

The  Past  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  d (a,  an,  u)  to  the  root.  Thus,  tsikd, 
(tail'd,  tsikau,  taikii),  struck.  The  terminations  in  an  and  u are  those  most  commonly 
used. 


Irregular  Past  Participles  are  : — 

ilind  or  ijnd,  to  come ; past. 

ndnd  or  ndi&nd,  to  go.  „ 

jdnd,  to  go.  ,, 

be  and,  to  sit.  „ 

dind,  to  give.  „ 

lagynd,  to  be  applied.  „ 


part.  do. 

„ ndthan. 

„ yau  (pi.  yaue  ; fern.  yaui). 
„ befhan. 

„ dinnau,  dinau. 

„ lagan. 


The  verbs  bond,  to  become ; laund,  to  take  ; and  konid,  to  do,  form  their  past  parti* 
ciplcs  regularly.  Thus,  hod,  land,  kora.  Of  course  all  these  can  end  in  o,  an  or  nt 
instead  of  d ; so  that,  e.g.,  Ave  have  hbu,  land,  and  kora,  and,  indeed,  these  u forms  are  the 
most  common  of  all. 

The  Future  Passive  Participle  is  the  same  in  form  as  the  Infiniti\re.  Thus,  whitar 
tiit  na&nd,  it  iB  not  to  be  gone  inside,  i.e.,  I will  not  go  inside ; khtm  korni,  khnk 
bond  zardri  thi,  happiness  to  be  made,  happy  to  be  become,  Avas  proper,  i.e.,  it  Avas 
proper  to  rejoice  and  to  bo  happy. 

The  Conjunctive  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  i to  the  root,  thus  tsiki,  having 
struck,  but  this  form  is  only  used  in  Intensive  compounds,  as  in  bandi  dind  (he)  divided. 
When  used  as  a regular  conjunctive  participle,  kori  is  added,  as  in  tsiki-kori,  having 
struck. 

The  Noun  of  Agency  is  formed  by  adding  nwdld  to  the  root.  Thus,  tsikniodld , a 
striker,  one  who  is  about  to  strike. 


WESTERN  PAHArI. 


694 


The  second  person  singular  of  the  Imperative  is  the  same  in  form  as  the  root.  The 
plural  is  formed  by  adding  d.  Thus,  tsik,  strike  thou ; failed,  strike  ye.  Some  Impera- 
fives  are  irregular  : Thus  :-«■»  > 

Imperative 

2nd  Sing.  2nd  Plur. 

ihnd  or  ijnd  to  come  ichh  ichhd 

ndfzd  or  ndfod,  to  go  ndd,  nds  ndd,  tidSd. 


The  Old  Present  or  Present  Subjunctive  is  conjugated  as  follows  : — 
I strike,  I may  strike  : 


Sing. 

1.  tsiku,  t&ikit 

2.  faike 

3.  tazke 


Plur. 

tsiku,  tsiku 
failed 
tsikau 


The  nasalized  form  of  the  first  person  is  apparently  most  common  after  a vowel  or  a 
single  h.  Thus  ndti,  I may  go ; ihu,  I may  come ; galdu,  I may  call  (myself  thy 
son). 

The  Puture  is  formed  by  adding  Id  {Id,  lan ) to  the  root.  Of  these  lau  is  the  most 
common.  This  changes  for  number  and  gender,  but  does  not  change  for  person.  Thus 
tsiklau , I (masc.),  thou  (mase.)  or  he  will  strike ; talkie , we,  you,  or  they  (all  masc.)  will 
strike.  The  feminine  is  faikli  for  all  persons  of  both  numbers.  In  the  first  person  sin- 
gular and  plural,  a u may  be  inserted  before  the  lau,  so  that  this  person  is  singular  mas- 
culine faikulau  or  tsiklau  ; plural  masculine  faikulc  or  falkle.  Verbs  whose  roots  end  in 
a vowel  or  a single  h change  this  u of  the  first  person  to  u.  Thus,  ndnd,  to  go,  has 
ndttlau  or  ndlau,  I shall  go. 

The  verbs  ihfzd,  to  come,  and  ranked,  to  remain,  are  slightly  irregular.  The  former 
has  for  its  first  person  ihulau,  ihlau,  iulau  or  llau,  and  so  on  for  the  other'persons  and 
for  the  plural.  Ranked,  to  remain,  has  its  first  person  singular,  rahulau  or  rauhlau. 
Latina , to  take,  has  its  first  person  laulan,  and  din>d,  to  give,  deulau. 

Regarding  the  form  khdle-8,  they  will  eat  it,  in,  (fed  sungor  khalea,  of  the  parable, 
see  under  the  head  of  demonstrative  pronouns. 

The  present  participle,  without  any  auxiliary  is  used  for  the  ordinary  present,  and 
changes  for  gender  and  nufnber,  but  not  for  person.  Thus  faikdd  {-did.,  - dan ),  I (masc.) 
strike,  thou  (masc.)  strikest,  and  so  on.  The  masculine  plural  is  faikdey  and  the  feminine 
for  both  numbers  is  i&ikdl.  Verbs  like  khand  and  rauhnd%  have,,  of  course,  khdndd 
( khdndo , khdndau ),  and  rauhndd  {rauhndo,  rauhndm)ke tfi. 

Mr.  Bailey  notes  a passive  use  of  the  present  participle,  indicating  ability,  as  in 
mere  neh$  kordom,  as  for  my  (part),  it  is  not  being  done,  is.,  1 cannot  do. 

A definite  present  is  formed  with  lagan  (past  participle  of  lagged))  added  to  the 
present  participle,  as  in  ha  faikdan  lagan , I am  strikingi 

The  Imperfect  is  formed  by  adding  tin  to  the  present  participle,  as  in  ha  tsikdau- 
thi , I was  striking.  The  participle  changes  for  gender  and  number,  but  not.  for  person. 
Or  we  may  add  Idgau-thi,  as  hd  faikdan  lagan- thi. 


INNER  SIRAjI. 


695 


The  tenses  formed  from  the  past  participle  call  for  no  remark,  they  are  made  exactly 
as  in  Hindi.  Thus  : — 

ha  ndfhau , I went. 

mat  tsikau,  I struck  him. 

ha  ndthau  dsd,  I have  gone. 

mat  tsikau  dsd,  I have  struck  him. 

ha  ndthau  thl,  I had  gone. 

mat  tStkau  thl , I had  struck  him. 

The  Passive  Voice  is  hardly  ever  used  in  this  dialect. 

Possible  forms  are : — 

ha  tsikau  hundau,  I am  being  struck. 
ha  tsikau  hundau  thl , I was  being  struck. 
ha  tsikau  jdlau,  I shall  be  struck. 

No  examples  of  causal  verbs  occur  in  the  specimens  or  in  Mr.  Bailey’s  work. 
They  are  doubtless  formed  on  the  lines  of  other  Western  Pahari  dialects. 


696 


[ No.  2.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group* 

WESTERN  P All  ART  (KULUl). 


Inner  SirajI  Dialect. 

TOT  TOTSJT-T  zf  ftTO  ft  I TOT-IW  ftTOQ  TOT-%  fm 

© ^ ©, 

% ^TWT  TO  TOT  ^^t-TT  ^TOT  3ft  % I TOT  7TTO 

3ft  ftaT  i frf  «n%  f3%  ft#  ftw?  to  tot  ^5  to  f^m- 
3 irret  1 tot  to%  TO-ft  wit  snrftofiri  ilti  1 tot 

Ih  tot  to  to  tot  tost * to  1 tot  tops  ftf 

©V  ^ * *©\ 

^rrft  i tot  to  tot-t  tot  to  fr  irrst  1 toti  ?r3i-% 

C\  • 

^TTO  #?t  ^TT  WH^T  TO  | TOT  TOTI  3W  ft  TTUT  I^Tf  TT 
frf  ft  T?rnft  1 3to  to-3  5ft8'  ft^T-ft  I TOT  if3T-%  ^ fqrft  I 
^r  TO  ^TTT-T  fi?TT  55HT-3  ffe  ftft  ft^T  ft  I fNf  TOT  ft#  TO^T  | 

fM  tot  ^r<r#  tott  to  *mwt  1 tot-3  ftrot  % tott  W totott-tt 

err  tot  ^rt¥  ^ 1 tot  tot  ftft  3#°  ft?  it  tot  tot  fterit  1 

?W  TOT  TO  fir  TOTT  ^TT  TOT  ft  ft  ^T¥  I TOT  TOt-Sfiift  ^TOT 
• • 

tot  to  TOt  i ^ *rft  ft  tot-t  to  tot  %ft-^?ft  tot 
ttt#  i $ft-sffft  tot-t  n*  fa  i *ft  ftft  1 tot  sTtror 

ft^T  % TOT  Sr  qTTOTT-TT  CTT  #TT  TOfa  TO  | TOT  TOT  ftft  3fP 

©V  VJ 

ffa  % mr  %^T  irerrfr  1 to  ^te%  toto3  #t*r  % to  ifr  iftTO 

©.  ©s  • 

wiit  tott  1 tot-3  wft-TOT  i tot  tot-t  to  TO#t  tNt  13 

• SI  x « 

ftTO  ^TT5%-%  ^^TT  I TITOTOT  IIT%  l|ft  I qfro  TOT 

OTT  ft  l W ftTOT  ft^i  | fN[  ft  | TOT  it^T  | TOT  TOT 

^ ©\ 

I^ft  «tl<^  H 

tot-tt  wfT  frro:  to  ft  1 tot  tot  %%  to  fhrr-ft  ?tt 

• Os^ 

sn^i-ft  ^ 1 ?rar  tjw  %^tt  wrft-^fft  q^lln  jrara 
ftw  ^ nfr  ht®  1 Sir  ^ *31^ 

• ©“v  • 

to  to  % Tfro  ^z\  i topt  ifhft-^rft  m\  ^ ift^T  iff  totot 


INNER  SiaAjI. 


0 97 


franr  *t%  mi  ^ mvrm  \ ^q  %%  ^ 

hi*  <wft  toit  tNt  Wl-  zito  % , wit  *ft  to  nff 
1 ^ * **  **  muft-m  w %*C  ^ TO* 

I ^r  TO  i *T*t  ^ft  ^nft  T$tt- q€t  ^^ft 

t^t-%  if  ?Nr-ft  rr^fit  *qnft  ift*t  *ft  i to*  to-%  % 

^ m ^ ^t  i wt  fro  ^tt  ^tt  ^ to  mr  *m 

l^rft  cni*?l  *pi  ftqjT  **ft  it  *$  *r§  % ?rcr  *\m  g*t  it  \ 

^ *#N*t  i ^Ffsr  4t  ( ^ tot  ii 

©\ 


VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


[ No.  2.] 

JNDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


698 


Central  Group, 


WESTERN  PA1IARI  (KULTJl). 

Inker  SirajI  Dialect. 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 

Eku-manasa-re  diii  sohrii  thi.  Tea-mfifijhe*  tsbote-^ohrue  baba-bS 

One-man-of  two  sons  toere.  Them-among  by-the-small-son  thc-father-to 

bolu,  ‘he  baba,  dzb  mera  banda  teri-khati-ra  asa,  sau 

it-was-said,  ‘ 0 father , what  my  share  thy -property -of  is,  that 

bandi-dc.’  Tebba  tofu*  bandl-dlna.  Thore-dbyaye-pitshe 

divkle-(and-)give.*  Then  hy-him  it-was-divided-(gnd-)given.  A-few-days- after 

hotshe-Sohrue  sobh  mal  kotthe  kflru,  dur-di£a-be  natbo. 

by-the-small-son  all  property  together  tcas-made,  a-far-country-to  he-went. 

Tokkhe  naii-kbri  apne-bore-ri  kbatl  zari-m6Hjlie  kboi. 

There  gone-having  his-own-great-one-of  thc-property  debauchery -in  was-lost. 

Jgbba  bauliu  kbbrbch  kbri-chlieku,  teii-dese  btira 

fFhen  much  expenditure  he-had-made-completely,  in-that-country  a-great 
nfikaj  pbrit.  Tebba  kbnkal  hbi-ao.  Tebba  teu-desa-re  eku-admi-re 

famine  fell.  Then  poor  hc-became.  Then  that-country-of  a-man-of 

"bore  natho.  Tfrfie  tett-bb  apne-chhete  sungbr  tsarda 

in-the-housc  he-icent.  By-him  him-as-for  in-his-own-field  swine  feeding 

bhejii.  Tebba  teiie  mfine  bolu,  * dab  sungor 

it-was-sent.  Then  by-him  in-the-mind  it-was-said,  * what  the-swine 
kbales,  liaS  bi  kbalau.’  Yehye  teu-be  kol  nel  dinda-tbi. 

will-eat-it , I also  will-cat .’  Such  him-to  anyone  not  giving -was. 

Tebba  teu-be  budh  pbirl.  Bolu,  ‘ mcre-baba-re  ketre-jware-be 

Then  him-to  memory  returned.  It-was-said,  * my-father-of  how-many-servants-to 

bauhu  roti  dinda-thi ; ban  ebba  bbochbe  mbixla.  Hgn  6bba> 
much  bread  gicing-was ; I now  by-hunger  die.  I new 


ap  no- baba-nere 

naslau.  Teu-be 

bollau. 

“ he 

baba, 

mat 

my-own-father-near 

will-go.  Him-to 

I-icillsay 

, “0 

father. 

by-me 

P6rmesura-ra  ta 

tera  daroh 

kbrii ; 

bbba 

teta 

IV\ 

nel 

God-of  and 

of-thee  sin 

was-done  ; 

now 

such 

worthy 

not 

rauhu  je 

tera  beta 

bolle. 

Mambhg 

bbba  iera 

bur 

I-remained  that 

thy  son  they -will- say. 

Me 

now 

U8 

other 

jware  sa,  tera  ina  bi  dab.”  ’ Tebba,  uthi-kbri 

servants  are , such  me  also  consider ’ Then  ariaen-having 


INNER  SIRAJi. 


G99 


natho. 

he-ioent. 


Sau 

lie 


ta 

and 


apnc-b&ba-nere 
his- own- fa  ther-nea  r 

toil  heri-kbri 

him  seen-liaving  compassion 
nrilii.  Baubu  muglii 

he-leas-joined.  Much  kisses 

* he  baba,  mai  Pbrmesurii-ra 
‘ O father , hy-me  God-of 

jogi  nil  rauliii  jc 

worthy  not  I-remained  that 

apne-seuka-be  bolft  je, 

his-own-servants-to  it-was-sakl  that, 

ana ; teti-be  bani-dea.  Songlia 

clothe.  Both 

lnunc-be  dea. 

applying- for  glee. 

sohrii  mua-thi, 

son  dead- was, 

tea  khu£i 

was-met.’  Then  they  rejoicing 


bring;  him-to 
paire  poire 

on -th  e-feet  shoes 
Pahile  mera 
At-jirst  my 

bheta.’  Tebba 

Then 


macbl  diir  the, 

yet  far  was, 

al.  Thuri-kbri 

came.  Bun-haring 

dim.  Tebba 

were-given.  Then 

tern  darbh 

of-tliee  sin 

tera  beta 
thy  son 

' kliare-khari 
' good-good 
eii-re 

this-onc-of  on-the-lwnd 
tlibba  lmtmne  kbfile, 


t eii-re 
him-of 

teii-re 

him-of 

sohriie 

by-tlie-son 

kbrii ; 
tcas-done ; 
-a  > 


gala  u . 


Now  toe 
ebba  jiunda 
now  licing 
karde  Inge. 
making  began. 


babe 

by-the-fathcr 

goto 

on-the-neck 

bolii, 

it-was-saidt 

bbbii  teta 

now  such 

Babe 

I-may-say.'  By-the-fathcr 
jlrikye  kiiylii 

ga  rm  en  ts  ha  dug -prod  need 

batin'  mundyi,  songlia 
a-ring,  and 

klnisi  hole. 

will-eat,  hapjiy  icill-be. 

hofi ; goju-thi,  ebba 

became;  lost-was,  now 


Teu-ra  bbya  sblmi  chhete  tin. 

Him-of  the-great  son  in-the-ficld  teas. 

pujfi,  gihn-ri  ta  natsue-ri  tshey  sutii. 

he-ar rived,  song-of  and  dancing-of  noise  was-heard. 

sadi-kori  puchhu,  ‘ye  ke  sir’  Tone 

called-having  il-tcas-asked,  * this  what  is?'  By-him 


Jebba  gbora-neye 

lfrhci  the-honse-near 
Tebba  eku-seukii 

Then  ( fo-)one-sen>ant 


3<‘» 


tore  blmii 


ao. 


Tere-babe 


bbri 


kbanl 


tefi-neve 

him-near 

pin! 


bolii 

it-was-sakl 

kori, 


that,  ' thy  brother  came.  By-thy-father  a-great  eating  drinking  was-made, 

esse- gale  je  rSbay  bheta.’  Teue  jhikhi-kori 

on-this-word  that  in-good-health  lie-has-been-met.'  By-him  angered-hacing 

dzaau  je,  ' w liitar  nOT  nfisna.’  Tebba  teii-re 

it-ttas-considered  that,  * within  not  it-is-to-be-gone .’  Then  him-of 


babe 

bage  nikhali-kori 

sau 

patyau. 

Teue 

by-ilie-father 

outside  emerged -having  he 

was-remonst  rated-wit  h . 

By-him 

baba-neye 

bolii,  ‘ 

bhiil, 

etri-borsa  liau  tori 

tohll 

korda 

th  e-father - n ear  i t -was -said, 

Uo 

so-many  -years  I thy 

service 

doing 

rauhu. 

Kodhi  teri 

gal 

nalu 

kfdi ; pbr 

taT 

kbdhi 

remained . 

Brer  thy 

t cord 

not 

was-cut ; but 

bv-thee 

ever 

ek-bakri-ra 

cbbelii  mambhe 

rv-v 

nei 

dine, 

a pne-sbhghi-sathi 

a-she-goat-of 

kid  to-me 

not 

icas-giren. 

(that)  rny-own-companions-friends 

VOL,  IX,  PART  iv.  4.  r 2 


700 


WESTERN  PAHARt. 


khuSi  k&rde.  Jfebba  tSra  ye  beta  ao,  j8uS  teri  sari 

rejoicing  might-have-made.  When  thy  this  son  came , by -whom  thy  all 

khatl-patli!  luchi-rira-bg  dini,  tai  teu-ri-tani  khani  pin! 

property-etcetera  harlots-to  was-given,  by-thee  him-of-for  eating  drinking 
k5rx.’  Teue  teu-bg  bolu,  * he  b5t6a,  tu  ta  sada 

t oas-made*  JBy-him  him-to  it-was-said,  * O son,  thou  verily  ever 


ma-seta 

sa ; dzb-kitsh 

mera, 

sa, 

• 

sau 

sdbh  tera 

sa. 

Phiri 

me- with 

art ; tohat-ever 

mine 

is. 

that 

all  thine 

is.  On-the-other-hand 

kbuSl 

kftrni, 

khu§ 

houa 

zaruri 

thi, 

rejoicing 

to-be-made, 

happy 

to-be-become 

necessary 

was, 

kgsse-gale 

je 

tera 

bliau  mua-thi, 

sau  jiunda 

hou  ; 

on-what-icord  (i.e.,  because) 

that 

thy 

brother . dead-was. 

he  living 

became  ; 

goju-thi,  sau  bheta.’ 
lost-ioas,  he  ivas-met 


701 


SAINJT. 

The  country  in  which  Sainji  is  spoken,  and  the  estimated  number  of  its  speakers, 
are  dealt  with  in  the  Introduction  to  the  Kulu  Group.  A brief  account  of  the  dialect 
is  given  in  tho  Itev.  1.  Grahamc  Bailey’s  Languages  of  the  Northern  Himalayas,  and 
this  is  our  only  source  of  information,  as  tho  dialect  was  not  reported  in  the  preliminary 
operations  of  this  Survey,  nor  have  any  specimens  of  it  been  received. 

Sainji  is  closely  connected  with  Inner  Siraji,  and  in  the  following  pages  all  that  is 
proposed  is  to  give  a brief  account  of  the  points  in  which  it  differs  from  that  dialect, 
based  entirely  on  the  materials  collected  by  Mr.  Bailey.  I have  also  given  on  pp.  705  ff. 
of  list  of  Sainji  words  and  sentences  compiled  from  the  same  source. 

Tho  Pronunciation  of  Sainji  may  be  taken  as,  on  the  whole,  the  same  as  that  of 
Inner  Siraji. 

There  is  a tendency  to  pronounce  a or  a as  au,  even  in  the  middle  of  a word.  Thus, 
Jcaha  or  kauhau , from ; grau,  instead  of  gra,  a village ; tdS  or  tau?,  by  thee. 

The  most  noteworthy  difference,  however,  is  the  Sainji  tendency  to  drop  final 
vowels.  Thus,  instead  of  the  Inner  Siraji  ghore-rd,  Sainji  has  ghore-r,  of  a horse ; instead 
of  the  Inner  Siraji  ghara-be,  Sainji  has  ghara-b,  to  a house  ; and  instead  of  the  Inner 
Siraji  ke  sd,  Sainji  has  ke-s  what  is  (it)  ? 

Declension- — Tile  result  of  this  tendency  to  drop  final  vowels  has  reduced  two  post- 
positions to  being  simple  consonants,  and  this  has  again,  owing  to  the  shifting  of  the 
accent,  sometimes  reacted  ou  the  noun  itself.  The  two  postpositions  thus  apocopated 
are  the  rd  of  the  genitive,  and  the  be  of  the  dative-accusative.  The  former  has  become 
r,  and  the  latter  b.  Before  other  postpositions  the  ordinary  oblique  form  is  used.  As 
rd  becomes  r,  so  also  do  re  and  ri ; so  that  the  genitive  no  longer  changes  for  gender  or 
number,  as  is  the  case  with  genitives  Avith  the  full  termination  rd. 

Sometimes,  it  may  be  added,  the  full  terminations  rd  and  be  are  employed  as  in 
Inner  Siraji,  and  in  such  cases,  the  rd  is  liable  to  the  usual  changes.  Before  the  b the 
termination  of  the  noun  generally  undergoes  certain  changes.  We  must  therefore  give 
the  folloAving  specimens  of  declension : — 


| A home 

A house 

Au  elephant 

i 

A daughter 

A sister 

Nom.  Sing. 

i 

i ghdrd 

ghar  ( 

hltJii 

be}  l 

bhl a 

Obi.  Sing,  and  Plur. 

ghfire 

ghara  i 

Mthl 

beti 

bhine 

Ag.  and  Loo.  Sing,  and  Plur. 

ghGre 

ghare  . 

hnthJe 

befte 

bhine 

Gen.  Sing,  and  Plur. 

ghfirer 

gharar 

hathtr 

betlr 

bhtnar 

Dat.  Sing,  and  Plur.  « 

ghtirab 

gliar&b 

hathih 

j bettb 

\ 

bhlnab 

Nom.  Plur. 

i 

ghdrS 

ghar 

! hathi 

| bftl 

bhln 

Note  that  tlie  a in  bhiriab  is  short. 

Tho  other  postpositions  are  the  same  as  in  Inner  Siraji,  except  that  those  of  the 
ablative  are  dgd,  and  ka,  kalia,  or  kauhd. 


702 


WESTERN  PAIIARl. 


The  declension  of  the  Personal  Pronouns  differs  slightly  from  that  given  for 


Inner  SirajI. 

Mr.  Bailey  gives  the  following  : — 

I. 

Thou.* 

Sing.— 

Nona 

hau 

td 

Ag. 

MO&. 

fane,  tde. 

Obi. 

tnau 

td. 

Gen. 

met'd 

tevd 

Dat. 

mau-bhe. 

td-blie. 

Plur. — 

Norn, 

, dsse 

tiisse 

Ag. 

dhe 

tiisse 

Obi. 

deed,  d$d 

tiid 

Gen. 

mhdrd 

t hdrd 

Dat. 

dssdb,  dsab 

tiidb 

With  the  form  mau-bhe  may  be  compared  the  Inner  SirajI  marnbhe. 
The  Demonstrative  Pronouns  arc  declined  as  follows : — 


This. 


That. 


Mase. 

j Fem. 

Muse. 

Fem. 

Sing.— 

Nom, 

ed 

ed 

S>) 

Sd 

Ag- 

eue 

esse 

{due 

Mss* 

Obl. 

eu  (ed') 

ess  1 

tea  (ted) 

t essd 

Gen. 

efi-rd,  ear 

e$sd-r< *,  essdr 

feu-rt,  tear 

tdssa-rd,  t&ssir 

Dat. 

eal 

essdb 

teuh 

tessab. 

This. 

| 

That. 

Ma sc.  and  Fein.  I 

I 

Ma9c.  an  1 Fein. 

Plur.— 

1 

1 

Nom. 

ed 

i 

ted 

Ag- 

ule 

l 

tede. 

Obl. 

ed. 

! 

ted. 

Geu. 

i 

ed-rd,  ear 

1 

te<t-n I,  tear 

Dat. 

cab 

1 

i 

tedb 

Some  of  the  above  forms  are  not  in  Mr.  Bailey’s  paradigm,  but  arc  taken  from  his 
specimen  sentences,  or  deduced  from  parallel  occurrences  found  therein.  Mr.  Bailey 
gives  the  e in  essd,  etc.  as  long.  Perhaps  it  should  b<*  short  as  in  fessd,  etc. 

The  remaining  pronouns  do  not  present  important  variations.  The  obliquo  form 
of  kun,  who  ? is  Ms  or  Icdsii,  and  that  of  kd,  what  ? kl.  ‘ Why  * is  kl-dgn,  in  which  fhit 
is  identical  with  id,  the  dative  postposition  in  CJiameali. 


SAINjf. 


703 


VERBS— A.— Auxiliary  Verbs  and  Verbs  Substantive  . — The  present  tense 
is  ad,  which,  as  in  Inner  Siraji,  is  immutable.  It  is  often  suffixed  to  another  word  and 
then  drops  its  vowel,  as  in  kea,  what  is  (your  name),  for  Ice-ad ; rauh-a,  for  rauh-ad, 
he  dwells.  The  negative  Verb  substantive  is  nehi  dthl,  is  not,  and  is  also  immutable. 

The  past  tense  is  tl  as  in  Ku].u1,  instead  of  the  tin  of  Inner  Siraji.  It  also  is  immu- 
table. 

B. — Active  Verb. — Tile  Old  Present  and  Present  Subjunctive  is  thus  con jugated. 
It  is  the  same  in  the  singular  and  the  plural,  and  the  second  and  third  persons  are  the 
same. 

I may  strike,  etc. 

Sing,  and  Plur. 

1.  tslku. 

2 and  3.  tjfike. 

The  Future  has  three  forms,  all  different.  I cannot  say  whether  they  can  all  be  used 
with  the  same  verb,  but  I give  here  the  terminations  attached  in  each  case  to  the  verb 
tsiknd,  to  strike. 

The  first  form  changes  the  l of  the  Inner  Siraji  future  to  r.1  We  thus  get  the 
following,  the  singular  and  plural  being  identical. 

I shall  strike. 

Sing,  and  Plur. 

1.  taikur 

2.  talkar 

3.  tslkdr. 

The  second  form  distinguishes  the  singular  from  the  plural,  but  in  each  number 
there  is  no  distinction  of  person.  Thus : — 

I shall  strike,  etc. 

1st,  2nd,  and  3rd  persons. 

Sing.  tslku 

Plur.  txlki. 

This  form  seems  to  be  a derivative  of  the  old  present.  This  tense  is  often  con- 
founded with  the  future,  and  in  Kashmiri  has  lost  its  present  signification  and  is  only 
used  as  a future  or  as  a present  subjunctive. 

The  third  form  takes  the  b which  is  the  distinguishing  mark  of  the  future  iu  East- 
ern India.  Tho  same  b also  occurs  in  the  future  of  the  Gawarbati  Pisacha  language. 
Mr.  Bailey  only  gives  examples  of  the  first  person,  viz.,  lalkub,  I shall  strike.  Ai  hether 
the  same  form  is  used  for  the  other  persons,  I do  not  know. 

The  Inner  Siraji  Future,  hold,  he  will  be,  is  given  by  Mr.  Bailey  in  one  of  his  sen- 
tences. 

The  other  tenses  are  formed  as  in  Inner  Siraji,  and  call  for  no  remarks,  but  in  one  of 
his  sentences  Mr.  Bailey  gives  rauhs  for  * he  dwells,  ’ which  is  evidently  a compound 
of  rauh , and  ad,  the  verb  substantive,  with  the  final  a dropped  as  explained  above.  rlhis 

1 So  also  in  tho  Veron  PisScha  language,  the  / of  the  future  has  become  r- 


704  WESTERN  PAUARf. 

is  probably  really  a present  definite  formed  by  suffixing  sd  to  the  old  present,  so  that 
it  stands  for  an  original  rauhe-sd. 

v- 

The  irregular  verbs  are  much  as  in  Inner  Siraji.  The  only  one  deserving  special 
notice  is  iedz$d,  to  come  ; pres,  part.,  i<£gdd  ; past  part.,  dt on  ; Imperative,  i<ig,  plur. 
i(jha  ; fut.  idgur,  etc. 


LIST  OF  STANDARD  WORDS  AND  PHRASES  FOR  THE  KULU 

GROUP. 


English. 

Ku|ul. 

♦ 

Inner  Sirajl. 

"l 

i 

_ | 

Sainji. 

1.  One 

• 

Ek  /■  . 

• 

13k  . 

• 

1 

l 

1.  k. 

2.  Two 

• 

Dai 

• 

DuT 

• 

Dm. 

3.  Three 

Trill,  (in  West  Kulu)  chin, 
chan. 

Cli£n 

1 

! 

! 

Cluii. 

4.  Four 

• 

Char 

9 • 

Tsar 

1 

Xsfir. 

5.  Five  • 

wffij 

• • 

I’ati'lz 

Pans. 

6.  Six 

• 

Chhau 

• 

Tshau 

• 

Xgliaa. 

7.  Seven 

Sott 

Sat,  sat  . 

■ 

Salt. 

S.  Eight 

• 

Of  tli 

» • 

Ath,  at  h . 

* 

Afth. 

2.  Nino 

1 

Non 

• • 

Nan 

4 

Nauu. 

10.  Ten 

Dos 

Do-s 

1 hiss. 

11.  Twenty 

* * | 

Hilil,  blh  , 

* 

Bih 

* 

Bih. 

12.  Fifty 

• 

IVmjah 

• • 

Pajza 

'••J.. 

13.  Hundred  * 

Sauvi 

Shall 

• 

1 

14.  I 

• 

1 1 ail 

• 

| ] la.  h:i3  . 

i 

• 

1 Hail. 

j 

lK.  Of  me 

• 

Merii 

Moran 

• 

! Mr-ra. 

16.  Mine 

• 

Merit 

• • 

| 

Meruu 

j 

• 

Merii. 

1 

17.  We  . 

• 

As^e,  ham,  hamS 

■ • 

! 

. Asse,  h&inmd  . 

• 

j Asse. 

18.  Of  ua 

• 

Assam,  mhara 

i 

Assara.  mharau 

i 

• 

Mhara. 

19.  Our 

• # 

Assam,  raharfi 

Assara,  mharau 

• 

Mhara. 

20.  Thou 

• • 

Tu,  than  . 

• • 

Tu 

• 

Tft. 

21.  Of  thee 

Tflra 

• • 

Terau 

• 

• 

Terfi. 

* 

#82.  Thino 

. 

Ttfrft 

1 • 

Terau 

• 

Terfi. 

23.  Yon  . 

• • 

Tu8Sd 

• • 

Tiisse,  tommS  . 

• 

TilssS. 

24T.-CH  you  . 

• 

TnssarS,  t{lsrty1ihain&v&  . 

| Tfissara,  tharau 

i 

i 

• 

Thar*. 

^28.  Your  «*: 

♦W 

• • 

TusBara,  tusra,  thamaia  • 

! 

I Tfissiira,  tharau 

• 

Thfira. 

--  

~7 * 

Ku)ul,  Inner  Sirajl  and  SSainjl. — 7U5 

English. 


Kujui. 


Inner  Sir&ji. 


Sainji. 


26.  He 

’ i 

. | So,  sau,  o 

• 

Sau 

• • 

So. 

27.  Of  him 

. Tsi-rii 

Tou-ra  • 

• • 

Toa-rS. 

28.  His 

| 

. Tel-ra 

• • 

Tefl.ra  . 

• 

Teu-ra. 

29.  They 

. ' To 

• • 

Tea,  sea,  ee 

• • 

Tda. 

30.  Of  them  . 

. ’ Tlnhii-rii . 

! 

TinhS-ra,  tea-ra 

• • 

Tea-ra. 

31.  Their 

. ; Tinha-ra  • 

i 

* 

Tinha-ra,  tea-ra 

• « 

Tea-ra, 

32.  Hand 

. ! Hotlli,  hath 

Hath,  both 

• • 

Hath. 

33.  Foot 

• , Ozongb,  dzongii 

Pair,  khur 

% • 

Pair. 

34.  No6e 

J Nik 

l 

i 

Nuk 

• • 

Nak. 

35.  Eyo 

1 

. Hochchhl,  ochchhl,  okkhl  . 

i 

Achh,  aohhl  . 

• 

Akkh. 

36.  Mouth 

. ! Kliakli  • 

• 

Muh 

• 

Mali. 

37.  Tooth 

. 1 Dord 

• 

Band 

• 

Band. 

38.  Ear 

. i K6nn 

• • ! 

! 

Kagef.  • . 

i 

* * ! 

Kanet. 

89.  Hair 

. ; So  raj,  sir  • • 

1 

* '| 

Sr5al 

• • 

Igopa. 

40.  Head 

. | Mund 

i 

■ •! 

Mund 

• 

Mund. 

41.  Tongue 

. , Dzlhbli  . 

• • j 

IJzlbh 

• • 

jjzibli. 

42.  Belly 

. Pvt 

- 

Pet- 

• t 

Pet. 

43.  Back 

• , Pit  th 

• 

Pith,  pitthi 

• • i 

Peth. 

44.  Iron 

. 1 Lfiha 

• : 

Firtha,  • 

• 

Lolia. 

45.  Gold 

. Sana  • - • 

• • ! 

1 

Suna 

46.  Silver 

. ; Uupfi  • 

• 

Rupa  • . 

• 9 

i 

l 

47.  Father  . 

. ; Bapu,  tabu,  tab 

1 

• 

Bab 

• • 

Haba. 

48.  Mother 

. : AmmS,  ya,  ij  . 

• 

lb  I 

• • 

Ij. 

49.  Brother 

. ! Bhal,  Bbaii 

i 

• • 

Bhal,  d&d 

• • 

1 

Hhai  (elder),  bhatl  (j /oun- 
ger). 

50.  Sister  . 

. DaT  (elder),  lv'hv  ( younger ) 

i 

Da!  (elder),  bhlg  ( y 
'die!  (younger). 

ounger), 

Dai  (elder),  bhlfl  {younger), 

51.  Man 

Mabnii  . 

• 

ManasS 

• 9 

Mard. 

52.  Woman 

. Botrl 

i 

• • 

ROtri,  tflhSuyl  . 

• % 

Betfl. 

706— Kujui,  Inner  Sirajl  and  Sninjl, 


English. 

Kulni. 

Inner  Siraji. 

SainjT. 

53.  Wife 

Jo,  (izoi,  lahjl  . 

• 

Bctfl,  tsheurl  \ 

Jfie,  ji5,  dzfld. 

54.  Child 

Yaija 

• 

Halka,  balak  . 

TsiiOrn. 

55.  Son  ... 

Sflhpll,  bflta 

• 

• 

Beta,  tshfltii,  solmi 

Tghorfi. 

56.  Daughter . 

Srthr I,  bfitl 

• 

• 

Bet l,  tahrttl,  sen,  solin 

Tsliflrl. 

57.  Slavo 

Bdthfl 

• 

• 

Souk,  dr-rfl 

58.  Cultivator 

Haji 

« 

- 

Korean  .... 

59.  Shepherd  . 

Puhal,  phufcl  . 

• 

Phual  .... 

Phnal. 

GO.  God 

Pormesor  . 

■ 

Po  mu' bur 

61.  Devil 

Raklias,  bhnt  . 

■ 

Rakos  .... 

62.  Sun 

Siiraj,  dliiara  . 

• 

i 

! 

Dhyara,  dihare,  smwj  . j 

Dihara. 

63.  Moon 

Dzoth.  dzutli  . 

i 

• i 

Dzflth.  tsanani  . 

Dzfltth. 

64.  Star 

l 

Tarft 

i 

i 

. j 

T a ra  • . . • j 

Tara. 

65.  Fire 

Ogg 

i 

i 

Ag ..... 

66.  Water 

Paul  - . 

i 

Pan!  .... 

67.  House  . . • ‘ 

Ghor,  g5hr 

Ghar,  dora  . • . ! 

Ghar. 

6S.  Horse 

1 

Ghftra,  gfthra  . . 

l 

i 

1 

Gherii  .... 

j 

Ghfira. 

; 

i 

69.  Cow 

Gal 

• ; 

| 

Lachhmi,  gS  . . . ; 

Gl 

70.  Dog  . . • ; 

Kutta  . 

i 

• 

• 

I 

, Kuttau  or  kiikar 

Kutta. 

71.  Cat  ... 

| 

Braja,  (Jem . bjall) 

* 

• 

| Baiealau  (fnn.  -li) 

Bareala  (Jem . -}I). 

72.  Cock 

1 Kukkaj*  . 

• 

1 Kukkar  .... 

i • 

I 

Kukkar. 

73.  Duck 

| Batak 

* 

1 Abhi  # . • . 

74.  Ass 

] G add  ha,  goddha 

• 

! Gadliau  . 

| 

| Gadha. 

i 

75.  Camel 

, Ufc  . 

• 

• fit  . - • • 

j * 

i 

: IJfc. 

i 

76.  Bird 

Chiju  » 

t 

• 

\ Chiuru,  cholfi.  . . 

! 

i 

77.  Go  ... 

• 

• 

Nash,  ra . 

i 

' Nii,  nas. 

78.  Eat  ... 

Kha 

• 

Kha  • 

! Kha. 

79.  Sit  . . 

BU 

• 

• 

Besh  . • • 

B5$. 

VOL.  IX,  PAM  17. 

Krilul,  Inner  Sirftji  oauiji.  i\j( 

4x2. 

Kujni 


English. 

80.  Como 
SI.  Beat 
J*2.  Stand 

83.  Dio 

84*.  Give 

85.  linn 

86.  Up 

57.  Near 

58.  Down 
SO.  Far 

00.  Before 

01.  Behind 

92.  Who 

IM.  What 
9 k Why 

95.  And 

96.  But  • 

97.  If 

98.  Yea 

99.  No 

100.  Alas 

10 1.  A father  . 

102.  Of  a father 

103.  To  a father 

104.  From  a father 

105.  Two  fathers 

106.  Fathers  • 


® j.  ij 

Jok,  mftr  . 

. Khara  ho 

. Mor 

. m 

. Thur,  th6r,  bhagg 

. Ujjhe,  jhaS 

Bhetl,  n£r 
Bnnhe,  bihaU,  bhi 
. Dnr 

. Agg.',  5ghe 

. Plchchhe 
\ 

. Kun  . 

. Ki  . 

. Kibe 

. Hor  • • 

I 

. Por 
. Jr* 

. lino,  lift  . 

. j rsai  • 

. llfii 

. Bab  . • 

. Babe-ra,  baba-ra 
. ; Biibe-be,  baba-be 

i 

i 

. Bilbo- na,  bfiba-na 
. Dfil  bfib  . 

. | Bab  . » 


Inner  Sir&jl. 

> loh,  6j 
. IgTk 

. Khara  nth 
. Mar  . • 

. Ill  . 

. Thur 
. Ujhe,  gl§ 

. N6jv\  s<MA 
. Undhe,  tel,  jlle 
. Darera,  diir  • 

. Jehfl,  ilgfi 
. Patfihei,  pitghft . 

. ; Ku£ 

i 

. j K,- . 

. j Kibe,  kilo 

. ; Hor 

i 

. ; Por 
. Je 
. Hrt 

. Xai  . « 

. Darflh 
. j Bab 

j 

. ! Baba-ra  . 

i 

. Baba-bo  . . 

i 

. Baba-ldfa  • 

. Dul-hab  . 

. ! Bab  . • 


SainjI. 

ids. 

I*  Ik. 


DS. 

Thur. 

(JjhS. 


. . ITiidhS. 


. Jehu. 

. Pifshe. 

. Knji. 

. Kfi. 

Kib,  kl-dgtt. 


B&b&. 

BabSr. 

Babab. 

BabO-aga. 

Diil  b&b$. 

Babe. 


708— Kujul,  Inner  Sirajl  and  SainjI, 


English. 

Kn|nl. 

Inner  Sirajl. 

Sainji. 

107.  Of  fathers 

Bab^-ra,  baba-ra 

• 

• 

Baba-ra  • 

Bab€r. 

108.  To  fathers 

Bftb<3-bS,  baba-b3 

• 

• 

Baba-b5  . * . 

Babab. 

1 

109.  From  fathers 

Babe-na,  b&ba-na 

• 

• 

i 

Baba-lera  . . . 1 

1 

Babe-age. 

110.  A daughter 

Betl 

• 

Betl  .... 

Betl. 

111.  Of  a danghter  . 

I3etl-ra  . . 

• 

• 

BStl-ra  .... 

* 

Betlr. 

112.  To  a daughter  . 

B.ti-bB  . 

• 

• 

Bstl-bS  .... 

Betib. 

113.  From  a daughter 

Beti-na  . ' . 

■ 

• 

Bf*tl-lepi . 

BeD-agS. 

114.  Two  daughters  . 

DQI  betl 

• 

• 

Dili  b£ti  .... 

Dill  betl. 

115.  Daughters 

Bc-ti 

• 

• 

Bet  I .... 

Betl. 

116.  Of  daughters 

Betl-ra  . 

• 

• 

Betl-ra  .... 

Bfitir. 

117.  To  daughters 

Beti-bo 

* 

• 

Beti -be  .... 

l 

Betib. 

118.  From  daughters 

Beti-na  . 

• 

• 

Retl-lera 

Bf-tl-iige. 

119.  A good  man 

Khara  mahgu  . 

• 

• 

Ramra  magagh 

i 

Ramra  mard. 

120.  Of  a good  man  . 

Khare  mfiligu-ra 

• 

• 

( R a inre  magasha-rfi 

i 

Ramre  mardar. 

121.  To  a good  man  . 

! Khare  mail  mV -bo 

i 

• 

• 

Ham  re  raagasha-be  . 

Ramre  mardab. 

122.  From  a good  man 

| Khare  mahgfi-na 

i 

• 

i 

■ 

I Ramre  manasha-lerii 

Ramre  mania -ag  5. 

128.  Two  good  men  . 

, Dili  khare  mahnfi 

• 

Dili  ramre  maga^i 

Dul  ramre  mard. 

124.  Good  men 

. Khare  nuihg.fi  . 

i 

• 

Ramre  manasll 

i 

Ramre  mard. 

125.  Of  good  men 

I KharS  mahgu-ra 

i 

i 

• 

j Ramre  magasha-ra  . 

j 

Ramre  mardar. 

126.  To  good  men 

! 

j Khare  mahgfi-b8 

• 

i 

Ramre  magaBha-bii  . 

Ramre  mardab. 

127.  From  good  men 

KharS  mahgti-na 

t 

• 

; Riiinre  manasha-lera 

i 

Ramjv  marda-age. 

128.  A good  woman 

Khari  betrl 

• 

• 

Ramrl  betrl 

i 

Ramrl  betrl. 

129.  A had  boy 

Bura  gfihpl  . 

9 

• 

' Burn,  sOrii 

Biira  tahdrfi. 

130.  Good  women 

Khari  b£trl 

• 

• 

Ramrl  betrl 

Rawri  betrl. 

131.  A bad  girl  • 

Burl  sfthjl 

• 

• 

Buvi  sOri .... 

' Burl  tfihrtrT. 

132.  Good 

Khara  , • 

• 

• 

Ramra  . 

Ramp. 

133.  Better 

(Es-na)  khara  . 

! 

• 

• 

(Ifi-ka)  ram  fa  . 

(Eu-kn)  ramra. 

Kujui,  Inner  Sirajl  and  Siiinji.—  709 


English. 

Ku|ul. 

Inner  Siraji. 

SftinjI. 

134.  Best 

• 

S8bbhi-na  kharft 

• 

• 

Sobblil-k!  ramfa 

• 

S5bbhi-kS  r&mfa. 

135.  High 

• 

Uthra 

• 

• 

Uclita 

• 

UthlS,  ujje. 

136.  Higher  . 

• 

(I5l-na)  nthy&  • 

• 

j (lii-kl)  uchta  . 

. (Eft-ka)  uthla. 

137.  Highest 

• 

SSbbhi-na  uthja 

• 

i 

i 

| Sobbhl-ka  uchta 

• 

S5bbhi-k§  uthla. 

138.  A horse 

• 

Glifij*a 

• 

i 

i 

GliOfa 

• 

• 

Ghora. 

139.  A mare  • 

• 

Ghflp  • 

• 

• 

G hop 

- 

Gliflyl. 

140.  Horses 

• 

G • • 

m 

- 

Gh0r«3 

• 

• 

GhOfd. 

141.  Mares 

• 

Ghflfl,  gbOfli  • 

- 

» 

GLori  . 

• 

Ghflrl. 

142.  A bull  . 

• 

BSldd  . 

Bold 

• 

• 

Bauild. 

143.  A cow 

Ga  . • 

. 

Laclihmf . 

• 

Ga. 

144.  Bulls 

• 

Baldh  (balm)  • 

Bold 

Bauijd. 

145.  Cows 

Gal 

Liichhmt . 

• 

Ga. 

146.  A dog 

• 

Kutta  • 

• 

• 

Kutta 

• 

Kutta. 

147.  A bitch  . 

Kuttl 

• 

• 

Kuttl 

• 

Kflttl. 

148.  Dogs 

j 

Kutto 

• 

* ; 

Kutto 

• 

Kfltte. 

149.  Bitches  . 

i 

i 

Kuttl,  kuttii  . 

Kuttl 

• 

Kflttl. 

150.  A he  goat 

i 

Bokra  • • 

• 

• i 

j 

Bakta 

i 

Bakra. 

151.  A female  goat  . 

i 

1 

• j 

Bokrl  . . 

• 

i 

13a  kri  . 

1 

I 

. i 

Bilkrl. 

152.  Gouts 

• : 

BokrG 

• 

i 

* j 

Bakro 

- 

• 

Biikrfl 

153.  A male  deet1 

I 

i 

Horn 

• 

i 

! 

Kakkar  (barking  deer) 

• 

154.  A female  deer  . 

i 

i 

Horni 

• 

KakkrI  . 

• 

• 

155.  Deer 

• 

' Horn,  litfrnl  • 

• ; 

Kakkar  . 

• 

• 

156.  I am 

I 

| Hail  sa,  ho 

j 

HI  sa,  asa 

• 

• 

Hao  sa. 

157.  Thou  art 

• 

Tfl  sa,  he 

j 

• 

i 

Tu  sa,  asa 

• 

Tu  sa. 

158.  He  is 

- 

1 

j Sau  sa,  lie 

• 

• 

j Sau  sa,  asa 

• 

Sft  sa. 

159.  We  are  . 

• 

Asse  si,  sa,  ho  . 

• 

• 

Assn  sa,  asa 

• 

Asse  sa. 

160.  You  are  . 

Tusse  si,  sa,  ha 

i 

• 

• 

Tilsse  sa,  asa  • 

• 

• 

Tussd  sa. 

710— Kujul,  Inner  Siraji  and  Sainji. 


English. 

Kujui. 

Inner  JSirajl.  j 

..  ....  _ 1 

Sainjl. 

161.  They  are . 

To  si,  ba,  ha 

• 

Tea  sa,  asft 

• 

Tea  sa. 

162.  I was 

Hau  tha,  ti 

• 

Ha  thl 

• 

Hau  ti. 

163.  Thou  wast 

Til  tha,  ti 

• 

Tu  thl  • 

• 

Ttt  ti. 

164.  He  was  . 

Sau  tha,  ti 

i 

I 

Sau  till  . 

So  ti. 

165.  Wo  were . 

Assd  thS,  ti 

Asse  thl  . 

. 

AssO  ti. 

166.  You  wore 

Tussd  the,  ti 

! 

Tnsse  thl  • 

TfissS  ti. 

167.  Thoy  woro 

TO  the,  ti 

Tea  till  . 

• 

Tea  ti. 

168.  Be  . 

Ho  . . 

• | 

Hd  ... 

• 

Hd. 

1G9.  To  be 

lld^ia,  h^nu 

Hdiiau 

• 

Ho?a. 

170.  Being 

Hunda 

i 

Hunda 

• 

1 Hunda. 

3 71.  Having  boon 

Ufli-ko  . 

Hdl-k5rl  . 

• 

Hm-kBri. 

172.  I may  bo  . 

| Hau  lida  . 

• 

Ha  hofi  . 

• 

Hau  ho!L 

173.  I bhall  bo 

! 

i Hau  honu 

Ha  hdula,  hola 

• 

Hau  hdur,  hola. 

174.  I should  be 

1 

175.  Beat 

Mar 

• 

Ts-Jk 

i 

| 

• 

Isik. 

176.  To  beat  . 

Mil  in  a,  marniT  . 

• 

j Xsi^na  . 

i 

Tfeikna. 

^77.  Beating  . 

Marda  . . 

• 

TVlkdau  . 

Igikda. 

178.  Having  beaten. 

Marl-kd  . 

• 

Tsikl-korl 

'IVlkl-korl. 

179.  I beat  • . 

Hau  mara-sa  . 

• 

H5  tsikdau 

• 

Hau  tslkda. 

180.  Thou  beatest 

Til  mara-sa 

• 

Tu  tsikdau 

• 

TO  tslkda. 

181.  He.  beats. 

: Sau  mara-sa 

■ 

Sail  tsikdau 

• 

So  tslkda. 

182.  We  boat  . 

j Assd  mara-sa, 

Assd  tslkdo 

• 

Assd  tslkda. 

183.  You  beat . 

1 

; Tussd  mara-sa,  “FI  . 

• 

Tussd  talkde 

• 

| Tvissd  tslkda. 

| 

184.  They  beat 

; To  mara-sa. 

• 

Tea  tslkdo  • 

• 

i 

Tgfr  tslkda. 

185.  I beat  ( Past  Tense ) . 

i 

1 

! Ma!  marfi 

i 

t 

• 

Mai  tslkfx  • 

• 

; Mde  tslkii. 

186.  Thou  beatest  (Pad  • Tai  miirft  . 

Tense ).  ! 

• 

Tai  tslkQ 

• 

I 

i 

| Tane  ialku. 

187.  He  beat  ( Past  Tense) 

i 

! Teio  rnfirfi 

• 

TuI  tslkfi 

• 

T&V5  talbu. 

1 

Kujui,  Inner  SirajI  and  Sain  jl.— 711 


English. 

Kulul. 

Inner  Sirijt 

Sainjt. 

188.  We  beat  ( Past  Tonga ) 

Asst*  mil  r ft 

• 

Assft  tgikft 

Ahft  tgikft. 

189.  You  beat  {Past  Tensa) 

Tusse  mar  ft 

• 

Tftssft  tgikft 

Tftssft  taiku. 

i 

190.  They  beat  (Past  Tense ) TinhS  rnard 

1 

4- 

• < 

Tea  tgikft  * 

TiSae  tglkfi. 

191.  I am  beating 

• 

Hau  marda-laga-huuda-sa  . 

HS  tglkdau  lagau 

Hau  tgikda.  . 

192.  I was  beating  . 

Hau  marda-laga-hunda-tl, 
-tha. 

HS  tglkdau  lagau-thl 

Hau  talkda-tl. 

1 93.  I had  beaten 

• 

Mai  jauku-tl,  -tha 

• 

MaT  islku-thl  • 

Mfte  taiku-ti. 

194.  I may  beat 

• 

Hau  niarsi 

Hau  haiku. 

195.  I shall  beat  , . 

• 

Hau  inarnu 

« • 

Hail  tsikulau,  tslklau 

Hau  haiku  r,  tblkft,  tgikft  b. 

196.  Thou  wilt  beat . 

• 

Tii  maria 

• . 

Tft  jslk(u)lau  . • 

Tft  fcgikar,  tslku. 

197.  lie  will  beat 

. 

Sau  maria 

• 9 

Sau  tglk(u)lau 

Sft  tgikiir,  tglkfi. 

19S.  We  shall  bent  . 

Assft  marnu 

• 

Assft  tgik(u)lft  . 

Asse  tsikfir,  tslkl. 

199.  You  will  beat  . 

Tusse  marie 

• • 

Tusse  talk (u)  1ft 

Tusse  haikar,  tsiki. 

200.  They  will  beat  . 

• 

Tft  marie  . 

. * 

T.'ii  tgik(ii)lc-  . 

Tfta  haikar,  haiki. 

201.  I should  beat  . 

■ 



202.  I am  beaten 

Hau  marua-sa  . 

• 

— 

203.  I was  beaten 

• 

Hau  mania- ti,  (-tha) 



204.  I shall  bo  beaten 

• 

Hau  inarinuft 

• 



205.  I go 

• 

Han  nbsi-sa 

• • 

Ha  nandau 

Han  nanda. 

206.  Thou  goest 

i 

Tu  nosa-sa 

• • 

Tii  naudau 

9 

Tu  nanda. 

207.  He  goes  . 

■ 

Sau  nosa-sa. 

• • 

Sau  n an  da  u • 

• 

Sft  uanda. 

208.  We  go 

• 

Assft  nosa-sa,  -si 

Assft  naudft 

• 

Assft  nandft* 

209.  You  go  . 

• 

Tusse  nosa-sa,  -si 

9 • 

Tftssft  nandft 

• 

Tfisso  nandft. 

210.  They  go  . 

• 

To  nosa-sa,  si  . 

• . 

Tea  nandft 

• 

Tfta  nandft. 

211.  I went 

• 

Hau  notthft 

• • 

Ha  uatli&u 

• 

Hau  nfitha. 

212.  Thou  wentest  . 

• 

Tft  nutthii 

• 

Tfi  "a  than 

t 1 

Tft  nfitha. 

213.  He  went  . . 

• 

Sau  nftttha  . 

• • 

Sau  nathau  . • 

• 

St  natliii. 

214,  Wc  went . 

• 

Abbo  nftttlie  . 

• • 

Assft  natho 

• 

Assft  n lithe. 

i 

i 

712 — Kulul,  Inner  Sirajl  and  Sainjl. 


English. 


Inner  SirSjt 


215.  You  went 


• Tussd  nfttthe  . 


t Tfisse  nftthd 


Tfisdo  nfithe. 


216.  They  went 


. T<1  n 5 tfch  3 


* Tea  nathc 


. 1 Tea,  until*'. 


217.  Go 


. N5.4 


Naa  or  nil 


Na,  na-. 


218.  Going 


219.  Gone 


N5sda  ...  • • Nasdau,  naiidau 


N5fctlia  . . . . Nathan  . 


. Nanda,  nasda. 


Nath  a. 


220.  What  is  your  name  ? . Tilsra  nil  ki  sa  ? . . ( Ter  a ko  nau  ? . 


Tera,  nil  kes  r 


221.  How  old  is  this  horse  ? El  ghnjv-ri  ketrl  bares  sa  ? Ed  phfirC-rl  kCtrl  umniar  Ed  Kli«rer  ketrl  ambar  ? 


222.  How  far  is  it  from  KaSmlt-  okkliS-na  ketrl  dflr  Indlia-kS  Kasinlr  ketra  dfir  Ekk lifi-kal.lt  Kagmlra-tang 

here  to  Kashmir  ? sa  ? i.  sii  ? k.’tra  (lor  I ml  a ? 

223.  How  many  sons  are  Tussa-re  babtl-rd  gh5ro  Thard  l.aba-re  ghfire  ketre  T<  ■! <■  babdr  gbard  kgtrd 

there  in  your  father’s  ketre  betd  si  ? Snrii  na  ? lark.'  ? 

house  ? 

224.  1 have  walked  a long  Huu  aj  barl  dfiri-tal  nottlnV  MaT  az  baulifi  bat  hand!  . Hau  ad*  bare  biira  zingh* 

way  to-day.  ti.  handi  awa’. 

225.  The  son  of  my  uncle  MeiO  chache-re  betc-ra  biyah  M«t f*  chache-re  sflrii-ia  Merf-  Uats»r  beta  ear  bubo! 

is  married  to  his  sister.j  tel-ii  bfdiul  songhe  hua-  1 by  ah  tefi-rl  blnija  soiigha  saughe  b»"a  hOfi. 

j hnnda-sa.  i ^liOit  sa. 

226.  In  the  house  is  the  Bad-  | Ghora-na  sette  ghorfi-rl  | SittC*  ghorG-rl  kathi  ghore  Gharf*  bitte  ghfirer  zin. 

die  of  the  whito  horse.:  kathi  sa.  I sii. 

227.  Pnt  the  saddle  upon  ; Tel-rl  pittlii-pandhe  kathi  ( Kathi  teft-vl  pittbl  paraundr*  E n r pitfhi  fiprd  zlu  bonnha. 

bis  back.  pa.  kosii. 

228.  1 have  beaten  bis  son  ; Mai  tel-re  bete-be  bnliu  Mai  t*‘ii-re  sflrii-bo  bauhfi  efir  beta  bara  tslkfi. 

with  many  stripes.  ; komchl  inari.  tnlkii. 

229.  lie  is  grazing  cattle  on  Sau  dhoga-re  choplig  pandhf  San  dharatl-ro  gahl  dago  JJzfltar  tsflre  fipie  ts»ra  Ert 

the  top  of  the  hill.  j gftru  oharauda  laga-hunda-  chiirda  lag  a hunda.  ga  biikrl. 

; sa. 

230.  He  is  sitting  on  a San  tel  bftte-lieth  ghfire-  , San  tr.fi  biitr-  hrtlie  ghrrf*  "La  l utt*“  h."t-ho  srt  both 5 

horse  under  that  tree.  pad  he  bftha-huuda-sa.  paraumh-  bi'tlia.  hunda.  ghore  fipre. 


231.  His  brother  is  taller 
than  his  sister. 

2o2.  The  price  of  that  is 
two  i unees  and  a half. 


Tei-ra  blial  tei-rl  behiil-na  Tofi-ra  blial  apnl  bhina-ks  Efir  blial  upnl  bauihnl-k5 
lomba  sa.  lemma.  bade] a. 

Tel-ra  mul  dhal  rupaiye  sa.  j Tefi-ra  mul  filial  rapaul  sa  . Pur  mul  dlia<5  rupayya. 


233.  My  father  lives  in  that  Mora  balm  tel  h^tshe  gliftpa-j  Mei  a l ab  ten  lu^tslu"  ghore  Mt'ro  babu  e(S  lu^tahe  ghare 
small  house.  j na  i*&uha-sa.  i lauhnda.  ranhs. 


234.  Give  this  rupee  to  him  fib  rupaiya  tel-bi?  d 0 


. To  rapaul  tefi-be  de  . . £fib  rupayya  dea  (give 

! rupees  to  him). 


235.  Take  those  rupees  To  rupniyS  tel-na  m5hg&  So  tea  rapaul  teu-lepa  laul  Ea  rupayya  efl -aga  mftnga 

from  him.  (ask  for).  lau.  (ask). 

236.  Beat  him  well  and  Tel-b3  bohd  joka  li&r  rSsfil-  Ten*b8  khaB©  tslka  tebko  E u ranire-k5ri  f^ika,  rasIS 

bind  him  with  ropes.  sfthgd  bonnha.  rashl-kS  banhii.  bl  bonnha. 

237.  Draw  water  from  the  Khuo-na  paot  tihgra  . KlinhO-nfi  pa^I  kafh  . . Kfie  kauhau  pannl  kaddha* 

well.  i 


238.  Walk  before  me.  . Mn-na  agge  aggS  hSd  . i M5  age  had 


Man  iehu  tstal. 


239.  Whose  boy’  comes  be-  Tussti-na  pichcbho  k^s-ra  ( Thare  plight?  kas-ra  sdru  Kas-ra  larkii  tii  pitaho  awa  F 

hind  you  ? beta  £jda-sa  ? \ Tjda  liiga  ? 

240.  brom  whom  did  you  TOh  tusso  k5san  leu  ? . , j Sau  tiisse  kasa-kS  mnlll  Kasfi-agii  tae  mul  moiigtl  ? 

buy  that  ? aga  ? 

241.  From  a shopkeeper  of  Gara-re  hatialO-na  . . Gra-re  fkn  karada-iigo  . Graur  uiikaunnd5ra-aga. 

the  village. 

-• i 


Kulul,  Inner  Siraji  and  Sainji. — 713 

4 Y 


VOL,  IX,  PART  IV, 


715 


The  Mandi  Group. 

The  State  of  Mandi  lies  between  Kulu  and  the  district  of  Kangra.  Immediately  to 

Where  spoken.  its  south  lies  the  State  of  Suket,  which  is  separated 

from  the  Simla  Hill  States  by  tho  river  Satlaj.  North  of  Mandi  lies  the  Chhota  Bangahal 

canton  of  the  Kangra  district,  as  explained  ante  (p.  669,  footnote).  This  canton  is 

almost  uninhabited,  and  is  divided  into  two  portions  by  a mountain  chain  running 

north  and  south.  The  language  of  the  fow  inhabitants  of  the  18  lxumlets  of  the  Eastern 

portion  of  Chhota  Bangahal  is  Kului  more  or  less  mixed  with  Mandgali,  while  that  .of 

the  Western  portion  is  the  Kangri  form  of  the  Dogra  dialect  of  Panjabi.  These  facts 

must  be  known  in  order  to  understand  the  dialectic  division  of  Mandgali. 

• • • 

The  language  of  Mandi  is  called  Mand6a.ll,  and  that  of  Suket  is  called  Suketi,  the 
two  being  closely  connected. 

The  mountainous  South-Eastern  portion  of  the  Mandi  is  geographically  a portion  of 
Dialects.  the  Kulu  Siraj  immediately  to  its  East,  but  the 

language  is  not  Sirajl.  It  is  Mand6a.ll  slightly  mixed  with  that  language,  and  .is  called 
Mandeali  Pahari.1  Mand6all  proper  is  spoken  ovor  the  rest  of  the  State,  and  Mr.  Bailey 
recognizes  three  varieties  of  it.  The  first  is  that  spoken  in  the  main  portion  of  the  State 
south  of  the  river  Bias,  excluding  the  Mandgali  Pahari  tract.  This  is  the  standard 
dialect.  North  of  the  Bias  is  what  Mr.  Bailey  calls  Northern  Mandgali,  and  in  the 
extreme  north  of  the  State  is  the  Chhota.  Bahghall  dialect,  spoken  in  a portion  of  Chhota 
£angahal  which  belongs  administratively  to  Mandi.  The  two  latter  differ  very  slightly 
from  standard  MandSall,  and  will  not  be  considered  separately  in  these  pages.  Any 
important  dialectic  peculiarities  will  be  dealt  with  in  describing  the  standard  dialect.  For 
the  purposes  of  this  survey,  no  separate  specimens  were  received  for  Northern  Mandgali 
or  Chhota  Banghali,  and  the  only  available  authority  for  these  is  the  account  given  by 
the  Rev.  T.  Grahame  Bailey  in  the  State  Gazetteer  and  re-printed  in  his  Languages  of 
the  Northern  Himalayas  published  by  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  in  the  year  1908. 

Mr.  Bailey  says  that  there  are  said  to  be  three  dialects  of  Suketi  but  tliat  this  is 
evidently  an  over  refinement.  The  dialects  are  named  Pahar,  Dhar,  and  Bahai.  Any 
information  available  regarding  these  three  will  be  given  under  the  head  of  Suketi. 

The  people  of  this  tract  are  prejudiced  against  learning  foreign  languages,*  and 
this  accounts  for  the  accuracy  and  consistence  with  which  the  specimens  given  below 
have  been  recorded.  Mand5a.ll  is  evidently  a dialect  that  has  a standard  to  which  its 
speakers  endeavour  to  adhere. 

No  separate  returns  have  been  received  for  Northern  Mandgali  or  for  Chhota  Bangh- 


Number  of  speakers.  all,  both  being  included  under  the  general  head  of 

Maqdgali.  The  total  number  of  speakers  of  this  Group  has  been  returned  as  follows : — 

Map48&U 150,000 

M&Qd&lI'Pah&rl 10,000 

Sakstl  .............  52,184 

Total  . . 212,184 


* Assorting  to  the  State  Gazetteer,  p.  26,  the  language  of  SirAi  is  mostly  unintelligible  to  the  people  of  the  lower 
villages,  while  MapfSaft  Pahtfl  ie  a lingua  franca  generally  understood  by  all. 

9 State  Gasetteer,  p.  25. 

VOL.  IX,  VAST  IV. 


4 Y 2 


716 


WESTERN  PAlIABl. 


The  Vocabulary  of  these  two  States  is  much  the  same  as  that  of  othor  Western  Paliari 
vocabulary.  languages.  The  following  is  a list  of  a few  note- 

worthy expressions  collected  from  Mr.  Bailey’s  Vocabulary  and  from  the  specimens  which 
follow.  Words  noted  only  in  Chhota  Bangahal  are  marked  ‘01th.  B.’  Those  noted  only 
in  Northern  MandSaU  are  marked  * N,’  those  noted  only  in  Mandgall  Paharl  are  marked 
‘ P,’  while  those  peculiar  to  Suketl  arc  marked  * S.’ 
agge,  in  front. 
aunt,  an  egg. 
b ft  gar,  wind. 
bdhnd , to  beat. 
bakkhd,  towards. 
busnit  or  bathnd , to  sit  (N). 
bald,  an  egg. 
baydh , a marriage. 
bebbi,  a younger  sister  (N). 
bhachedl,  foolish. 
bid  hit,  a husband. 
bun,  down  (Kashmiri  bon), 
cli ale  j and,  to  go  away. 
dal,  a tree. 

dad,  an  elder  sister  (N)  (Kashmiri  ded,  a mother). 

dhdrd,  a bill. 

dhydrd,  a day. 

dohri,  a held. 

dot  hi,  to-morrow  evening. 

ebbe  or  ibhc,  no w. 

eh rd  or  erhd,  like  this. 

etthi  or  yetthi , here. 

gabliru,  a son. 

ghat , a little. 

grab,  a village. 

gudnd,  or  gwdnd,  to  cause,  to  go,  to  lose. 

gndla,  sweet. 

hdchchhd,  clean. 

hdkkhi,  the  eye. 

hath,  down  (not  up). 

liikd,  the  breast. 

hun,  now. 

tbbe  or  ebbe,  now. 

Ij,  a mother  (N). 
ja,  ja-je,  when. 

■jebbe,  when. 

jehrd  or  jerhd,  like  what. 
jetthi , where. 

jlnkhi  j arid,  to  become  angry. 


MAUD  I GROUP. 


717 


jufna,  to  be  got,  obtained. 

katthe , about,  concerning,  for  the  sake  of. 

Itebbe , when? 

Jcehrd  or  kerhu,  like  what  ? 

ketthi , where  ? 

khard,  good,  beautiful. 

kharnd,  to  stand. 

khndnd,  khwdnd,  to  give,  to  eat. 

kubhadrd,  ugly. 

lari,  a wife. 

mdhtimi,  a woman  (N). 

tndnjd,  a bed. 

mardh,  a man. 

mass , meat. 

maltha , a small  boy. 

mund , the  head. 

munnu , a son  (Chh.  B.) 

nede  or  nere,  near. 

nhdsnd , nhalhnd,  to  run  (X). 

nhassi  jdnd,  to  run  away. 

picJichhe,  behind. 

pftdhar,  a plain,  level  ground. 

pat  iid , sharp. 

pralle,  upon. 

paindd,  footpath,  way. 

parsi,  the  day  after  to-morrow,  the  day  before  yesterday. 

part  eg,  apart. 

paund,  to  fall. 

prdnt , after. 

pnhdl,  a shepherd. 

pujjnd,  to  arrive. 

sadnd,  mddnd,  to  call,  summon. 

sdhi,  postpos.,  like. 

mrudl,  hair. 

sauna,  to  lie  down,  sleep. 
sulnd > gold. 

Id,  then,  therefore. 
tdtd,  swift, 
tebbe,  then. 

tehrd  or  tefhd,  like  that. 
tetthi,  there. 

fhandd,  cold,  cool  (X.  thondd). 
thaina,  to  place  (Kashmiri  thawuu). 
tikki  or  tikd,  up  to. 
uprd,  up. 


718 


WESTERN  PAHiKl. 


t ohittar,  within. 
yStthi,  or  Stthi,  here. 

The  character  used  in  writing  Mandgali  and  Suk&ti  is  a form  of  7£fcri.  The  follow* 
. ing  is  the  alphabet,  including  some  of  the  more  important 

’ Written  character* 

compound  consonants. 


MANSI  GROUP, 


719 


MandS&ii  Alphabet. , 


Vowels. 

Consonants. 

a 

*3 

iH 

ka 

da 

X> 

hit 

a 

A 4 

kha 

tr  7 71 

dha 

tr 

i 

Ha 

k 

f 

id 

4 £ 

ga 

71 

na 

pha 

ST 

i 

(j 

gha 

pa 

m; 

nha 

£ 

ki 

cha 

ST 

pha 

<£> 

jya 

£ 

* 

b\ 

chha 

a* 

la 

€ 

dhya 

«■ 

ki 

• 

ja 

£ 

\ 

bha 

nhy 

£ 

' 

v,  a 

6 

jha 

! 

ma 

X 

(ra 

ku,  kd 

$ 

fa 

V 

ya 

a 

pra 

« 

ar 

9 

$ 

(ha 

S 

ra 

ara 

9 

kS 

£ 

#a 

h 

la 

<rr 

khwa 

«r 

ai 

4 ha 

X, 

va 

ez 

gtoa 

* 

kai 

ga 

♦ 

ia,  aha , 
sa. 

H 

dwa 

€ 

0,  ait 

«9^3? 

ta 

3 

ha 

3 

rtea 

r 

kd,  kau 

r> 

(ha 

BL 

\ 

fa 

arr 

♦ 

720 


WESTERN.  PAHA.R1. 


Mandi  and  Suket  are  the  n^pst  Western  of  the  Western  Pahari  Hill  States  that  we 

have  hitherto  considered.  Immediately  to  their  west  lies  the 
and°Kuiund1ai*c^rds  the  Simla  British  district  of  Kangra  proper,  the  people  of  which,  both 
*'  in  race  and  language,  claim  kinship  with  the  I)ogras  further 

to  the  west,  rather  than  with  the  Paharis  of  the  Simla  and  Kulu  hills. 

While  the  language  of  Mandi  is  widely  different  from  that  of  Kangra  in  its  general 
character,  it  does  agree  with  it  in  a few  points  which  we  may  here  note.  Id  all  other 
points  the  Western  Pahari  character  of  Mandeali  is  well  preserved. 

The  first  point  is  that  of  pronunciation,  which  agrees  rather  with  that  of  Kangra 
than  with  that  of  Kulu.  There  does  not  seem  to  be  any  tendency  to  pronounce  the 
ordinary  a like  the  6 of  ‘ hot  ’.  Thus  we  have  gliar , a house,  not  ghor.  In  the  north 
of  Mandi,  however,  we  do  come  across  occasional  instances  of  the  o-sound,  as  in  thondd, 
cold,  as  compared  with  standard  Maud  gall  thandd. 

So  also  the  common  Western  Paharl  interchange  of  d with  o or  u has  not  been  noted 
in  Mandeaji  proper,  although  a few  instances  have  been  noted  in  Mandeali  Paharl 
and  SuketT.  Thus  the  Mandeali  word  for  ‘ horse  ’ is  glibrd,  not  ghbro,  and  the  past 
participle  of  karnd,  to  do,  is  kit  a,  not  klto  or  kerb. 

Very  few  instances  of  the  dropping  of  an  initial  h have  been  noted,  and  the  transfer 
of  aspiration  in  such  words  as  gbhrd  for  glibrd  does  not  occur.  JI  is,  however,  some- 
times prefixed  as  in  hdkkhl,  an  eye. 

The  Western  Paharl  changes  of  ch  to  td,  of  j to  a and  of  t ( tr ) to  ch  do  not  seem 
to  occur. 

In  all  these  Mand6all  agrees  with  Kangri  as  against  Western  Paharl. 

In  declension,  Maudfiali  uses  the  postposition  jo  for  the  dative,  which  is  also  the 
ease  in  Kangri.  Although  the  same  postposition  occurs  in  other  Western  Pahari 
dialects — notably  in  Chamgali, — it  is  in  the  opinion  of  the  present  writer  always 
borrowed  from  the  West,  being  connected  by  origin  witli  the  Sindhi  jo,1  of. 

The  distinguishing  mark  of  the  Mandefili  future  is  not  the  Western  Pahari  Id,  but 
the  Kangri  ghc.  Compare  the  Inner  Siraji  t8llc-ul , I shall  strike,  with  the  Mandftali  and 
Kangri  mar-ghd. 

With  these  exceptions,  the  Mandeali  Grammar  essentially  agrees  with  Western 
Pahari,  as  will  be  evident  from  a consideration  of  the  following  pages,  and  we  are 
therefore  entitled  to  class  it  and  Suketl  as  Western  Pahari  languages,  affected  by  the 
neighbouring  Kangri. 


1 The  Kftftgri'/d  is  an  old  locative  of  an  obsolete  jd9  of ; and  it  is 
Sindhi  j6. 


this  jd  which  is  to  be  considered  as  identical  with  fchs 


72! 


MANPfeALT- 

For  particulars  as  to  the  locality  in  which  Standard  Handgali,  with  its  sub-varieties 
of  Northern  Mandgnli  and  Chhot£  BanghaJI,  is  spoken,  and  for  the  number  of  its 
speakers,  see  the  preceding  introductory  remarks. 

The  present  account  of  Mandfiali  Grammar  is  based  partly  on  the  notes  in  the  !tev. 
Grahamc  Bailey’s  Languages  of  the  Northern  Himalayas , and  partly  on  an  analysis  of 
the  subjoined  specimens.  These  specimens  consist  of  a version  of  the  parable  of 
tho  Prodigal  Son,  of  an  original  police  report,  and  of  the  usual  list  of  words  and 
sentences. 

Pronunciation. — As  explained  above  Standard  Mandgall  has  abandoned  the  pecu- 
liarities of  Western  Paharl  pronunciation.  The  letter  a is  sounded  as  in  Pafijabi,  and  not 
like  tho  6 in  ‘ hot  ’ . The  letters  a,  o and  u,  arc  not  interchangeable.  Ch  and  j show  no  traces 
of  being  pronounced  as  ts  and  z respectively,  and  the  change  of  t ( tr ) to  ch  has  not  been 
noted. 

An  initial  h does  not  disappear,  nor  is  the  aspiration  of  aspirated  consonants  trans- 
ferred as  in  gdhfd  for  ghord,  a horse.  In  the  word  hdkkhl , an  oye,  an  h has  been 
prefixed.  In  Northern  Mandgali,  however,  an  a docs  sometimes  become  6,  as  in  thdndd, 
cold ; while  in  the  mixed  dialect  of  Ohliota  Baiigahal,  the  termination  u for  d,  as  in 
chhohru,  a boy;  gudlii, a shepherd,  is  not  uncommon. 

NOUNS  . — Masculine  ladbliava  nouns  in  d form  their  nominative  plural  in  e,  and 
feminine  nouns  ending  in  a consonant  add  i.  In  North  Alandeall  and  Chhota  Banghall, 
the  latter  add  a,  instead  of  i.  Thus,  ghord,  a horse ; ghdre,  horses  : haihn , a sister ; 
baihni,  sisters:  N.  and  Chh.  B.  ded,  a sister ; deddd,  sisters.  In  the  case  of  all  other 
nouns  the  nominative  plural  is  the  same  as  the  nominative  singular. 

For  all  nouns,  all  other  cases  of  the  plural,  except  the  vocative,  are  the  same  as  the 
corresponding  cases  of  the  singular. 

The  Agent  case  (singular  and  plural)  is  formed  by  adding  e,  as  in  ghar,  a house ; 
ghare,  by  a house  or  houses : hdthi,  an  elephant ; hat  hie,  by  an  elephant  or  elephants. 
Tadbhava  masculine  nouns  ending  in  d,  drop  the  d before  adding  e.  Thus  ghord,  a 
horse ; ghdfe,  by  a horse,  or  horses. 

The  Oblique  form  (singular  and  plural)  of  tadbhaca  masculine  nouns  in  d,  is  made 
by  changing  the  d to  e.  Thus  ghord,  a horse,  old.  form  ghdre.  Masculine  nouns 
ending  in  a consonant  add  d for  tho  same  form.  Thus  ghar,  a house,  obi.  form  ghard. 
Feminine  nouns  ending  in  a consonant  add  i.  Thus  haihn,,  a sister,  obi.  form  baihni. 
In  N.  and  Chh.  B.  such  feminine  nouns  add  d instead  of  *,  as  in  ded,  a sister,  obi.  form 
deddd.  Note  the  doubling  of  the  final  d in  this  special  word.  In  the  case  of  all  other 
nouns,  the  oblique  form  is  the  same  as  the  nominative. 

The  Vocativo  singular  of  all  masculine  nouns  ends  in  d,  and  of  most  feminine  nouns 
in  e,  the  Vocative  plural  always  ends  in  6. 

VOIfc  IX,  rART  IV.  1 ' 


722 


WESTERN  PAHArI. 


Tlie  above  forms  are  conveniently  shown  in  the  following  table : — 


Nom.  Sing. 

I 

1 

1 

Nom.  Plur. 

Ag.  Sing, 
and 

Plur. 

Oblique 

Sing,  and 

Plur. 

Voc,  Sing. 

Voo.  Plur. 

ghGra,  a horse 

gherS 

ghdre 

I 

ghQrSd 

ghdreD 

ghar , a house 

ghar 

ghare 

ghara 

ghard 

gharO 

hathl,  an  elephant 

hathl 

hdthie 

hathl 

hathia 

hathto 

belt,  a daughter 

M{1 

bStle 

betl 

betle 

betid 

baihi i,  a sister 

baihn  f 

bathnli 

baihnl 

baihnl 

baihnlB 

ded,  a sister  (N.  and  Chh. 
B.) 

dSdda 

dedde 

■ dSdda 

dSddS 

deddO 

Just  as  the  Northern  Mandga]i  ded,  a sister,  doubles  its  final  oonsonant  before  termi- 
nations, so  does  the  Standard  Mandfiali  bab,  a father  ; nom.  plur.  and  obi.  bdbbd,  ag. 

bdbbe. 

The  Voc.  Sing,  is,  according  to  the  parable,  bdpu.  Northern  MandSSjl  has  the  nom. 
sing,  bdbbd,  declined  like  ghdfd. 

The  usual  postpositions  are : — 

Dative- Accusative — jo;  for  the  dative  we  also  have  kane,  to. 

Ablative — ge,  the,  from : kane,  with,  together  with ; with,  by  means  of : sdogi , 
with. 

After  Verbs  of  saying,  the  person  addressed  is  put  in  the  ablative  governed  by 
sdogi,  or  in  the  dative  governed  by  kane  or  jo.  Examples  of  all  these  will  be  found  in 
the  version  of  the  parable. 

Genitive  —rd  (masc.  sing.  obi.  and  plur.  re,  fern,  ri),  which,  as  usual,  is  adjectival. 
Locative — mavtjh  or  manj  hd. 

Adjectives. — As  usual,  only  adjectives  in  d,  are  declined, — masc.  sing.  obi.  and 
plur.  e,  fern.  i.  Comparison  is  indicated,  as  usual,  by  the  use  of  the  ablative,  as  in 
bciihni-ge  lammd,  taller  than  the  sister  ; sabbhi-ge  achchha,  better  than  all,  best. 

PEO  NOUNS. — The  first  two  Personal  Pronouns  are  declined  as  follows 
Sing.  I.  Thou. 


Nom. 

hau 

tS. 

Ag. 

mat 

tat 

ObL 

ma,  mah 

tu,  tuddh. 

Gen. 

merd 

terd. 

Nom. 

dsse 

tu8se. 

Ag- 

dssi 

tussS. 

Obi. 

dssd 

tussd. 

Gen. 

dssd-rd,  mhdrd 

tussd-rd. 

In  the  ablative  singular  with  the,  we  find  rndthS  and  tutthe.  N.  has  the  Dative- 
Accusative  mnnjo  and  tv-jo.  Ohh.  B.  uses  mat  as  well  as  h-au  for  * I ’.  It  makes  the 
Dative- Accusative  singular  minj o and  tijjd,  and  the  Ablative  singular  maiigd  and  tuggi. 


MAND$AJ.I.  723 


The  Demonstrative  Pronouns,  which  are  also  used  as  pronouns  of  the  third  person, 
are  thus  declined.  As  in  most  other  Western  Pahari  dialects  they  have  in  the  singular 
three  genders, — masculine,  feminine,  and  neuter : — 


• 

This, 

That. 

Maso. 

Pom. 

Neut. 

Masc. 

i 

Fem. 

Neut. 

Sing. 

Nom. 

eh 

eh 

eh 

se 

8* 

se 

Ag. 

fne,  inks,  el 

esse 

xddhte 

tine , iinhe f tel 

tesse 

tiddhte 

Obi.  . 
Plnr. 

Nom.  . 

es,  y%8 

• ess't 

iddhi  i 

tes 

V . _ 

tC88CL 

t iddhi 

, j 

ihtZ 

Jz r 

8QO 

Ag. 

tnhe 

tinhe 

Obi.  . 

Inha 

Ifnhd 

The  Relative  and  Interrogative  pronouns  are  thus  declined  : — 


Who.  I Who?  What? 


Maw. 

Fem. 

Neut. 

Masc. 

Fem. 

Neut. 

Sing. 

Nom. 

• 

js,  je 

i»,  js 

js,  je 

kun 

kun 

kya 

Ag. 

jlne , jinhe 

jesse 

jiddhie 

lies 

kessv 

[ kiddhie 

Obi. 

• 

• XJ 

jes 

jessa 

jiddhl 

kes 

kessi 

| kiddhl 

1 

\.  . _ 

j 

v 

i 

-J 

Plnr. 

"V” 

Nom. 

• 

• l/fi f 

.leo 

kun 

Ag. 

• 

• 

jtnke 

kfnhe 

Obi. 

• 

jlnhd 

ktnhd 

In  N.  and  Chh.  B.  the  A gent  singular  masculine  is  jinle  and  kunie. 

In  all  the  above  there  are  varieties  of  spelling.  Thus  we  meet  asse  instead  of  asae. 


and  tyea  or  tia,  instead  of  tea. 

The  Indefinite  pronouns  are  hoi  (obi.  he  si),  anyone,  some  one,  and  kichh,  anything, 
something. 

The  following  additional  pronominal  forms  may  be  noted 
Jiar-kdi,  whoever ; har-kichh,  whatever. 

erhd,  or  ehra,  like  this ; so  tefhd  or  tehfa , like  that,  and  so  on. 
itnd,  this  much,  and  so  on. 
ibbe  or  ibbe,  now  ; tebbe,  then,  and  so  on. 
etthi  or  yetthi,  here ; tetthi,  there,  and  so  on. 

vot.  IX,  PART  iv. 


4z  2 


724 


WESTERN  PAHArI. 


VEEBS. — A.— Auxiliary  Verbs  and  Verbs  Substantive. 

The  verb  substantive  is  ha  for  the  present,  and  thd  for  the  past.  Both  are  adjecti- 
val, and  neither  changes  for  person,  becoming  hS  and  the,  respectively,  when  the  subject 
is  masculine  plural,  and  hi  and  thl  respectively  when  it  is  feminine  (singular  or  plural). 

When  the  pronoun  eh  precedes  ha,  the  two  join  together  and  becomo  eha,  this  is. 

North  Mand&'dl  differs  slightly.  ‘ I am  * is  he,  and  ‘ he  is  ’ is  ha  or  he.  The  past  is 
thid,  plur.  thie ; fem.  thi. 

B.— Active  Verb. — Besides  the  usual  array  of  Verbal  nounsand  participles,  Mandft- 
ali  has  a participle  indicating  state  or  condition,  as  e.g.  baithi-rd,  in  a state  of  being 
seated  ; mdri-rd , in  a condition  of  being  beaten.  The  rd  is  either  the  genitive  postposi- 
tion, or  else  the  past  participle  of  the  verb  raihnd,  to  remain,  and  changes  for  gender  and 
number  in  the  usual  way. 

The  following  is  the  conjugation  of  the  verb  mama,  to  beat. 

The  Infinitive  is  formed  by  adding  nd  to  the  root,  which,  as  usual,  becomes  nd  after 
r or  l.  Thus  paund,  to  fall ; baithnd,  to  sit ; mama,  to  beat.  The  verb  ‘ to  como  ’ is 
dund,  but  in  North  Mandgall  it  is  aund,  and  in  Chhota  Bangliali  it  is  and. 

The  Present  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  da  to  the  root,  as  in  marda,  striking. 
If  the  root  ends  in  a vowel  or  a simple  A,  then  ndd  is  added.  Thus,  from  jand,  to  go, 
jandd,  going.  The  following  present  participles  are  irregular  : — 
hond,  to  become  pres.  part,  hundd 

aund,  to  come  ,,  aundd  or  aundd 

raihnd  (N.  rdhnd),  to  remain  „ rahndd  (N.  rdhndd ) 

The  Present  Participle  is  usod  in  incoptive  compounds,  marda  Idgd,  he  began  to  die. 
It  is  also  used  as  an  infinitive  of  purpose,  as  in  se  sungar  chardndd  bheji  ditd , he  sent 
him  to  feed  swine. 

The  oblique  form  of  the  present  participle  is  used  as  an  Adverbial  Participle,  ns 

in  mdrde , while  striking,  and  when  hi  is  added  to  this,  wc  have  mdrde-hi,  immediately 

on  striking. 

The  Past  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  yd  to  the  root.  Thus  mdryd,  struck. 
A. variant  spelling  of  this  is  mitred,  which  more  nearly  indicates  the  exact  pronuncia- 
tion. Its  masculine  plural  is  mare,  and  its  feminine  mdri.  The  following  past  parti- 
ciples are  irregular : — 


hand,  to  become 

past  part. 

hud  (N.  hod) 

marnd,  to  die 

I* 

mud 

duna  (N.  aund,  Clih.B.  ond),  to  come 

99 

ayd 

jand,  to  go 

99 

ged  or  gayd 

paund,  to  fall 

99 

pea  (IS . paied)  or  payd 

laina,  to  take 

99 

led i or  layd 

leaund  or  lyav.nd,  to  bring 

99 

lei  dyd 

raihpa  (N.  rdhnd),  to  remain 

99 

rchdt  rahyd,  or  rd  ■%. 

pind,  to  drink 

99 

pita 

dend,  to  give 

99 

ditta  or  ditd 

kartid,  to  do 

99 

kitd 

laggnd,  to  be  joined 

99 

lagd  or  lagd 

MAND&iLI. 


725 


khdnd,  to  eat  past  part.  khddhd 

baithnd  or  baSnd,  to  sit  ,,  bat  lb  (com.  son.)  or  baithyd 

The  feminines  of  ged,  ped,  and  led , are  gal,  pal,  and  lai,  respectively. 

The  Static  Participle  referred  to  above,  is  formed  by  taking  the  past  participle, 
changing  the  final  yd  to  l,  and  adding  rd.  Thus,  mama,  to  strike,  past  participle 
mdryd,  Static  Participle  marl-rd,  in  the  condition  of  being  beaten.  As  't  ill  be  seen 
from  the  specimens,  this  participle  is  of  frequent  occurrence. 

From  the  irregular  past  participles,  we  have  the  following,  slightly  irregular 


forms  : — 

hud,  become 

static  part. 

hui-rd 

mud,  dead 

99 

mui-rd 

dyd,  come 

99 

ai-rd 

ged  or  gay  a,  gone 

99 

gel-rd  or  gai-rd 

ped  or  payd,  fallen 

99 

pel-rd  or  pai-rd 

led  or  layd,  taken 

99 

lei-rd  or  lai-rd 

rehd,  rd  or  rahyd,  remained 

99 

rahi-rd 

pita,  drunk 

99 

plti-rd 

dittd  or  ditd,  given 

99 

dittl-rd  or  dltl-rd 

kitd,  done 

99 

kltl-rd 

Idgd  or  lagd,  joined 

99 

Idgl-rd  or  lagl-rd 

khddhd,  eaten 

99 

khddhl-rd 

batth.  baithyd,  seated 

99 

batthi-rd 

Although  it  is  said  above  that  this  participle  is  made  by  changing  yd  to  i,  this  method 
of  formation  is  only  given  for  practical  reasons.  Possibly  the  form  mart  in  mdri-rd  is 
really  a conjunctive  participle,  and  mdri-rd  is  equivalent  to  the  Hindi  mdr-rahd.  It 
would  not,  however,  be  safe  to  say  that  the  static  participle  is  formed  from  the  conjunc- 
tive participle,  for  the  latter  is  sometimes  widely  different  from  the  past  participle,  and 
then  the  rule  would  not  apply.  For  example,  the  conjunctive  participle  of  jdnd,  to  go, 
is  jdl,  and  the  past  participle  is  ged.  The  static  participle  is  gel-rd , not  jdi-rd.  The 
probable  explanat  ion  of  this  is  that  gel  is  here  an  irregular  conjunctive  participle,  form- 
ed from  ged  on  the  false  analogy  of  hut  from  hud.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  possible  that 
the  rd  is  really  the  genitive  postposition,  which  is  added  to  adjectives  in  lviuthali  and 
elsewhere  without  changing  the  meaning  (see  p.  380). 

The  Future  Passive  Participle  is  the  same  in  form  as  the  Infinitive.  Thus 
mama,  it  is  to  be  struck  ; masc.  sing.  obi.  and  plur.  mdrne;  fern,  mdrnl.  So,  in  the 
parable,  we  have  aunt,  the  share  (fcm.)  which  is  to  come  to  me,  and  other 
examples. 

The  Conjunctive  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  l to  the  root.  Thus  mart, 
having  struck,  but  this  form  is  only  used  in  compound  verbs.  When  used  independently 
M or  Jcaue  is  added.  Thus  mdrl-ke  or  marl-kane,  having  struck.  The  following  are 
slightly  Ifcregulftr  : — 

pannd,  to  fall  Conjunctive  part,  pail-lce,  etc. 
dund,  to  come  „ » Ai-ke,  etc. 

hand,  to  become  „ „ hfd-ke,  etc. 


726 


WESTJblBN  PA1I A1U. 


The  Noun  of  Agency  is  formed  by  adding  lodld  to  the  oblique  infinitive.  Thus 
mdrne-wdld , a striker. 

The  Imperative  second  person  singular  is  the  same  in  form  ’as  the  root.  Its  plural 
adds  d.  Thus,  mar,  strike  thou  ; mdra,  strike  ye. 

A Polite  Imperative  adds  le  to  the  root.  Thus  mdriS,  please  to  strike;  khdie,  ploaso 
to  eat. 

The  Imperative  of  raihnd  (N.  and  Chh.  B.  rahnd),  to  remain,  is  raih  (N.  and  Chh.B. 
rah),  plural  rahd,  and  of  laind,  to  take,  lai,  plural  lad.  In  North  Mandgali  and  Chliota 
Baughfili,  the  verb  amid,  to  come,  has  its  2nd  person  Imperative  a , both  singular  and  plural. 

The  Old  Present  and  Present  Subjunctive  is  not  given  by  Mr.  Bailey.  In  the 
Parable  there  is  one  example, — hand,  (I  am  not  worthy  that)  I should  be  made  (thy  son). 
What  the  forms  of  the  other  persons  and  of  the  plural  are,  I am  not  able  to  say.  Mr. 
Bailey,  however,  for  North  MandeaU  gives  a similar  form  as  optional  for  the  first 
singular  future. 

The  Present  is  formed  by  adding  a to  tho  root,  to  which  the  verb  substantive  hd  is 
added.  Thus,  hau  mara-hd,  I strike.  The  mdra  does  not  change  for  number  or  person, 
but  the  hd  changes  for  gender  and  number,  but  not  for  person. 


Singular. 

Plural. 

1 

Mnsc. 

Fein. 

l Maw. 

Fem. 

11 

! 

1 

i 

2 

i- 

mira-hd 

mard'hi 

mar  d' he 

mara-ht 

3J 

i 

i 

There  are  a few  irregular  forms.  Thus,  from  : — 


pau.nd,  to  fall 

pres. 

paua-hd, 

hand,  to  become 

liua-hd 

dund,  to  come 

99 

dud-hd 

raihnd,  to  remain 

99 

raha-hd  or  ra-hd 

laind,  to  take 

99 

laha-hd  or  la-hd 

jdnd,  to  go 

91 

jdhd-hd  or  jd-hd 

khdnd,  to  eat 

99 

khdha-hd  or  kha-hd 

denu,  to  give 

99 

deha-hd 

A Present  Definite  is  formed,  as  in  Hindi  from  the  present  participle,  with  the 
present  of  the  verb  substantive.  Thus,  hau  nidrdd- hd,  I am  striking.  Or  we  may  add 
to  the  present  participle  the  Static  participle  of  lagged,  to  be  joined,  with  the  verb  sub- 
stantive. Thus,  hau  mdrdd  Idgi-rd  hd,  I am  striking,  I am  in  the  act  (or  condition)  of 
striking. 

The  participles  of  course  change  for  gender  and  number,  as  in  sed  mdrdi-hl  or  se9 
mdrdi  Idgi-ri  hi,  they  (fern.)  are  striking. 


mandEa.^1.  727 

The  Imperfect  is  formed  on  the  same  principles  as  the  present  definite,  substituting 
tha  {the,  thi)  for  ha.  Thus,  ha  a mdrdd-thd  or  hau  mardd  lagl-rd  thd , I Avas  striking. 
Or  it  may  be  formed  on  the  analogy  of  the  simple  present,  as  in  hau  mdra-thd,  I was 
striking. 

The  Fast  Conditional  is.  as  usual,  the  present  participle  (changing  for  gender  and 
number)  alone.  Thus,  hau  mdrdd, (if)  I had  struck,  or  I should  have  struck  (if). 

The  Future  tense,  as  has  been  previously  stated,  agrees  with  Kangri  and  hot  Avith 
Western  Pahari.  It  has  two  forms.  The  first  is  made,  as  in  Kangri,  by  adding  ghd  to 
the  root.  Thus,  mdrghd,  (I)  shall  strike,  (thou)  Avilt  strike,  (he)  will  strike.  This  does 
not  change  for  person,  but,  if  the  subject  is  in  the  masculine  plural  it  becomes  mdrghe, 
and  if  the  subject  is  feminine  (singular  or  plural)  it  becomes  rndrghi. 

If  the  root  ends  in  a vowel,  this  is  liable  to  nasalization  before  the  ghd,  as  will  be 
seen  in  the  list  of  irregular  futures  given  below. 

The  second  form  of  the  future  is  made  by  adding  ahg  or,  if  the  root  ends  in  a vowel, 
ng  to  the  root.  Thus,  mdrang.  This  does  not  change  for  gender,  number  or  person. 

The  following  futures  are  slightly  irregular : — 

paund,  to  fall  future  paughd  or  panng 

bond.  to  become  ,,  hwghd  or  liung 

duff’d  (N.  aund ) to  come  „ dughd  (N\  aughd ) or  dung  or  dong 

leaund  or  lyaund,  to  bring  ,,  lydiighd  or  lydung 

jdnd,  to  go  ,,  jnglul,  (N '.  janghd,  Clili.  B.  jdiighd)  or  jdng 

khdiid,  to  cat  ,,  lchaghd  or  khdhg 

plnd,  to  drink  „ piglid  or  ping 

dend,  to  give  „ deghd  (X.  dighd)  or  deny 

raihnd,  to  remain  „ rahanghd  or  rahahg 

laind,  (N.  Ifind),  to  take  „ langhd  (N.  laglid,  law ) or  lang 

In  the  second  specimen,  in  the  word  havtahg-jl,  it  Avill  be  carried  out,  the  syllable  ji 
has  been  added  to  the  future.  This  is  probably  a mere  honorific  suffix.  In  Kashmiri, 
a future  imperative  is  formed  by  the  addition  of  the  syllable  si,  which  is  by  origin  also 
this  ji. 

The  tenses  formed  from  the  Past  Participle  are  formed  exactly  as  in  Hindi,  and 
require  fcAV  remarks.  The  following  are  sufficient  examples : — 
hau  geo,  I went. 
mat  mdrya,  t struck  him. 
hau  ged-hd,  I have  gone. 
mat  mard-hd,  I have  struck  him. 
havt  ged-thd , I had  gone. 
mat  mdra-thd,  I had  struck  him. 

In  the  Pi4acha  languages  thero  are  a number  of  verbs,  of  which  the  past  participles 
are  always  construed  in  the  feminine.  Thus,  in  Kashmiri,  the  verb  wntgnu,  to  be  burnt, 
in  the  past  tense  is  always  feminine,  as  in  tout8es,  he  was  burnt,  literally,  a (feminine) 
burning  was  done  to  him.  Similarly,  in  Mandeall  Mr.  Bailey  points  out  that  the  verb 
bdhnd,  to  beat,  is  always  feminine  in  the  past  tenses,  as  in  mat  tee-jo  hdhi,  I bent  him, 
literally,  by  me  to  him  a (feminine)  beating  was  done. 


728 


WESTERN  PAHARt. 


The  Passive  Voice  is  formed,  as  in.  Hindi,  by  conjugating  the  past  participle  with 
jdnd,  to  go.  Thus,  nidryd  jdnd,  to  he  struck. 

Causals  are  formed  as  in  Hindi.  Thus  sundna,  to  cause  to  hear ; pldtid.,  to  cause 
to  drink  ; charnd  or  char  and,  to  graze  (cattle).  Note  tho  following: — 

pailnd,  to  fall,  Causal  pa  y a 

khdnd,  to  eat,  „ khuaiid  or  khivand 

jdnd,  to  go,  „ guatia  or  gwdna,  to  cause  to  go,  to  lose. 

Compound  Verbs. 

Intensive  compounds  are  very  common.  Thus,  del-detid,  to  give  away. 
Inceptives  have  been  dealt  with  under  the  head  of  tho  present  participle. 
Frequentatives  are  made  as  in  Hindi.  Thus,  mdryd  karnd , to  strike  frequently. 
Note  khayd  (not  khadhd)  karnd,  to  eat  regularly. 


[ No.  I.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


730 


Central  Group. 


WESTERN  PAUARt  (MANpSA^I). 

Specimen  I. 


>r<52^ 

? 

, 

? 

44 

A&f) 

& 

•s  »\ 

rt7c£c 

n 

'4* 

£ 

sA 

&S>* 

£ a 

<&? 

'4% 

yr?c& c 

S*£ 

£t>- 

<5)A 

*1 

ife 

£ls$ 

4<s$ 

? 

f ft 

* 

A?' 

s/r 

AJWii 

77ml- 

• 

*i4 

SSl 

nTTTtfcc^ 

H*5 

<«*■ 

w 

Tfitlot ? 

4W 

731 


[ No.  I.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 


.WESTERN  PALIARI  (MAND^ALI). 


Specimen  I. 


TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 


Ekl-inanukha-re  dul 
One-man-of  two 


gabhru  the. 
sons  were. 


Matthe- 

By-the-younger- 


gabhrue 

son 


apne-babba-saogi  bblya 
his-own-fat  her- to  i t-was-sai  d 


jo,  * ma-jo  lato-phate-rl  bad  jo 

that,  ‘ me-to  property -of  share  which 


auni  {for  auni)  t£sa  dtil-de.’ 
is-to-come  that  give-away .’ 


Ta  tSs-ro-babbo 
Then  by-his-father 


5.  tes-ri  bad  late-phate-rl  tes-jo  dol- 

6.  him-of  theshare  the-property-of  him-to  icas-gioen- 


ditt.  Thorhe-dina-gc  prant  tinlio- 

aicay.  A-few-days-from  after  bu-that- 


matthe-gabhrue  lata-pbata  sabli  katth 
younger-son  thc-property  all  together 


kara-ke 

made-having 


bare-dura-rc  tnulkba-jo 
a-great-distance-of  conntry-to 


4gjbala-gaya.  Tettlil  luchpana-manjh  sabli 

it-was-gone-away.  There  debauchery-in  all 

10.  lata-plia^a  gwai-dlta. 

10.  the-property  was-caused-to-go. 

VOl  IX,  TAUT  IV. 


JSjo 

When-that 


tlnhe  sabli 
by -him  all 


732 

WESTERN  FAHl^l. 

5hv 

H 

2 

unrtt 

*4yp 

w4 

4 

•* 

*i 

stof 

** 

w4 

<l*f  3 

$ 

s# 

atorf 

? 

S* 

• 

*? 

£\s 

ft 

'<£$ 

? 

k 

4*u 

*#4 

■4-ic^ 

5* 

$srA 

H 4 

£ 

j9i 

e* 

j9w4 

£ ^ « 

r 

?BT  v$n<r 

w 

CijSft 

46 

4? 

vt 

k 

* 

S'  «i 

$T 

£S* 

A 

ttS 

3k 

v£& 

MANpfiA^I. 


733 


lata-phata  gwai-cbborya,  ta  tes-mulkha 

property  was-completely-caused-to-go,  then  (in-)  that -country 

naka}  bln  paya.  Ta  se  t&s-ra, 

a-famine  also  fell.  . Then  he  of-him 

mattha  putr  bhukha  marda  gala  (for  laga).  Ts  se 

the-younger  son  hungry  dying  began.  Then  he 

t£s-mulkha-re  kfesi-barc-admi- 
that-country-of  a-certain-great-man- 

5.  nere  jai  rabya.  T§l  tlnhe-bare- 

6.  near  having-gone  remained.  Then  by-that-great- 

admie  se  sungar  eharamla  apne- 
man  he  swine  feeding  his-own- 

kbetra-dohrl-mafijha-jo  bbeji-dlta. 

Jields-lands-in-to  was-sent. 

Ta  se  apnc-mana-manjh  eli  bujhda 

Then  he  his-own- mind-in  this  considering 

laga  je,  ‘ jlnbii-sata-jo  eo  sungar  kbaya 

began  that,  ‘ what-g rains  (acc.)  these  swine  eating 

10.  kara-he,  haS  (for  kau)  bln  Inba-sata-kane  apna  pet 

10.  doing-are,  I also  these-grains-with  my-own  belly 

bbarda.’  KI  je  bor-kete  tes-jo  kbane-jo 

(I-)  would- have- filled.'  Why  that  otlier-anywhere  him- to  eating-Jor 

jurda  naht  tba.  Jaje  se  sudhl-manjb 

being-got  not  was.  IV  hen- 1 hat  he  sense-in 


734 


WESTERN  PAHAkI. 


rdA 

£ 

& 

44? 

41 

4$* 

& 

?a 

mp 

Oft 

OUT 

§iA 

*i 

«* 

•i 

* 

•5jUT!T 

« 

jOrj? 

to 

£ 

s' 

4x 

a 

£f 

2? 

•mi 

i 

gWtjr 

sv 

5^ 

J 

-sir 

4S£ 

#f 

W 

A*t 

43 

m-jJ 

u 

&£ 

•4><5v 

& 

❖f 

■*}$ 

cWg 

«A 

4 

s* 

* 

4? 

3& 

w4 

to 

JWt 

^5 

mandEi^I. 


735 


aya,  ta  bolda  laga  je,  * mere-babba-re 

came , then  saying  he-began  that , ‘ my-father-of 

dliyar  kitne-lil  nokra-ckak  ra- jo  roti 

daily  koto-many -even  scrvants-domestics-to  bread 

khane-jo  paks-hi,  hOr  liaS  bbukha  marya  kara- 
eatmg-for  is-bein  g-cooked,  and  I hungry  dying  doing - 

ha.  MS,  apne-babba-nere-jo  cbale- 

am.  For-me  my-own-father-near-to  going- 

5.  jana,  bur  tfis-nere  jai-ke  ebra 

6.  it-is-to-be-gone , and  him-near  gone-having  such 

bolna  je,  “ bapu-ji,  ba8  tera  hor 

is-to-be-said  that , “ father-sir , I of- thee  and 

snrga-ra  bhulan-har  hui-cbukya,  bun 

heaven-of  forgetter  became- completely  t now 

ha§  tf*ra  gabhru  kib5  banfi ; m5-jo  &pne- 

I thy  son  how  shall- I-be-made ; me  ( acc .)  thine-own- 

hori-nokra-chakra-sahl  samilu-laa.”  * 

other-servants-domestics-like  consider.”  * 

10.  Utblikane  apne-babba-nere-jo  chajya. 

10.  Arisen- having  his-own-father-near-to  he-icent. 

Ajha  pujjya  nalil  tha,  dura-ge  t6s-re 

Still  arrived  not  he- was,  distance-from  by-him-of 

babbS  aonda  ( for  aunda)  deklu-laya,  hor  daya  al- 

by-t  he- fat  her  coming  he-tcas-obscrvcd,  and  compassion  arrio - 


736 

JTV5 

& 

*8» 

WESTERN  PAHA$J. 

*4 

<4 

?$ 

4bt 

«r 

t* 

2- 

4wfi^ 

44 

4>t 

£ 

4a 

4) 

3S 

£nft 

M 

<$'Ai 

3* 

t 

•\* 

Ax 

*4 

k\ 

AjP 

Xitil 

m5?¥ 

*&£ 

£ 

vs4i 

Her 

*& 

2 

<5*? 

44\ 

A ft 

at 

£ 

hT 

4*& 

>t?? 

e^r 

Ofr 

44 

A 

3* 

?’ 

A 

■ w 

K$V 

<*>4 

vSSr 

M* 

*5 

i£Vs> 

£ 

the' 

3 

a Co 

»fcs£ 

Hi 

ffe 

*■ 

4*« 

S t. 


MANDftiLl.  737 

gal.  T§  da6ri-kan6  gaya,  hor  t£s- 

ed.  Then  run-having  he-went,  and  him- 

kanfi  bakot  karl  milya,  hor  pyar  klta. 

to  much  having-done  he-w  as-embraced,  and  love  was- made. 

T5  tlnhe  apnS-babba-kane  bolya  je, 

Then  by -him  his-own-father-to  it-was-said  that, 

' bapu-ji,  had  bliuli-gaya,  tussa-ra  hor 
1 father -sir,  I forgot,  you-of  and 

* 

0.  * sarga-ra  dendar  hua,  hun  hao 

6.  heaven-of  debtor  I-became,  now  I 

Idhi  lagk  nah?  ha,  je  tussa-ra  putr  banO.’ 

( of-)thi8  worthy  not  am,  that  you-of  son  I- may -be- made* 

T5  t6s-re  babbe  apne-nokra -chakra- jo 

Then  by-him-of  by-the-father  his-own-servants-domestics-to 

bolya  je,  ‘kbare  kbare  kapre  kadhi-lyao, 

it-was-said  that , * good  good  clothes  bring-forth, 

hor  Ss-jo  panhy  ai-deya (/or  dea) ; hor  hatlia-rl 

and  this-one-to  put-on ; and  hand-of 

'*• 

10.  loundrl,  paira-re  jute  bhi  panhy ai-dfcya {for  dea) ; 

10.  ring,  feet-of  shoes  also  put-on; 

h6r  6rl-ra  rubh  lyai-ke,  kati-ke  khale, 

and  enclosure-of  ram  brought-having,  killed-having  lel-ns-eat, 

t|  blka  thand  pais.  Mera  8h  gabhru 

then  the-breast  cool  let-us-cause-to-fall.  My  this  son 

5 a 

rou  IX,  WBT  IT. 


738 


W28TJBBN  TAHITI. 


ni 

A 

*Mf 

VA 

A 

jft»£3 

feK 

*? 

3nt 

<-i 

4*5-5 

#- 

4 

£ 

■H? 

v*f  4F 

44 

4 

At 

S' 

4U> 

3> 

445^ 

ft 

% 

HVi 

2 

•$£> 

£» 

4*4 

F 

•*4 

S' 

ft  £ 

sh3 

S 

S?  4^ 

3v4 

«# 

35r 

3f 

4£ 

B*t 

* 

v£ 

•$*? 

4^ 

F 

31 

F* 

• 

4\» 

*A 

a*ft 

M 

4 

mi 

** 

MANpftl  Ll. 


739 


muS-barabar  tha,  hun  jiundd  hua; 
dead-equal-to  teas,  now  living  he-became ; 

gwaohhi  gaira  tlia,  hun  milya.’ 

lost  ' in-a-gone-condition  he-ivas,  now  he-is-got.' 

kbusi  hug. 
happy  they -became. 

It  or  tes-ra  bara  gabbru  khetra 
And  him-of  the-elder  son  ( in-)the-field 


5. 

tha. 

_ /V 

Ja 

sae  {for  se)  ghard-nere  aya. 

ta 

B. 

was. 

When 

he  the-house-near  came. 

then 

t6s-jo 

git 

hor 

nachne-ri  kati-sot 

him-to 

singing 

and 

dancing-of  tone 

pal. 

Tl 

tin  he 

ekl-cbakra-jo  sadai- 

fell. 

Then 

by -him 

a-servant-to  called- 

ke 

puchliya 

je,  * eh  kya  ha  ?’ 

Tinhe 

having  it-was-asked  that,  * this  what  is  V By -him 


tgs-gS  bolya  je,  ‘ tera  bhai  alra-ha, 

him-to  it -was- said  that,  * thy  brother  in-a-come-conditioh-is, 

10.  hor  t&re-babbe  orl-ra  bakra  katira-ha, 

10.  and  by-thy  father  the-cnclosure-of  goat  in-a-kttled-condition-im 

kis-bastS  j6  s3  tera  bhal  raji  kbusi 

what-for  that  he  thy  brother  contented  happy 

aya.’  TS  s6  jhikhi-gaya,  hor  ghara-bhittar 

oatne Then  he  angered-went,  and  the-house-within 

vor*  IX,  PAST  IV. 


Ta  raji 
Then  contented 


5 b i 


740  WESTERN  PAIlA^f. 


* 

4Jl 

V* 

a 

aV 

44  4s*- 

3* 

- h 

j£)J 

3 

44 

F 

<£ 

£ 

Xia-fl 

« 

V4  ’ 

% 

<sr 

« 

AH 

cSW 

' at 

« 

#4 

■ I . 

V§a 

'N 

Jl 

ssi 

ai? 

+ft 

»{J 

• *\ 
*e 

%8l 

io*v7 

A 

£l£ 

*\ 

e 

«ff 

4J4  S' 

n«41 

a* 

5i 

S» 

£5 

4as 

*J4 

s? 

3ft 

4®te 

m 

»§\S 

Stf' 

f?' 

• *\ 

£? 

3? 

4Qi 

h 5"  y^5 


4*2  2$  4^g 


mandEaiJ.  741 

ja!  nabf  nlchka.  Ts  t£s-ra  bab  bahar  aya. 

going  not  (?)  wished.  Then  him,- of  the-J ather  outside  came , 

i*. 

fior  sc  manai-dita.  tlnhe  apne- 

and  he  was-remonstrated-with.  Then  by- him  his-own- 

* 

bab&rjo  bata  dlta  je,  ‘itni  barsa- 
father-to  answer  was-given  that , * so-many  years - 

'll 

ge  ba8  terl  tahel  karya-kara-lia,  hor 

from'  1 thy  service  .doing -continually -am,  and 


tuddh*ge 

duji 

mai  nahi 

kiti ; 

par 

thee-from 

difference 

by -me  not 

was-done  ; 

but 

tai  kadhi  ma-jo 

ek  chbelu 

bhi  nahi 

by-thee 

ever  me-to 

a kid 

even  not 

dlta. 

je  ha§ 

apne-satblya-jo  bln 

was-given,  that  I my-own-companions-to  also 

mast!  khwanda,  bur  jSje  tcra  eh  gabbru 

afeast  might-haoe-given-to-eat , and  when- that  thy  this  son 


aya,  jiuhc 

terl 

khati-kamal 

luchl 

randa- 

came , by-whom 

thy 

property 

vicious 

harlots- 

jo  khwai, 

tgs-re  katthe  tai 

mota 

bakra 

to  was-given-to-eat, 

him-of  for 

by-thee 

a-fat 

goat 

ka^ya.’ 

T5  tlnbe 

bolya 

F, 

1 he  putr,  tuu  (for  to) 

toas-slmghteredi  * 

Then  by-him 

it-icas-8aid  that. 

* O son,  thou 

sada-bi  mab-nere  ba,  -je  mSr§  ( for  mCri)  kbati- 

•ever-even  me-near  art,  what  my  property ■ 


742  WESTERN  PAHARl. 

4>te  * "4  j|  « Pi  vS 


''sifi  ? -«i  <££  33  M 


JSjft  ^ ^ 5? 


4 ^ a&  £>g  v5» 


™ i 4 *t  nd 


kamai-ra  ha,  b©  eabh  t©ra  ha,  par 

eaminge-of  is,  that  all  thine  is,  but 


iddhi-r©  katth©  bakra  katya,  hor 

this-of  far  a-goat  was-slaughtered,  and 


khusi  hft©,  j©  t©ra  ©h  bhai 

happy  we-became,  that  thy  this  brother 


l©kh©  tha,  6©  jiunda  d©khya;  hor 

like  was , he  living  was- seen;  and 


raji 

contented 


muo- 

deadm 


gwachi-gaira  tha,  s©  mili-gaya.* 

in- a-lost -gone- condition  was,  he  teas- got.’ 


[No.  2.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


714 


Central  Group.. 


WESTERN  PAllART  (MANDfiALT). 

Specimen  II. 


ft 

MM 

v 

»v 

<3P£  t *l*§^ 

*"\  *~s 

4 

k-S3*  4<££ 

f&Pt 

.% 

s E§tf“UH 

3 

*4^  4m 

eQ* 

-£.$£}  4^  AVd 

& hn2  wA  £j?t 


74.5 


[No.  2.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAHARl  (MAljipEApl). 

Specimen  II. 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 

SrI-sam.  74-r6,  Kill  ak -par  10,  arji  IJarabaga-ro 

Prosperous-year  74-in-of  Kdtik-date  10,  representation  Hdrdbdg-of 


TIianC'dara-Nantrama-  hor  Negi-Sapahl-ri  chi,  jc 
Tlidneddr-A  it  ant- Bdm-  and  Negi-  Constable-of  this-is,  that 


Katnk-par  14  Musramau  Onjra  Kbadwaa  Bagsa-jo 

Kdtdi-date  14  Tlie-Mwalmdn  Gujrd  Khudd  Balchsh-to 


Sapahl-sath  bhejuc-ra  hukam  aya.  'la  Sapalri 

the-conslahle-icith  sending-of  order  came.  Then  the-constable 


5.  .TaS-Sifigb  bhejya. 

5.  Tai-Hingh  teas -sen  t ( -for- h im) . 


Ta  ch  Kbadwaa  Bags  jarlra 

Then  this  Khudd  Bakhsh  in-a- fevered-condition 


aukha  ha. 
very-ill  is. 


llandne  jog  ha  nalu. 
(For-)  walking  fit  he-is  not. 


Khadwaa-Bagso  bolya 
By-Khudd-  Bakhsh  it-was-said 


j®»  *ja  haS  afm  hung,  aGng.  Ibbc  jarlra 

•hat,  ‘ when  I well  will-be,  I-tcill-come.  Now  in-a-fevered-condition 


<? 

a»kha  ha.’»  Ta**'  araj  likhi-bhejl.  Jc  hukam  aoug,  se  bartang-]I. 

try  ill  I-am.'  Therefore  representation  was-written-and-sent.  What  order  will-come , that  will-be-carried-out. 

vm>  «,  rm  'ft.  60 


746 


MAfsipfeALT  PAHAl?T. 

As  already  stated,  the  Paliarl  dialect  of  Mandfiall  is  a mixed  form  of  speech,  partly 
resembling  Standard  Mandga]!,  and  partly  resembling  Innor  Siraji.  A brief  notice 
pointing  out  where  it  dilTers  from  Standard  MandSajI  will  suffice.  Por  materials  we 
havo  a short  folk-tale,  a statement  made  in  court  by  an  accused  person,  and  the  usual 
list  of  words  and  sentences  given  on  pp.  7 69  ff . 

In  pronunciation  wc  notice  the  occasional  prefixing  of  an  h before  a vowel,  just  as 
in  the  Mand&Ui  hdkkhi , an  eye.  So  here  we  have  bandar , within,  and  sanghe , not 
sange,  with.  A noteworthy  change  is  the  word  mangsar,  the  name  of  a certain  month 
( N ovember-Decembcr) , a corruption  of  the  Sanskrit  mdrgaSirah,  Here  wo  have  rg, 
first  becoming  gg,  and  then  ng.  The  Western  P'ahari  change  of  tr  to  ch  occurs  in  the 
word  for  * three  which  is  either  the  Inner  Siraji  chin  or  the  MandgaJI  true. 

The  declension  of  nouns  closely  resembles  the  Standard.  Ghord,  a horse,  makes  its 
oblique  form  and  its  nominative  plural  ghbre.  Other  examples  are  chachd,  an  uncle, 
obi.  chit c he  ; thdnd,  a police-station,  obi.  thane ; chandranid,  the  moon,  chandrame  (ag. 
case)  ; dhydrd,  a day,  dhydre  (loc.). 

Ohar , a house,  makes  its  oblique  singular,  as  in  the  standard,  ghard,  but  this  form  is 
also  used  for  the  locative  ( c.g . in  sentences  223  and  226).  So  pahdr,  a mountain, 
pahdrd ; hath , a hand,  hatha ; and  hah,  a father,  babhd , doubling  the  b as  in  the 
standard. 

Most  feminine  nouns  ending  in  consonants  havo  the  oblique  form  in  d as  in  Inner 
Siraji.  Thus,  bhin,  a sister,  bhlnd ; maw,  a mother,  mdwa ; gall,  a word,  galld.  But 
somotimes  we  havo  the  MandSall  i,  as  in  pith,  the  back,  obi.  form  pitthi,  with  doubling 
of  the  t and  shortening  of  the  vowel. 

The  Pronouns  are  the  same  as  in  Standard  MandSall.  As  additional  forms,  we  may 
note  mat  used  at  the  end  of  the  second  specimen  for  had,  I ; tujjb  (in  the  first  specimdh), 
to  thee. 

The  plural  geuitives  of  the  first  two  personal  pronouns  are  hamha-rd,  our,  and 
tumha-rd,  your,  and  * thine  ’ is  thdrd,  instead  of  terd. 

Por  the  present  tense  of  tho  verb  substantive,  wo  have  hd  {he,  hi)  as  in  the  Stand- 
ard. The  first  person  singular  and  plural  is  sometimes  hd. 

Another,  and  a now  form  is  dhdd  (masc.  plur.  dhde  ; fern.  sing,  and  plur.  ahdi), 
which,  like  hd,  does  not  change  for  person. 

Yet  another  form  is  6d,  which  does  not  change  at  all,  beinsr  the  same  for  singular, 
plural,  masculine,  feminine,  and  for  any  person. 

The  Past  is  thd  {the,  thi)  as  in  the  Standard. 

The  conjugation  of  the  Active  Verb  closely  follows  that  of  the  Standard  dialect. 
Examples  of  the  Present  l’articiple  are:  chdrdd,  grazing;  hundd,  becoming;  rahendd, 
dwelling;  dondd,  coming.  It  will  be  seen  that  while  the  principle  of  formation  Is  the 
same,  some  of  the  forms  vary  slightly  from  the  Standard. 

The  Past  Participle  also  follows  the  Standard,  with  the  same  irregularities.  Wq* 

may  note  the  verb  ndtad  or  nhdind , to  go,  with  its  past  participle  ndthd.  Jana^o  go,  is 

»* 


MANpiUj,!  pahAr!  747 

also  used,  with  its  past  participle  gayd.  The  Static  Participle  in  i-rd  is  very  common, 
and  is  made  as  in  the  Standard. 

There  aro  instances  of  the  Old  Present  and  Present  Subjunctive,  as  in  beyotarU , I 
may  cut ; baithe,  it  may  sit  (1st  specimen). 

For  the  Present,  the  present  participle  is  vised  alone,  as  in  baydd,  thou  becomcst  (1st 
specimen). 

For  the  Present  Definite  we  have  chdrdd  Idgl-rd , he  is  grazing  (sentence  229),  and 
aondd  Idgi-rd  id,  he  is  coming,  corresponding  to  the  Standard  mdrdd  lagi-rd  hd. 

The  verb  * to  come  ’ is  dunid  or  ichhnd,  past  participle  dyd. 


748 


[ No.  3.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAHlRl  (MANDlSALl). 

PABA^t  DlAIiEOT. 

Specimen  I. 

S'1  ft  4\  4 $ct 

M ’K  ^ 

\*l  M H K %"i  4 

b vi  $ jt'E#}  t ^ 

^2^  ?4  JSnj  vjl  $?  ^5-5 

$ 544  ■ t &E>t' 

^ MH  s44  I ^ 


749 


£ No.  3.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAHARl  (MANP^ALI). 

PahakI  Dialect. 

Specimen  I. 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 

i 

Chandramc-hor  chandrame-ri  mawa-ri  katha. 

Moon- and  moon-of  mot  her -of  story. 

Eki-dhyare  chandrame  apnl-mawa-jo 

On-one-day  by-the-moon  his-own-mother-to 

bolya,  * amma,  m5-jo  ek  erha  cholu  sl- 

it-ioas-said,  * mamma,  me-for  a such  coat  seto, 

/V 

-de,  j6  ma-jo  pura  baithe.’  Chandrame-ri  mawe  bolya, 

...  that  me-to  completely  it -may -fit'  The-moon-of  by-the-mother  it-was  said, 

* bachchua,  erha  cholu  tujjo  klbS  beyotarS  ?’ 

* child,  such  coat  for-thee  how  may-I-cut  ?' 


kfcbft 

tn  dutiya-ra 

cliandraina 

banda. 

sometimes 

thou  second-day-of 

moon 

becomest. 

kobS 

punya-ra,  k§be 

na 

dutiya-ra 

na 

sometimes  full-moon-of,  sometimes  neither  second-day-of  nor 


punya-ra.’ 
ffM  -moon- of ' 


750 


FREE  TRANSLATION  OF  THE  FOREGOING. 

The  Story  of  the  Mooti  and  his  Mother. 

One  day  the  Moon  said  to  his  Mother,  ‘Mamma,  sew  for  mo  a coat  that  will 
exactly  lit  mo.’  The  Moon’s  Mother  replied,  * My  child,  how  can  I cut  such  a edat  ? 
Sometimes  you  arc  only  a two  days’  old  crescent  moon,  sometimes  you  are  a full  moon, 
and  sometimes  you  are  neither  crescent  nor  full.* 


762 

[ No.  4.  ] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group 

"WESTERN  PAIlARl  (MANpEALl). 

PahakI  Dialect. 

Specimen  II, 

^ ^ >34  ft  $ t\  ^ 

t A 5 

% \4  n«t 

s-  i.  $ ^ ^ 

^ ^ nj?  $£  $4j 


753  H 


[ No.  4.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PA  HART  (MAND&ALl). 

Tahabi  Dialect. 

Specimen  II. 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 

Byan  mudalc-8aktu-ra  likhya. 

Statement  accused- Saktii-of  ( is-)written . 

McrC  Klialahclu-jO  chvonnl  diti-rl  till ; dhyare  du! 

Of-{i.c.  by-)me  Khalahelu-to  a -f 'ou r- a n n a-piece  in-a-gicen-stale  teas;  days  two 


kam  laina  kltl-ra  Ilia.  Madgsar  prabiste  8 

work  to-be-taken  in-a-done-stalc  teas.  Mahgsar  on-date  eight 


s 6 jana  es  neda  gaya,  6s-ge  kam  manerya.  Inlie 

that  personal. e.  I)  him  near  went,  him-from  work  was-asked.  By-him 


5.  galaya  je,  * mere-bold  kam  nalil  dcl-lmnda. 

6.  it-was-said  that,  * on-my-said  work  not  is-being- given. 


Chyflnni  apni  lai-lai.’  Mai  bolya,  ‘ chyfmnl 

Four-anna-piece  your-own  take-away By-me  it-icassaid,  1 thc-four-an  n a-piecc 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


;>  d 


754 


WESTERN  PAHX$T. 


*1*5^  H >j,  h^|  vl  u*4  fcc 

iA  hi  i$  h *{4  ^ 

$£  i >t£  f{  i§  3}  4$^  t £«* 

5 6 *t  ££  ^ ?*[£ 

■1 

*&  & skB  $ b*$  §$ 

J$  4 'hft  k 4ft  f .4 

?EJ  <2>  jfwfy  4 w/{ 

?s5  ryn  &$  e \s$  5\  £*Z  % 

,o  Jh  i T?  i 3(^4^  ^ 


MA^dKajI  PAHA^i. ' 


756 


ma  nihf  lain!.  . Kam  laina.’  Essa-galla-par 

(for-)  me  ( is-)not  to-betaken.  Work  is-to-be-taken.'  This-word-on 


Khalahelu-hatk&-ge  pakaiya.  Inhe  clhartl  let 

Khalahelu-hand-to  it-was-scizcd,  By -him  (on-the-)  ground  lying-down 


mari. 

Mai 

baha-ge  pakyi 

kharha  kita. 

Inhe 

was-struck. 

...  By-me 

the-arms-to  having-seized 

standing  he-  was -made. 

By-him 

bolya 

je,  ‘ ma-jo 

inarya  nalil.  MS 

thane-jo 

jana.* 

it-ioas-said  that,  * me  (ace.)  please-beat  not,  (For-)  me  the-police-stalion-to  it-is-  to-be- gone' 


5.  Ta  eh  chhadi-dita.  Iddlu-ge  jyada  hath  es-jo 

6.  Then  he  toas-released.  This-than  more  hand  hini-to 


lai-ra  nahi.  IIov  rupae  trae  6s-ge  jflde 

in-an-applied-state  ( was-)not . And  rupees  three  him- from  separately 


laine.  Se8  bhi  mangc-the.  Tiddhi-jo  bhl 

are-to-be-taken.  Those  also  demanded-were.  That- for  also 


ujar  kita,  hor  gall  bhi  den  da  laga. 
refused  was- made,  and  abuse  also  giving  he-began. 


Eh  gall  hoi.  J6  iddhi-ge  jyada  mai 

This  thing  occurred.  If  this-than  more  by -me 


10.  hath  lai-ra  hoe,  ta  mai  sajawar  ha. 

10.  hand  in-an-applied-state  may-have-been,  then  I punishable  am. 

Tot.  lx,  PART  IT. 


766 


FREE  TRANSLATION  OF  THE  FOREGOING. 

The  Statement  of  Saktu,  the  accused  person,  is  here  recorded. 

I had  given  a four- anna  piece  to  Khalahelu,  the  complainant,  for  ■which  an  agree* 
ment  was  made  that  he  should  work  for  two  days.  On  the  eighth  of  the  month  Mangsar 
I went  to  him  and  asked  for  the  work.  He  replied  that  ho  would  not  work  as  he  had 
said,  and  told  mo  to  take  away  my  four  annas.  I said  that  I did  nut  want  the  money, 
but  did  want  the  work.  As  I spoke  thus  1 caught  him  by  the  hand,  when  ho  promntlv 
lay  down  on  the  ground.  I pulled  him  up  standing  by  his  arm,  and  he  said,  ‘plcaso 
don’t  beat  me.  I'm  off  to  the  p< dice-station.’  Then  I let  him  go.  1 have  not  handled 
him  more  than  this.  Moreover,  besides  this,  he  owes  me  three  rupees.  I asked  for  them, 
but  lie  also  refused  to  repay  them,  and  beg  in  to  abuse  me.  If  I may  liavo  handled 
him  more  than  this,  then  I admit  that  I deserve  to  be  punished. 


757 


sukett. 

Suketi  differs  hardly  at  all  from  Standard  MandSajl.  This  will  be  evident  from  the 
specimens  given, — a few  linos  of  the  parable,  and  the  usual  list  of  words  and  sentences. 
It  will  bo  seen  that  the  .main  difference  is  in  tlie  Vocabulary,  -which  more  nearly 
approaches  that  of  KiStha].!  and  Siraji  than  does  Mandgaji. 

We  may  note  a few  joints  in  Grammar.  There  is  the  KiOthali  tendency  to  pro- 
nounce e as  l and  a as  o.  Thus  we  have  d*i  for  d&e , he  will  come  ; tlnl  for  tine,  by  him  ; 
and  khab  for  khdd,  they  may  cat.  The  word,  which,  in  Hindi  is  bln  tar,  within,  is  often 
curiously  maltreated  in  Paharl  pronunciation.  Thus,  in  MandCall  it  is  bhiilar  and  in 
Inner  SirajI  tv  hit  a r.  In  Suketi  it  assumes  the  form  mhtthar. 

In  the  declension  of  nouns  the  locative  of  ghar,  a house,  is  gliard , as  in  Mandeali 
Pahafi,  not  ghare.  The  postposition  of  the  dative  is  jb  or  le,  and  of  the  ablative,  the 
or  te. 

In  the  pronouns,  for  ‘ that,'  besides  se,  we  have  also  oh,  sing.  ag.  une,  obi.  us  ; plur. 
oh,  ag.  unhe,  obi.  unhd. 

In  Verbs  the  present  subjunctive  occurs  in  asl  (for  vise),  lie  may  come  (a and,  to 
come) ; khdu,  I may  eat ; khdo  (for  khdd),  they  may  eat. 


758 

[ No.  6.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAHA.RI  (iUA^DEALI). 

SUKETT. 

Eki-mauchha-re  dui  sohvii  the.  Tinha-mlutbra-the  matlie-sObyue 

One-man-of  two  sons  were.  Them-among-frotn  by-the-younger-son 

apua  hah  puchliu,  * iira  babba,  mlli-le  gliara-vi  band  jo  mora 

his-own  father  was-askcd , ‘ 0 father , me-to  the-house-of  share  which  my 

hisab  asg  tps  de.’  Tini  ■ ghara-ri  band  tinha-le  del-diti. 
account  may-come  that  give.'  By -him  the-house-of  share  tliem-io  toas-given. 

Tltore-dhyaye-ka  inatha  sOhrft  niehh  cheta-peta  katth  kaii-ke 

A-few-days-of  the-younger  son  all  goods  together  made-having 

diir-desci-lo  natlia,  to  tiddlil  apna  cheta-peta  kulnchhna-mhithar  kboa. 
a-far-country-to  went , and  there  his-own  goods  debauchery-in  was-tcasled. 

Jin  nlcbh  muky  a,  teuka  tes-mulkha-maftjh  bam  nakal  paya.  Te 
When  all  was-completed,  then  that-country-in  a-great  famine  fell.  And 
t&s-vc  pallo  kiclih  nl  reha.  Teuka  tfis-mulkha  k6si-agu 

him-of  in-pocket  anything  not  remained.  Then  ( of-)that-country  a-certain- person before 

chakar  reha.  Tine  apne-khetra-mhlthar  siuigar  ebarda  bheja, 

servant  he-remained.  By-him  his-own- fields-wifhin  swine  feeding  hc-was-sent, 

te  tini  jana  je,  ‘jinlia  seta  suhgar  kbao,  tinba  hail 

and  by-him  it-was-thought  that , * what  husks  the-sivine  may-eat,  those  I 

kliau.’  Te  seS  seta  bl  kuni  ni  khane  dxte. 

may-eat .’  And  those  husks  even  by-anyone  not  for-eating  were-given. 


STANDARD  LIST  OF  WORDS  AND  PHRASES  FOR  THE  MANDI  GROUP 


English. 

MundBall. 

MandSaj!  Ptthap. 

Suketl. 

1.  One 

. Ek  .... 

Rk 

Ek. 

2.  Two 

• 

. ' Dfii 

Dui 

• 

! 

Dni. 

3.  Three 

• 

. Trao  .... 

Chin,  traS 

• 

! 

Tin. 

4.  Four 

• 

. Char  .... 

Char 

• 

• 

Char. 

5.  Five 

. ! Panj  .... 

PaKj 

• 

. ; 

Panj. 

6.  Six  . 

. Chhau  .... 

Chliahfl  . 

• 

Chheh. 

7.  Seven 

. Sat  .... 

Sat 

• 

Sat. 

8.  Eight 

Ath  .... 

Ath 

Atth. 

9.  Nine 

. Nau  .... 

Nau 

• 

Nau. 

10.  Ten 

• 

. ( Das  .... 

Das 

• 

Dae. 

11.  Twenty 

• 

. Bih 

I 

Bih 

Vi. 

12.  Fifty 

• 

. Tan  jail  .... 

Pnnjyah 

Pan jah. 

13.  Hundred 

i 

• Sau  .... 

Sau 

Sau. 

14.  I 

• 

. Hao,  hau 

HaS 

Hau. 

15.  Of  me 

• 

. Mera  .... 

Mora 

i 

i 

• • 

M era. 

16.  Mine 

. Mera  .... 

Mt*ra 

• 

1 

i 

Mera. 

17.  We  . 

. Asso  .... 

JTamh§  . 

• 

j 

As6t\ 

18.  Of  us 

• 

• Assa-ra,  mliara 

Hamh5-ra 

• 

i 

! 

i 

Mbara. 

19.  Our 

• 

. Assa-ra,  mliara 

ElainhS-ra 

• 

i 

! 

Mliara. 

20.  Thou 

• 

. Til  . 

• 

! 

Tii,  tn . 

21.  Of  thee 

• 

. Tora  ... 

Thara  • 

Tera. 

22.  Thine 

. Tera  . 

Thara 

Tera. 

23.  You 

• 

. TussS 

j 

j Trnnhe  . 

• 

Tubs?. 

24.  Of  you 

• 

• Tussa-ra 

Tumh8-ra 

• 

; Tussara. 

25.  Your 

• 

. Tussa-rS 

Tumh8-ra 

• 

1 

: Tussara. 

MapdMli.— 759 


English. 

Marfgtt]!  Paliirl. 

' SukSti. 

26.  He  . 

• 

Ss 

So  . 

Oil,  sS. 

27.  Of  him 

• 

T8s-ra  .... 

Tfis-ra  . 

• 

• 

Us-ra,  ttfs-ia. 

28.  His  . 

© 

iTgs-rft  .... 

T5s-ra  . 

t 

• 

Us-ra,  t£s-ra. 

29.  They 

• 

• 

.... 

So  . 

• 

• 

Oh,  so8. 

30.  Of  them 

• 

• 

Tinha-ra 

Tinh5-ra 

Unha-ra,  tinba-ra. 

31.  Their 

• 

• 

Tinha-ra 

Tinha-ra 

• 

• 

Unha-r5,  tinha-ra. 

32.  Hand 

• 

Hath  .... 

Hath 

• 

• 

Hatha. 

33.  Foot 

Pa?5,  pair 

Pair 

• 

• 

Paira. 

34.  Nose 

- 

Nak  .... 

Nak 

Nak  a. 

35.  Eye  . 

• 

HSkkh!  .... 

Haclihl 

• 

Akkhl. 

36.  Month 

• 

Mah  .... 

MSha  . 

• 

t 

Mflha. 

37.  Tooth 

• 

Dand  .... 

Dand 

• 

• 

Danda. 

38.  Ear  . 

• 

Kan  .... 

Kan 

• 

• 

t 

Kana. 

39.  Hair 

• 

Sarual  .... 

Sarwal  . 

• 

• 

Kos. 

40.  Head 

• 

Mnnd,  sir 

Sir 

• 

• 

• 

Mngd. 

41.  Tonga© 

• 

Jlbh  .... 

! 

Jlbh 

• 

Jlbbha. 

42.  Belly 

• 

Pet  . . . . 

1 

Pot  . 

• 

• 

Pr>ta. 

43.  Bick 

• 

Pitth  . . . . { 

Pith 

t 

t 

Pltthl. 

44.  Iron 

• 

Lrtha  . , . . J 

Lrtha 

• 

Lrtha. 

45.  Gold 

• 

i 

SnTna  . . . . j 

i 

Snlna 

• 

• 

Srtina. 

40.  Silver 

• 

1 

i 

Chandl  . . . . j 

i 

Chandl  . 

• 

• 

• 

Chandl. 

47.  Father 

• 

i 

Bab,  bapfi  • . . j 

Bab 

• 

• 

• 

Bab. 

48.  Mother 

• 

i ! 

Mart,  mai  • . . 1 

1 

Ij  . 

• 

• 

• 

Mart,  mSw. 

49.  Brother 

• 

• 

! ! 

j Bhai  . . » 

i 

Bharyahar 

• 

• 

Bhan,  bhaya. 

50.  Sister 

• 

• 

I 

i 

Balifyi  (ymmgir),  baih? 

| (younger, , brtbbrt  (eider). 

i 

: Bhln 

• 

• 

# 

Bahn,  bheg  (obi.  bhaiga)* 

51.  Man 

• 

! 

MSphil,  mannkh,  adml, 
mardh. 

Magas  . 

• 

• 

Adral,  magachh. 

52.  Woman 

• 

i 

JanSna  «... 

Brttfi 

• 

• 

JananS. 

760— Ma?dSSJl. 


English. 

K 

Pah&rl.  | • Suketl. 

53.  Wife 

• 

Lafl 

. Chh&5pl  . 

i 

. . . ; Lafi. 

| 

54.  Child 

• 

AJattlia  . 

• • 

i 

. | Maltha  . 

. , Balik. 

55.  Son  . 

• 

Gabhrii,  beta 

• • 

. Sflhru 

• . . i Mug.dd. 

56.  Daughter 

• 

< 

Bf*tl 

m • 

. ‘ S.’jhrl 

. Bi'tl. 

57.  Slave 

• 

Cbakar  . 

• • 

i 

. 1 Chakar  . 

. 

58.  Cultivator 

• 

Karsan  . 

• m 

. j Karsao  . 

. . Karsa^. 

59.  Shepherd  . 

• 

Pnliai 

• • 

. t Jwoala 

. . . Bakariwal. 

60.  God 

• 

Parmtlaar 

• • 

i 

. ■ Parmcsur 

i 

• . . Pftrmo^ar. 

61.  Devil 

• 

JJli  fit 

• • 

i 

Blifit 

• • • 

62.  Sun  . 

• 

Si'irj 

• • 

i 

. Siiraj 

. . . Surja. 

63.  Moon 

• 

Chaudavma 

. Chaudarms 

i 

. . . C hand  anna. 

64.  Star 

• 

Tara 

• 

j 

. 1 Tara 

i 

. . . Tare. 

65.  Fire 

• 

Ag 

• 

i 

i 

'■  A 

• * • 

i 

. . • Ag. 

60.  Water 

• 

Pani 

• a 

. ! Pilnl  . 

1 

. Pam*. 

67.  ilj >uao 

• 

Ghar 

• • 

L. 

. i Ghar 

i 

. Ghar. 

68.  Horse 

• 

(ihora  • 

• • 

j 

. ! Gbrtya  . 

i 

. . . Chapa. 

69.  C ow  • 

• 

Gal  . 

• 

. ' Gar* 

..  Gar*. 

70.  Dog 

• 

Kutta  • 

• • 

. Kutta 

. . . Kutta. 

71.  Cat  . 

a 

Pill  I 

• • 

. Barjal  . 

1 

. , Bill!. 

72.  Cock 

• 

Kiikkap  . 

• ■ 

Kukar 

. . . Knkap. 

73.  Duck 

• 

Bafcak 

9 9 

. B.*»t  ak 

i 

. . . Bat.ak. 

74.  Ass  . 

• 

Gad  dll  a . 

9 • 

. j G add lia  . 

. . . Gadha. 

75.  Camel 

• 

Ut 

• • 

i 

. | Crt 

. Ut. 

76.  Bird 

• 

Panchbl,  pafckhSrii  . 

• Panchhl  . 

. , . Chiru. 

77.  Go  . 

• 

Ja 

• # 

. Nhas,  nas 

. da. 

78.  Eat  . 

• 

Klia 

• • 

. Kha 

. . . Klia. 

79.  Sit  . . 

• 

• 

Baith 

• 9 

. Bos 

. „ . Baith. 

if.  l - n/<  i 

*-■ 


vol.  iy,  pabt  iv 


Ma^B)i— 1 761 
5 £ 


English, 

Pahifl. 

' Suktitt. 

80.  Come  • 

. 

Au 

• 

• 

Ichh 

Au. 

81.  Beat 

• 

M ar,  ball . 

• 

i 

Chik 

• 

Mar. 

82.  Stand 

• 

Kharb  . 

• 

• 

Kliafh 

• 

Kh&fl-ji. 

83.  Die  • 

Mar 

• 

• 

Mar 

• 

Mar. 

84.  Give 

• 

De 

• 

Do 

• 

Do. 

85.  Run 

• 

Dadr 

• 

• 

Thurh  • 

• 

Danr. 

86.  Up  . 

• 

TJpar,  fipra 

• 

• 

U.jjhfi 

Upar. 

87.  Near 

Ned  e 

• 

• 

Nerd 

Ne<j0. 

8S.  Down 

• 

Heth,  bun 

• 

• 

Udhe  . . • 

Bun. 

89.  Fur  . 

• 

Dur 

• 

Dnr  . 

Dflr. 

90.  Before 

• 

Age,  agge 

• 

• 

Age 

AgO. 

91.  Behind 

• 

Plehhe,  pichche 

• 

■ 

PachhdhS,  pichhdhu  . 

Plehhe. 

92.  Who 

• 

Kuo 

• 

• 

.To5 

jo. 

93.  What 

• 

Kyil 

• 

• 

Kuo 

; Kya. 

1 

94.  Why 

Ki  . 

• 

- 

Kibe 

1 

i Kh 

! 

95.  And 

i 

Hfir 

• 

II  dr 

• 

j Hdr. 

96.  But 

1 

Par 

• 

Par 

! 

Par. 

97.  If  . 

• 

Je 

• 

Jo  .... 

i 

Jd. 

98.  Yes  . 

• 

HS,  ha 

• 

i 

HS  • 

• 

BE. 

99.  No  . 

• 

Ni  . * 

• 

• 

Nf  ... 

• 

Ni 

100.  Alas 

Olid  * 

• 

Ohd 

i 

ApsOs. 

101.  A father  . 

Bab 

• 

- 

! Bab 

1 

Bab. 

102.  Of  a father 

; 

| 

Baba-i  a 

j 

• 

• 

1 

i Babba-ra 

i 

Babba-rS. 

103.  To  a father 

• 

j Baba-jo  . 

• 

• 

! 

Babba-jo 

Babba-jo. 

104.  From  a father 

i 

j Baba-thd,  -go  . 

• 

BabbR-ge,  -thd 

i 

• 

BabbS- td. 

105.  Two  fathers 

• 

; Dul  bab  . 

i 

i 

• 

• 

] Dfil  bab  . 

• 

Do  bab. 

1 06.  Fathers 

• 

i 

! Bab  , . 

i 

i 

• 

• 

Bab  . . . 

• 

Bab. 

762 — M&ng8S)T. 


• English. 

Manual.!  Pali  ip. 

Suketl. 

107.  Of  fathers . 

Baba-rS  • . 

• 

Babba-i  a 

Babba-ra. 

108.  To  fathers . 

Bab5-j0  . 

■ 

Babba-jfi 

Babba-jo. 

109.  From  fathers 

Baba-thd,  -ge  . 

- 

Babba-ge,  -the 

Babba-te. 

110.  A daughter 

•Bsti 

• 

SfllirT 

' 

Beti. 

111.  Of  a daughter  . 

Beti-ra  . 

* 

Bohrl-ra  . 

Beti-ra. 

112.  To  a daughter  . 

Beti-jo  . 

• 

Sflliri-jfl  . 

• 

Betl-jrt. 

113.  From  a daughter 

Betl-gi!  . 

• 

Sflhrl-gf*,  -the  . 

Betl-te. 

114.  Two  daughters  . 

Dul  bet/i  . . • 

• 

Dili  finhri 

DO  beti. 

115.  Daughters 

Beti  ... 

• 

Sflhrl 

Beil. 

116.  Of  daughters 

B(Hl-ra  . 

• 

Sohrl-ra  . . 

Befcl-ra. 

117.  To  daughters 

Betl-jfi  . 

* 

S<lhrljs-jfi 

Beil-jo. 

118.  From  daughters . 

Betl-ge  . . 

Sohrlyt-gf*,  -t.hr 

Beti -to. 

119.  A good  man 

Bhala  ad  ml 

■ 

Bhala  manas 

Bhala  adml. 

120.  Of  a good  mau  . 

Bhale  admi-ra  . 

Bhale  manasa-ra 

Bhale  admi-ra. 

121.  To  a good  man  . 

Bhale  adml-jfl  . 

1 

Bhale  rrianasa-jn 

Bhale  adml-jfi. 

122.  From  a good  man 

Bhahl  admi-ge . 

! 

" i 

; Bhale  magasa-ge,  -the 

Bhale  admi-te. 

123.  Two  good  men  . 

Dfil  bhale  adml 

• 

i 

! 

Dill  bhale  manas 

i 

Dft  bhale  ad  mi. 

124.  Good  men 

Bhale  adml 

• 

! Bhale  manas  . 

Bhale  admi. 

125.  Of  good  men 

Bhale  Sdml-ra  . 

• 

Bhale  manasa-ra 

Bhale  admi-ra. 

126.  To  good  men 

Bhale  adml-jfl  . 

• 

I Bhah"  manasa-jtl 

i 

! 

Bhale  adml-jo. 

127.  From  good  men 

Bhale  adml- go . 

• 

! 

1 Bhale  manasa-ge,  -(hr 

Bhale  admi-te. 

128.  A good  woman  . 

Bhall  janana  . 

• 

Bhall  betri 

i 

Bhall  janana. 

129.  A bad  boy 

Bur  a matthS  . • 

• 

Bura  sfilirfi 

! 

Bigrl-ra  balik. 

130.  Good  women  * . 

Bhall  janantl  . 

• 

! Bhall  l>‘trl 

Bhali  janana. 

131.  A bad  girl 

Burl  mattbi 

• 

Burl  Bfihrl 

BigrI-rl  chhohri. 

132.  Good  .... 

Bhala,  aohchhS,  khara 

• 

1 Bhala,  khara  . 

9 

Bhala. 

183.  Better 

(fls-gS)  aohohhS 

(fis-go)  khara  • 

• 

(lls-tS)  bhala. 

▼Oil.  IX,  PAST  it. 


MaitfSSli— 763 
' 5 v 2 


Knglisli. 

i 

i 

Miingftali. 

Pab&fl. 

SnkStl. 

J34.  Best 

• 

. < Sabhi-go  achohlia 

• 

• 

Sabblil-go  khara 

• 

Sabbhl-te  bhala. 

l:?n.  High 

• 

i 

• Ij  eh  eh  a . . 

• 

Uchcha  . 

Uchcha. 

1*30.  Higher 

• 

. , (fis-ge)  uchcha 

• 

• 

( fts-ge)  uclicha 

(fis-tfc)  uchcha. 

1‘37.  Highest 

• 

| 

. 1 S abb] -go  uchcha 

• 

• 

j Sabbhi-ge  uchcha 

Sabbhl-tfi  uchcha. 

i 

138.  A liorse 

• 

Ghf»j*a 

i 

• 

• 

, Ghora 

• 

Ghflra. 

130.  A mare 

. ■ Ghfirl 

• 

Ghori 

• 

Ghofi. 

110.  Horses 

• 

. . Ghrtjv 

• 

Ghfirf*  • . , 

* 

GhflyG. 

141.  Mares 

• 

. • Ghflrl 

• 

Ghfiri 

GliflfT. 

U-J.  A bull 

• 

. 1 Bald 

1 

1 

• 

• 

Bflludh  . 

Saiih. 

143.  A cow 

• 

. i Gai 

! 

i 

• 

• 

Gar 

Gap. 

141.  Bulls 

• 

. j Bald 

• 

• 

Bflladli 

• 

Sauh. 

145.  Cows 

• 

i 

l 

. 1 Gal 

• 

Ga*" 

• 

Gao. 

140.  A Oog 

• 

. Kutta 

• 

Kutta 

• 

K ntta. 

147.  A bitch  > , 

• 

. Kutt! 

• 

Knit! 

Kutti. 

148.  Dogs 

• 

. . Kutte 

■ 

Knfto 

Kutte. 

.140.  Bitches 

K ii  Hi 

• 

• 

Kutti 

* 

Kutti. 

150.  A he  goat  . 

• 

. j Bakra  • , 

• 

• 

* j ah  ra  • • » 

• 

Bakra. 

151.  A female  goat 

• 

. Bakrl 

• 

Bakrl 

• 

Bakrl. 

152.  Goats 

# 

i 

. 1 Bakre  . 

1 

• 

Itith 

- 

Bakre. 

1 53.  A male  deer 

• 

- 1 Ham 

• 

Garun 

• 

llaran. 

151.  A female  deer 

• 

. , Harni 

• 

• 

Ham? 

• 

Harni. 

155.  Deer 

• 

II  am 

• 

• 

Harn  . , . 

• 

ITarari. 

150.  I am 

• 

i 

. i TTfiu  lia,  Jem.  h i 

• 

Ilau  ahda  . . 

• 

Ilau  hi 

157.  Thou  art  . 

* 

• j Tli  ha,  Jem.  hi  . 

• 

Til  ahda 

• 

Tu  ha. 

158.  He  is 

. ! ha,  jeon,  hi  . 

j 

• 

Sfi  ahda  . # . 

• 

Oh  hai. 

150.  We  are  . 

• 

. | Assr  he 9fcm,  hi 

i 

• 

Hamhe  ahdS  . 

1 

• 

Assfi  hai. 

100.  You  are 

• 

i 

. Tn  sse  he,  fern,  hi 

• 

1 

Tumhr  glide 

i 

• 

TussS  hai. 

i 

7* » t — MamlSall. 


Knglirii.  | Mui^d  Batf. 

I 


161.  They  are  . 

• 

S£S  h£ , fern,  hi . 

162.  I was 

• • 

Hail  tha,  /cm.  thl 

163.  Thou  wast . 

• • 

Tft  tha  . 

164.  Ho  was 

• • 

Se  tha 

165.  Wo  were  . 

• • 

Asse  the,  fern,  thl 

166.  You  were  . 

• 

Tusse  the  . 

167.  They  were 

• 

Sen  the  . 

168.  Be  . 

• • 

He 

169.  To  be 

• • 

Hn$a 

170.  Being 

• • 

H unda 

171.  Having  been 

• • | 

! 

Hni-kn 

172.  I may  be  • 

i 

• i 

Hail  Iju  . 

m.  1 shall  be  . 

• 

Hau  hSgha 

174.  I should  be 

• 

175.  Beat 

• 

Mar 

176.  To  beat 

i 

i 

Mama 

177.  Beating 

• 

j Mania 

178.  Having  beaten 

• 

Mitri-ke 

179.  1 beat  • 

• • 

Hau  mara-ha  . 

180.  Thon  beatest 

• • 

Tii  marff-ha 

181.  ite  beats  . 

• 

Sr*  m lira -ha 

182.  We  beat 

• 

Assr*  mars- he  . 

183.  You  l>eat  . 

• 

1 

! Tusse  mara-he 

i 

184.  They  beat  . 

• 

S$f>  mara-he 

185.  1 beat  ( Past  Tense ) 

Mai  iuaiva 

186.  Thou  beatest 
Tense). 

(Pa^ 

Tai  mar&i 

187.  Ho  beat  (Fast  Tense)  . 

| Tine  mar&i 

Ma94«All  Pahirt  ! 

i 

SuWH. 

Sn  ahde  . « . . j 

Oh  hai. 

Han  tha  .... 

Hau  thS. 

TS  tha  .... 

Tfi  tha. 

Sn  tha  . . . . 1 

i 

Oh  tha. 

Hambe  thfl  . , . I 

i 

Abso  thg. 

i 

Tumhe  the  . . . | 

! 

Tfisse  the. 

1 

Sfi  the  . . . . i 

Oh  the. 

Hfl  .... 

Hr>. 

Hf»^a  .... 

Hunda  .... 

HuS. 

Hfli-kr»  .... 

Hui-ke. 

H a u hli  .... 

Hau  boil. 

i Haf»  hniigha 

| MuT  hilgha. 

i 

Chik  .... 

! 

Mar. 

1 Cbiknil  .... 

i 

: Marnii. 

! 

Cliikda  .... 

, Mary  a. 

i 

( Chikl-be 

1 

j Mari-k»*. 

j 

i Tlaf)  ehikrbha  . 

1 

Hah  inara-hu. 

1 

Tu  ehiks-lia  . • 

! 

Tu  marS-hii. 

s Sn  ehiks-lia 

i 

i 

! 

I Oh  mar§-ha. 

i 

: Hainli^  cliiks-h6 

! 

I 

| Asst*  niarft-he. 

1 

Tumhe  ehika-he 

j 

i Tus sr  marn-he. 

j 

Sn  ehikfi-h.'* 

^ Oli  iiiarfi-hr. 

1 

MaT  chikyil 

1 Mai  niarya. 

. Tal  eliikj#a  . • 

TnT  marya. 

j Tf  i chikya 

i 

j Urn*  niarya. 

MaV<16£jI— 765 


Engl  i eli. 

Magd&ali. 

Maudeuli  Pnliap. 

1 

SuketT. 

188.  We  beat  (Tast  Tense ) 

Asse  miirea 

Iiamke  eh  iky  a • 

Asai  maiya. 

189.  Yon  beat  ( Past  Tense ) 

Tusse  mfireil 

Tumli?  cliikya 

Tusai  in  ary  a. 

190.  They  beat  ( Past  Tense ) 

Tin  he  rniir&i  . 

Tiiihe  chik^a  . 

Unho  marya. 

191.  I am  beating 

I Han  mania  lagl-ra-ha 

Hilo  ehikdii  lagi-va  . • 

Hail  mar  da  lagi-ra. 

192.  T was  beating 

Hau  mania  lagi-ra-thfi 

Ha 5 ehikdii  lagi-ra-tha 

Hau  in  aid  a lagi-ra-tha. 

193.  I had  beaten 

Mai  nuimi-lha 

! Had  chiki-ra-tlia 

i 

Mat  marya- tha. 

194.  1 may  beat 

Hau  mara-ha 

Hiln  ehikii  . • • 

1 ■»  f V . (V 

! Mai  maru. 

i 

195.  I shall  beat 

Han  margha,  fern,  margin  ; 
mara  ng. 

TIuO  rliiktinglia 

! 

! 

j Hau  margha. 

196.  Thou  wilt  beat  . 

Tn  margha,  fan.  marghi ; 
in  a rang. 

Tn  chikangha  . • 

Til  margha. 

197.  He  will  beat 

Se  margha,  fan.  marghi ; 
mailing. 

So  chikafigliii  . 

Oh  margha. 

198.  We  shall  beat 

Asse  margin-*,  jVm.  marglii  ; 
marang. 

ITambe  chikangho 

Asbo  margin*. 

199.  You  will  beat 

Tusse  mfirghe,  fan.  marghi ; 
marang. 

Tuinhe  ehikanghd 

Tussr*  inarghe. 

200.  They  will  beat  . 

Seo  margin',  fern,  marghi; 
marang. 

So  ehikanghd  . 

Oh  margin*. 

201.  I should  beat 

j 

... 

202.  I am  beaten 

Hau  marea  jS-lia 

Tliio  cliikya  gal-raha 

M:T-jo  marya-ha. 

203.  I was  beaten 

Hau  marea  gda 

Han  ehikyii  gai-rii-tha 

Ma-jo  marya-thii. 

204.  T shall  be  beaten  . j 

llau  marea  jagha 

HaS  rhikyii  jahghii  . 

MS-jd  margha. 

205.  I go 

Hau  jS-ba 

Iliio  nasn-hii 

Hau  jS-lia. 

206.  Thou  goest  . . | 

Tn  jfi-na  . 

Tu  nasS-ha 

Tn  jS-lia. 

i 

207.  Tie  goes  . 

Sr*  ja-ha 

Sr>  nasS-hiT  . . . ; 

i 

Oh  jS-liii. 

208.  We  go 

Ass*-  ja-hf* 

Humhe  na.^ri  h»* 

I 

Asad  ja-ho. 

209.  You  go  . . i 

Tiisso  jil-hr* 

Tn  in  hr  liusil  ho  . • 

1 

Tussd  js-hd. 

210.  They  go 

Seo  ja-hr* 

So  nasa-hr* 

Oh  js-hd. 

211.  I went 

Hau  p’s. 

llao  imtha 

HaiS  gaya. 

i 

212.  Thou  wentest 

; 

Tu  niitlia 

Tu  gaya. 

213.  He  went  . 

! 

S* * g i*a  . • . • 

Sd  rial  ha 

Oh  gaya. 

i 

214.  We  went  . . . J 

Ass?  gad 

liamh?  natlio  . 

A sse  gad. 

766— Ma$45Sll. 


English. 


Msindefill. 


MandSiU!  Pa  Imp. 


Huketl. 


215.  You  wont  . . . TusbS  gar* 

216.  They  went  . . S&o  gar*  . 

217.  Go  ....  Ja  ... 

218.  Going  . . . j Jiinda 

210.  Gone  . . . Jai-kf* 

220.  What  is  your  name  Y . Tussa-rii  kya  niin  ha  Y 

i 

i 

221.  How  old  ia  this  liorso  ? | IS  a gliOrf-ri  kya  unibar  1 


. Turn  he  nathe  . . . ! Tusse  gar*. 

i _ 

. ; nathe  . . . Oh  gar*. 

. Nas  . . Jfi. 

t 

. Na-da  . . . .!  Janda. 

. Xathii  ....  Gaya. 

. Tuniha-ra  ke  nuo  sa  P . Terii  naO  kya  liii  Y 
Y Rl  gliflre-rl  krtn  umbar  sa  ? Kh  ghara  kitna  ayana  ha  ? 


222.  How  far  is  it  from  here  1 Rtthl-gC*  Kasmir  kit  nr-  dur 

to  Kashmir  ? j ha  ? 

223.  How  many  sons  are  Tussa-rr*  baha-p*  ghara 

there  in  your  father's  kitin'*  gabhrfi  h«*  r 
liouse  ? 

224.  I have  walked  a long  Han  a j ha  hut  dura-tik 

way  to-day.  Inuidld-axa. 

225.  The  son  of  iny  uncle  is  M*p*  chadm-iv  gaUim-ra 

married  to  his  sister.  bayilh  te.s-u  hailim-kaii" 

. liila. 

220.  In  the  lunise  is  tin*  Sap«*d  glmy-ri  jin  ghara 

saddle  of  tin?  white  hhlitar  hi. 
horse. 

227.  Put  the  saddle  upon  .linji-jr>  tes-n  pitihi-par 
his  bark.  tliai-do. 

22S.  i have  beaten  his  son  ' Mai  les-rii  gabhru  baliuti 
with  many  stripe*..  krmlr-kanr*  marea. 

229.  lie  is  grazing  rattle  Sr*  pahaya-ri  ehnil-par 

on  the  top  of  tlie  hill.  dangle  ehfirda-lagi-ra. 

230.  He  is  sitting  on  a horse  S*'  tea  dala-hrtli  -par 

under  that  trci*.  Imithi-ra. 

231.  His  brother  is  taller  Tes-ra  blub  1rs-ri  bailini- 

tliau  bis  sister.  go  lamina  ha. 

232.  The  price  of  that  is  two  Tiddln-ra  mu!  dhai  nipayyil 

rupees  and  a half.  ha. 

233.  Afy  father  lives  in  that  M»'ia  lmb  tos  halk*-  gharii 

small  bouse.  raha-ha. 

23t.  Give  this  rupee  to  him.;  Ks  repay y a tes-jn  dr-i-d*'* 


Jndlia-ge  Kasmir  krti r*  dnr  Kthi-te  Kasmir  kitnl  dur 
sa  ? ha  ? 

TumhS-ro  biibba-iv  ghara  Tr*v  habba-re  ghara  kitnl 
krtrr*  srdirfi  sa  ? putr  be  Y 

Han  fij  khiise  dnr  nathii  sa  . Aj  barl  bat;  luldi. 

Mm."*  cliachr-iv  srthru-ra  Merf*  chach.'-rii  putr  meri 
by  a h tes-rl  blilna  sang  hr*  habnl-kano  byahl-ra. 
h lia. 

Sap»"il  ghr»rr-ri  jm  gharil  Us  saped  ghore-ri  kathl 
bandar  siT.  ghara  hi. 

Jjn  t«*l-ri  pii [i Ill-par  dab  . Us-par  jin  piir>. 

I 

Mai'  tes-ra  srdirfi  bahfit  us-r*~  putra-jrt  bahCt 

kordr*  sangln*  eliikya.  knrr**  mar*". 

Sr.  paharii  ujjhr*  d^grr*  Oh  puhiira-ri  chnti-par 
eliarda  lngl-ra.  dan  gar  chary  u karda. 

Sr.  t/i  da]ii  udhr*  ghr.rr-  Oh  *"*ki  ghr>rr-par  us  dala- 
ujjlio  bosi-ril.  lieth  baiflu-ra. 

Tei-ra  bliarx  altar  tbi-rl  l s-ra  bbai  us-ri  bhaina-te 
blilnu-go  lamina  sa.  lamba  ba. 

Tr-i-ra  mill  dhai  rupue  sit  . Us-ra  mill  dliiil  rupai  ha. 

M'-ra  bab  tr*i  haul."  ghara  M«Ta  bapu  us  ehliAff*  gharii 
rah  r*iid  a.  ' rah  a hil. 

Rl  rupae  tr*id>'  dr*  . . Rh  riipaiyfi  its-jr.  dri-dm. 


235.  Take  those  rupees  fioni  'finhil  rupiivxv  tes-gr  lal-  fin  hi  rupae  t*'i-g«*  laid«*  . Oh  rnpaiy.*  l.-L-leO. 

him.  I lai. 

j 

236.  lloat  him  well  and  T«~jfS  ain  karl  mar  her  ia>si  1 «*I-H*  kliitsa  ehik  hr.r  ras^i  Hs-jo  aui  mar.*  at.*  vassi- 

bind  him  with  ropes,  j siifigi  bannh.  , sanghe  bandh.  k:un*  bai;hi-d«* ». 

237.  Draw  water  from  the  , Khfilia-ge  panl  khaieh  . '•  Ivhuhii-ge  pani  khaieli  . kline-t-‘  paid  kadhrt. 

well.  i 


238.  Walk  before  me.  Mere  agge  dial 


. M'iv  iigr*  nas 


Mere  age  ilgv  chahv 


239.  Whoso  hoy  comes  be-  Tussil-re  pichchli**  kes-ra  Tumbard  piehln*liii  kun  ( Tnss«*-iv  ^ piehhe  kes-ra 

hind  you  ? inattha  aunda  lagl-ra-ha  ? srdirfi  a (Mid  a lagi-rii-sa  Y mnndu  ay  a kaitla  . 

240.  From  whom  did  you  TaT  sf*  h6s-gr-  mull.-  Fa  ? ; Tumh?  srt  kf-s-go  mnlr-  Ffi  ? Kh  tnss.'  kos-tr-  khfindya  ? 

buy  that  ? 

24*1.  From  a shopkeo|ter  of  G raws- re  hat t wauiye- ge  . Grixvii-iv  hatawaniye-ge  . . Us  gan-ie  ekl  hat  w a;ti-te. 
tho  village.  | I 

Mandi  aVi — 767 


769 


ChamEalt. 

Cham&LlI  is  the  name  of  the  main  Aryan  language  spoken  in  the  State  of  Chauiba, 
which  lies  to  the  nOrth  of  the  district  of  Kangra. 

In  the  North-East  of  the  State,  in  Chamba-Lahul,  the  language  is  Tibeto-Burman. 
In  the  extreme  west  of  the  State,  there  is  a dialect  called  BhatSall,  which  is  a form  of 
Dogrl,  and  is  described  in  Part  I of  this  volume. 

Chamgali  has  four  dialects,  of  which  the  estimated  number  of  speakers  is  as 


Dialects.  follows:  — 

Standard  ChamSaU  . • 63,338 

GadI  or  Bliarmaurl 14,946 

ChurSln * 27,301 

PabgwSjl 3,701 

ts  — 

Total  . 109.286 


* 

JVith  the  exception  of  GadI  these  are  all  confined  to  the  Chamba  State.  Included 
*in  th«.  I f, 946  speakers  of  GadI  arc  2,500  who  are  inhabitants  of  the  adjoining  parts -of 
the  Kangra  District. 

...  The  State  of  Chamba  is  mountainous.  It  is  traversed  by  three  snowy  ranges,  which 
" more  or  less  parallel  to  one  another,  cross  the  State  from  south-east  to  north-west.  The 
first  range,  or  Outer  Himalaya,  separates  the  Kangra  Valley  from  Chamba  Proper,  and 
also  the  basin  of  the  Bias  from  that  of  the  Havi.  North  of  it  lies  the  Valley  of  the  Ravi 
and  its  affluents,  containing  the  three  AVizarats  of  Chamba,  Bharmaur,  and  Cliurah,  in 
which  the  three,  dialects,  Standard  Chameall,  Gfull  and  Churalu  arc  spoken  respectivelv. 
The  Valley  of  the  Havi  separates  the  Outer  Himalaya  liango  from  the  Mid -Himalaya 
or  Pangi  Range,  which  forms  the  watershed  between  the  Ravi  and  the  Chenab.  Still 
further  on  is  the  Inner  Himalaya  or  Zanskar  Range,  forming  the  watershed  between  the 
Chenab  and  the  Indus.  The  network  of  valleys  forming  the  basin  of  the  Chenab,  be- 
tween the  Mid  and  the  Inner  Himalaya  is  divided  into  two  parts  of  nearly  equal  size  by 
a lofty  spur  from  the  Zanskar  Range.  The  tract  to  tlie  north-west  of  the  spur  is  called 
Pangi,  and  that  to  the  south-east  Chamba-Lahul. 

The  language  of  Chamba-Lahul  belongs  to  the  Tibeto-Burman  family,  and  does  not 
tponcern  us  at  present.  It  has  been  dealt  with  on  pp.  tOlfF.  of  Arolumc  III,  Part  I,  of  this 
Survey.  The  language  of  Pangi  is  the  Pahgwall  dialect  of  Chameall  and  is  dealt  with 
below. 

The  dialects  of  the  Ravi  Valley  are  GadI,  Churalu  and  Standard  Chameall.  GadI  is 
the  dialect  of  the  Gaddis  of  the  Bharmaur  AVizarat,  Churalu  that  of  the  Cliurah  AVizarat, 
while  Standard  Chameall  is  the  dialect  of  the  Chamba  AVizarat,  in  which  is  situated  the 
capital  of  the  State.  Bharmaur  lies  to  the  east,  and  Cliurah  to  the  north  of  Chamba  pro- 
per. Giidi  and  Churalu  will  subsequently  he  fully  described,  and  at  present  we  need 
only  confine  our  attention  to  Standard  Chameall,  prefacing  the  account  with  a few  brief 
remarks  on  Chameall  as  a whole,  including  all  four  dialects. 

VOL.  ix,  part  iv.  5 i 


770 


WESTERN  PAIIArI. 


CkamSajl,  while  clearly  belonging  to  the  Western  Pahari  Qroup  of  languages,  is  the 
Positron  in  regard  to  neigh.  most  western  of  its  members,  and  has  inucnediatoly  to  its 
bouring  languages.  south  and  south-west  dialeots  connected  with  PaKjabi. 

To  its  north-west  are  dialects  connected  with  Kashmiri.  It  is  therefore  to  bo  expected 
that  it  should  show  signs  of  the  influence  of  these  languages.  The  influence  of  the 
Kashmiri  dialects  need  not  detain  us  long.  We  have  over  and  of&e  had  ojjr  attention 
called  to  inttances  of  this  in  languages  as  far  East  as  the  Kumauni  of  Ceoffel  Pahari, 
and  the  explanation  given  has  been  that  the  original  inhabitants  of  the  wl^ole  country 
were  Khavas  who  spoke  a language  akin  to  Kashmiri  and  the  connected  ‘ Pi£&cha  * lan- 
guages of  North-Western  India.  As  we  have  gone  westward  from  Kumauni  these  traces 
of  the  * Pi4acha  * languages,  especially  in  the  matter  of  vocabulary,  have  grown  more  and 
more  prominent,  and  in  Standard  Ckameaji,  and  in  its  dialects,  words  which  are  evidently 
closely  connected  with  Kashmiri  form  quito  a sensible  proportion  of  the  stock  of  vocables. 
Attention  will  be  drawn  to  this  when  dealing  with  the  vocabularies  of  the  various  dia- 
lects, and  examples  will  be  given.  A little  inquiry  would  largely  extend  the  number 
of  these  examples,  did  considerations  of  space  permit  it. 

A9  regards  the  influence  of  PaKjabi,  this  is  more  accidental,  being  simply  due  to 
geographical  proximity.  In  Standard  Cliameaji  especially,  certain  changes  of  consonants 
such  as  that  of  t to  ch  or  ts,  which  arc  common  in  Western  Pahari  have  disappeared, 
though  they  still  survive  to  a limited  extent  in  Gadi,  Churahi  and  Pangwaji. 

Those  masculine  nouns  which  in  PaKjabi  end  in  a,  like  ghord,  a horse,  in  Western 
Pahari  generally  end  in  b or  u.  In  Standard  Chameali  this  o or  u termination  has  (tit- 
appeared,  in  favour  of  the  PaKjabi  a,  although  it  survives  in  the  other  dialects. 

In  three  of  the  dialects  the  postposition  of  the  genitive  is  the  Western  Pahari  rb 
(m),  and  this  is,  as  usual,  adjectival.  Only  in  Pahgwali  does  it  cease  to  be  adjeotival,  and 
the  North-Western  influence  being  strongest  hero,  the  tendency  for  an  r ta  be  elided 
comes  into  force,  and  the  rb  (in  its  locative  form)  becomes  a simple  e. 

The  postpositions  of  the  dative  case  in  the  Chameali  dialects  are  interesting. 

In  Chameali,  it  is  jo, 

In  Gadi,  ,,  jo,  bo,  or  go, 

In  Churaln,  „ nl, 

and 

In  Pahgwali,  „ je  or  di. 

We  shall  explain  in  the  proper  place  that  yd  is  really  an  old  locative  of  jd.  The 
Pahgwali  je  is  the  same.  The  obsolete  nominative  jd  is  identical  with  the  Sind]£i  jo,  of. 
In  almost  all  Modern  Indo-  Aryan  languages  the  dative  suffix  is  really  an  old  locative  of 
the  genitive.  This  has  been  explained  on  previous  occasions  and  need  not  detain  us 
here.  The  Gadi  hb  and  go  are  explained  in  their  proper  place.  Here  it  will  be  sufficient 
to  note  that  bo  connects  Chameali  with  Kului,  while  go  connects  it  with  the  Pi££cha  lan- 
guages. The  nearest  relative  of  the  Churahi  nl  is  the  PaKjabi  nu,  but  it  is  also  con- 
nected more  closely  with  the  more  distant  Gujarati  ne.  The  Pahgwali  di  is  by  origin 
a locative  of  da,  which,  while  not  used  in  Pangwaji,  is  the  regular  genitive  postposition 
of  PaKjabi. 


chamEali.  771 

While  tho  genitives  of  the  Personal  Pronouns  in  Standard  Cliameali  and  Gadi  are 
vnera,  terd,  etc.,  all  borrowed  directly  from  Panjabi,  Cliuvalii  has  an  interesting  set  of 
which  cerebral  letters  are  the  distinguishing  characteristics.  Thus,  mindd,  my ; asm, 
our ; tindd,  thy ; tudrd,  your.  Pangiriijl,  true  to  the  Pi5acha  influence,  drops  the  inter- 
vocalic f,  anA has  either,  m&,  my  ; he,  our ; tS,  thy ; l ah,  your;  or  else  shows  a relic  of 
the  cerebraHaf  and  r,  by  ending  these  words  with  a cerebral  n.  Thus,  man,  hen,  fan,. 
tdh% i.  , 

Tho  conjugation  of  verbs  calls  for  few  remarks.  In  all  the  dialects  it  follows  West- 
ern Pahari  in  all  its  typical  peculiarities. 

Of  all  tho  dialects  Pahgwali  departs  furthest  from  Standard  Chamfaji.  As 
explained  in  the  introductory  remarks  to  that  dialect,  this  is  mainly  due  to  the  isolation  of 
Pangi  from  the  rest  of  the  State,  and  partly,  also,  to  the  mixed  origin  of  its  population. 

We  now  proceed  to  consider  each  dialect  in  detail,  commencing  with  Standard 
Chamgaji. 

Authorities. — A very  full  and  interesting  account  of  Cliameali  will  be  found  in 
the  ltev.  T.  Grahame  Bailey’s  Languages  of  the  Northern  Himalayas  (London,  1908), 
to  which  reference  has  frequently  been  made  in  the  foregoing  pages.  Tho  only  other 
work  dealing  with  the  language  is  a Chambydli  Vocabulary  drawn  from  title-deeds  of 
the  16th  and  17th  centuries , by  Or.  J.  Ph.  Vogel,  Ph.T).,  Superintendent,  Archaeological 
Survey,  Northern  Circle.  This,  together  with  Mr.  Bailey’s  Grammar,  has  been  printed 
in -the  Chamba  State  Gazetteer  (Lahore,  1910). 

Versions  of  the  Gospels  of  St.  Mark  (1891),  and  St.  John  (1891),  into  Cliameali 
have  been  printed  from  type  in  the  local  character. 

Tho  following  sketch  of  Cbamgali  Grammar  is  mainly  based  on  the  account  given 
in  the  liev,.  T.  Grahamo  Bailey’s  Languages  of  the  Northern  Himalayas.  The  language 
of  the  specimen  (a  version  of  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son)  closely  agrees  with  this, 
and  any  points  of  difference  have  been  noted  in  the  appropriate  places. 

A word  of  explanation  aiul  apology  is  required  regarding  the  Chameaji  specimen  on 
pp.  785  ff.,  the  Gadi  specimens  on  pp.  801  tf.,  811  IT.,  and  815,  and  the  Pahgwali  specimen 
on  pp.  855  fl*.  It  was  originally  intended  that  these  should  be  printed  in  Cliameali  type, 
but  it  was  found  that  a sufficient  quantity  of  this  type  was  not  available  in  India.  They 
have  accordingly  been  printed  in  facsimile  from  the  original  manuscript  prepared  for 
the  printer.  This  manuscript  was  written  in  a rough  imitation  of  the  forms  of  the  type- 
printed  letters,  and  tho  pages  reproducing  it  should  not  be  taken  as  representing 
Cliameali  handwriting.  Thev  were  not  even  written  by  a Chamba  scribe.  Good 
specimens  of  genuine  Cliameali  handwriting  will  be  found  on  pp.  830  ff.  under  the  head 
of  Churalii. 


VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


5f2 


772 


STANDARD  DIALECT. 

Alphabet, — Chamgali  is  written  in  a form  of  the  Takri  alphabet.  In  the  State  of 
Cliamba  this  character  has  been  advanced  to  the  dignity  of  the  printing  press,  and  type 
in  an  improved  Takri  has  been  cast.  The  alphabet  is  as  follows : — 


171 

a 

u 

ka 

l 7) 

a 

1 

U 

ka 

<5 

i ^ ki 

l 

W] 

kl 

6 

u 

w 

kn 

a in i ku 

e,  e 

w 

ke,  ke 

Vi 

ai 

A 

kai 

b kb 

«Q 

an 

SP 

kan 

n 

kam. 

U 

ka 

* 

kha 

71 

ga 

gha 

D 

cha 

chha 

Ja 

> 

jha 

& 

ta 

a 

tha 

h 

da 

da 

(Ilia 

ot  V>a 

l 

• 

ra 

da 

• 

rha 

3 

ta 

sr 

tha 

3d 

da 

0 

dha 

na 

u 

pa 

6 

pha 

k 

ka 

kha 

Yl  ma 

TX 

ya 

ra 

la 

va 

7T 

• 

ska 

- 

71 

sa 

0 

ha 

O la 

Specimens  of  Compound  Consonants. 

W kya  H khya  ^ hr  a 5 tra  II  dra*  « tha 

Numeuals.  .v 

£\1,  ^ 2,  St  a,  y 4,  V)  1'.  K|  0.  ®»  7,  5 8,  6 5,  • 0. 


cuam£a^i. 


778 


Vocabulary. — A very  full  vocabulary  of  Cham6aji  is  given  in  Mr.  Bailey’s  work. 

Some  typical  words  taken  from  this  and  from  other  sources  are  here  given 
nffff,  fire. 
agge,  before. 
agritya,  to  meet. 
ajj,  to-day. 

akkhl  bakkhi , round  about. 

aklibdld,  wise. 

alakh,  lazy. 

anwul,  a mother. 

ankdl,  a famine. 

anhri,  mustard.  * 

auk  hi,  distress,  poverty. 

tab,  babb,  babbd,  a father. 

baihn,  bhen,  a sister. 

baihrid,  to  sit. 

bandnd,  to  divide. 

baft,  a roadway. 

baua,  left  (not  right). 

held,  feeble. 

bhen,  baihn,  a sister. 

bhidg,  morning. 

bliidgd , in  the  morning. 

bhiiia,  on  the  ground. 

It,  seed. 
bidr,  wind. 

bihdlnd,  to  cause  to  sit,  seat. 
bithfir,  custom,  tradition. 
biitd,  a tree. 
ghamknd,  to  be  angry. 
chdrhnd,  to  raise. 
ehatknd,  to  be  angry. 
chhdh,  buttermilk. 
chliama,  forgiveness. 
chhtthnd,  to  touch. 

•*  chiv'd,  a noise,  shout.  Cf.  dind. 
chugvd,  to  choose,  to  graze. 
dhakh , a little,  gently,  slowly. 
dhim,  a feast. 
dhehtid,  to  fall. 
dhidrd,  a day. 
dhlu,  a daughter. 
dikkhvd , to  sec. 

diVd,  a noise,  shout.  Cf.  chivd . 
dngghd,  deep. 


m 


WESTERN  PAHiRL 


git,  a cow. 

galdnd,  to  speak,  say. 

gdchna,  to  be  lost. 

gra,  a village. 

gudl,  gudlu,  a sbeplierd. 

gudyd,  to  cause  to  go,  to  lose. 

hachchhd,  white. 

hdkh,  tho  eye. 

hatth,  the  hand. 

head,  a part,  share. 

hi  dud,  winter. 

hiind,  to  be,  become. 

idehd , like  this. 

idi,  here. 

ind,  to  come. 

itte,  here. 

jn,  when. 

jdgat , a child. 

jakhni,  when. 

jhik,  down. 

jidehd,  like  which. 

jidi,  where. 

jihn,  (postposition),  like,  like  to. 
jittc,  where. 
jtigti , well. 
kachh,  near,  beside. 

Jcachhd,  from  near,  from. 

kachld , soft. 

kadhdri,  when  ? 

kakhni,  when? 

kamm , work,  action. 

kammd,  a servant. 

kayak , wheat. 

kane,  with. 

khdkh , the  cheek. 

khettar , a field. 

khdkh,  the  bosom. 

klindna,  to  cause  to  eat,  to  feed. 

khnlhnd , to  be  opened. 

khumd,  to  seize. 

Ari,  why  ? 

kidehd,  like  what  ? 
kiha,  how  ? 
kUld,  alone. 
kitfhd,  together. 


OHAHi&ll. 


kola , a boy. 

kudi,  where  ? 

ktifi,  a girl. 

kmuthrd,  ugly. 

kutte,  whore  ? • 

lakh,  the  waist. 

laf,  the  skirt  of  a garment. 

lard,  a bridegroom,  husband. 

Idfl,  a bride,  wife. 
lata,  lame. 

latd-phald,  or  lafi-pafi,  property,  goods. 

lauhkd,  younger  (of  a son). 

lufityd,  to  reap. 

manltft,  a man. 

mds,  meat. 

matd,  much,  very. 

mbri,  dead. 

mugtidri , abundance. 

mundydh,  a bond  servant. 

tiakk,  the  nose. 

nikkd,  small,  younger  (of  a son). 
nhasnd,  to  run. 
tiir,  near. 
dfh,  the  lip. 

pachhedtytyd,  to  recognize. 
patfhrd,  plain,  level. 
painnd,  sharp. 
paletnd , to  wrap. 
parol,  a door. 

pasach,  an  evil  spirit,  a demon. 
paly  and,  to  persuade. 

5 nchchd, , behind. 
pitth,  the  back. 

pndtyd | to  cause  to  fall,  to  put  (clothes  on  a person) . 

pnhdl,  jmhdlu,  a shepherd. 

pujfod,  to  arrive. 

piityd,  or  pattyd,  to  fall. 

puttar,  a sou. 

rarhvkd,  to  bo  angry. 

rehtid,  to  remain. 

ruqt(ir  to  cry,  weep. 

mdnd,  to  call. 

sahditd,  help. 

»at\  the  head. 
sikar-mukaf,  husks. 


776 


WE9TBBK  PA.H&.R1. 


aikhdl&d,  to  teach. 
si/ckhnd,  to  learn. 
sirual , hair. 
sobhttd,  to  please. 
sunnd,  a kiss. 
ta,  then. 

tabar-tdr , at  onoe,  quickly. 

taihl,  or  tehal,  service. 

takrdr,  confession,  agreement. 

taula,  quick. 

tehal,  sec  taihl. 

tidehd , like  that. 

tikar,  for,  up  to. 

tirnd , to  fall.  % 

trimat,  a woman. 

udi,  there. 

tire  pare,  round  about. 
utte,  there. 
nchdnd,  to  raise. 
uchchd,  high. 
utthna,  to  rise. 
warnd,  to  enter. 

NOUNS.  — The  declension  of  the  Cham&ali  noun  in  some  respects  resembles  that 
of  Panjabi  rather  than  that  of  other  Western  Pahari  languages.  In  the  latter  the 
oblique  plural  is  tire  same  as  the  oblique  singular,  but  in  Chamealr  there  is  a special 
form  of  the  oblique  plural,  ending,  as  in  Paftjabi,  ini 

Tadbhava  masculine  nouns  in  a,  form  the  nominative  plural  by  changing  d to  e. 
Thus,  ghord,  a horse,  ghdre,  horses.  Peminiue  nouns  ending  in  consonants,  and 
exceptionally,  one  or  two  ending  in  vowels,  add  i or  a in  the  nominative  plural.  Thus, 
baihn,  a sister,  baihtj.1  or  baihna,  sisters  ; gd,  a cow,  gdt,  cows  ; dhid,  a daughter,  - $hh~ta, 
daughters.  In  the  case  of  all  other  nouns,  the  nominative  plural  is  the  same  as  the 
nominative  singular. 

As  usual  in  Western  Pahari  languages,  nouns  have  an  oblique  form,  and  also  a 
separate  Agent  case,  often  also  used  as  a Locative.  There  is  also  a separate  form  for  the 
Genitive  singular.  These  arc  formed  as  follows  : — 

Masculine  tadbhava  nouns  in  d form  the  oblique  singular  in  e,  and  the  oblique 
plural  in  ea.  Thus,  ghord,  a horse  ; obi.  sing,  ghdre,  obi.  plur.  ghorea. 

Masculine  nouns  cuding  in  a consonant  add  d for  the  oblique  singular,  and  a for 
the  oblique  plural.  Thus,  ghar,  a house  ; obi.  sing,  ghord , obi.  plur.  ghara. 

Other  masculine  nouns  do  not  change  in  the  oblique  singular,  and  add  a in  the 
oblique  plural.  Thus,  hdthi , rn  elephant,  obi.  sing,  hdthi,  obi.  plur.  hdthia  ; bichchu , 
a scorpion ; obi.  sing,  bichchu,  obi.  plur.  bichchud. 

Peminine  nouns  ending  in  i do  not  change  in  the  oblique  singular,  and  add  a in 
the  oblique  plural.  Thus,  hurt,  a girl;  old.  sing,  kupi,  obi.  plur.  Jewfia. 


oiiamKa^S. 


777 


Feminine  nouns  ending  in  a consonant  add  l in  the  oblique  singular,  and  l or  a in 
the  oblique  plural.  Thus,  baibn,  a sister ; obi.  sing,  baihni,  obi.  plur.  baihni  or  baihna. 

The  only  important  feminine  nouns  which  do  not  fall  within  these  two  classes  are 
dhlu,  a daughter,  and  gd,  a cow.  The  former  has  its  obi.  sing,  dhitut,  and  its  obi.  plur. 
dbiiia.  The  latter  has  its. obi.  sing,  gal,  obi.  plur.  gala. 

The  Agont  (and  Locative)  plural  is  always  the  same  as  the  oblique  plural,  and  need 
not  concern  us  further.  In  the  case  of  masculine  nouns  the  agent  singular  ends  in  e. 
In  the  case  of  nouns  like  ghord,  it  is  the  same  as  the  obi.  sing.  Thus,  gbbre,  by  or  iu  a 
horse.  In  the  case  of  other  nouns  c is  added  to  the  nominative.  Tims,  gbar,  a house, 
gbare,  by  orv.in  a house ; hdthi,  an  elephant,  h&thie,  by  an  elephant ; bichcliu , a scorpion, 
bichchue,  by  a scorpion. 

Feminine  nouns  ending  in  i form  the  agent  singular  by  adding  e.  Thus,  hurl,  a girl, 
kurie,  by  a girl.  So  also  dhlu,  a daughter,  ag.  sing,  dhlfte,  and  gd,  a cow,  ag.  sing. 
gale. 

Feminine  nouns  ending  in  a consonant  have  the  agent  singular  the  same  as  the 
oblique  form  singular.  Thus,  baibn,  a sister,  ag.  sing,  baihni. 

The  genitive  postposition  is  rd,  and  this  is  generally  added  to  the  oblique  form  as 
in  other  Western  Pabarl  languages  ; but,  in  the  case  of  masculine  nouns  ending  in  a 
consonant,  like  gbar,  a house,  in  which  the  oblique  form  ends  in  d,  e is  substituted  for 
a.  Thus,  gbar ; obi.  sing,  ghard ; gen.  sing,  ghare-rd.  This  docs  not  apply  to  the 
plural,  in  which  the  rd  is  always  added  to  the  unchanged  oblique  form. 

The  above  declensions  are  conveniently  shown  in  the  following  table,  in  which  the 
Vocatives,  which  exhibit  minor  variations,  have  been  added. 


SlXOTLAK. 

i’lUHAL. 

Nominative. 

Oblique. 

Agent 

and 

Locative. 

i 

Genitive. 

v ,•  1 

l 

i 

! 

Nominative. 

Oblique  including 
Agent  ami 
Locative. 

Genitive. 

Vocative. 

i 

Ghdri , a horse 

glidre 

ghdre 

I 

ghore -rd 

! 

ghdre 

1 

ghdre 

gh(?rf*a 

yhurdd-rd 

ghdred. 

Ghary  ft  house 

ghard 

ghard 

ghare-rd 

yluir 

'jhar 

ghara 

ghard-rd 

ghuro. 

Ilatht,  ah  ele- 
phant. ■*' 

hdthi 

hdthle 

hdthi-rd 

hathia 

hdthi 

hdthia 

hdthid-rd 

hat  hid. 

Bichohn , a.  scor- 
pion. 

bichchu 

bichchue 

to 

bichchumrd 

bichchud 

bichcliu 

bichchud 

bichclivci-ra 

bichchud. 

Kufiy  a girl 

hurt 

hufie 

kurl-rd 

hurid 

hurl 

hurta 

hurid-rl 

kuriO. 

Jr, 

BaiJin •,  a sister 

baihni 

baihni 

baihni-rd 

baihni 

baihni , baihna 

baihniy  baihna 

lhiihnt-rd , 
baihna- rd 

Lai  h no 

Dhiuy  a daugh-~ 
ter. 

! 

dhlud 

dhlud 

dhiue-rd 

dhlud 

dhi  ud 

dhlud 

dJifud-rd 

dhlud. 

Gd,  a cow 

gdi 

gale 

gdi-rd 

gdid 

gd? 

. gdia 

giid-rd 

gdid . 

VOL.  IX|  PART  IV. 


778 


WESTERN  PAHAkT. 


Mr.  Grohnme  Bailey  mentions,  in  addition  to  dhlu,  and  gd,  one  other  irregular 
noun,  viz.,  na  or  nd,  a name.  Its  obi.  sing,  is  ndd,  its  gen.  sing.  nd$-rd,  nom.  plur. 
na  or  nd,  and  its  obi.  plur.  nda. 

The  usual  postpositions  are : — 

Aec.  Bat.  jo,  to  ; tikar,  for;  kart,  for,  on  account  of. 

Abl.  kachhd,  from ; leone,  with,  by  means  of,  together  with ; manjhd,  from 
in. 

Gen.  rd. 

Locative  bichch,  maiijli,  in  ; tikar,  up  to  ; par,  on  ; kane,  kachh,  near. 

After  verbs  of  saying,  the  person  addressed  takes  kane  or  jo. 

Of  the  above,  rd  is,  as  usual,  an  adjective,  becoming  re  when  the  governing  noun 
is  in  the  masculine  oblique  singular  or  in  the  masculine  plural,  and  ri  when  the 
governing  noun  is  feminine. 

The  postposition  jo  is  used  for  the  accusative,  exactly  like  the  Hindi  ko. 
The  word  jb  is  the  locative  of  an  obsolete  jd  which  meant  ‘ of  \ and  which  was 
derived  from  the  Sanskrit  kdrgah  through  the  Prakrit  kajjab.  The  ka  was  dropped, 
and  the  remaining  jjab  became  jd  in  the  ancient  language.  This  jjob  also  became  the 
Sindhi  jb,  of.  It  should  be  remembered  that,  although  both  the  Cham&ill  ,/d  and  the 
Sindhi  jb  have  the  same  ultimate  derivation,  the  Chameali  jb  is  really,  by  origin,  a 
locative  of  the  Sindhi  jb.  The  locative  of  jjab  was  jjahu , or  some  such  word,  from 
which  the  Cham&ill  jb  is  directly  derived. 

Adjectives  call  for  few  remarks.  As  usual  only  those  change  for  gender  and 
number  which  end  in  d.  The  a becomes  e when  the  adjective  agrees  with  a noun  in  the 
masculine  oblique  singular  or  in  the  masculine  plural.  When  the  adjective  agrees  with 
a feminine  noun  the  d always  becomes  l.  Thus  : — 

bliald  dihne,  a good  man. 

blade  ddnu-rd,  of  a good  man. 

blmle  ddrnl,  good  men. 

hhali  trimat,  a good  woman. 

bit  all  trimoti-rd,  of  a good  woman. 

bit  all  trimat  a,  good  women. 

Comparison  is  indicated  as  usual  by  the  ablative  with  kachchd.  Thus  : — 
bhenbkac/ihd  lammd,  taller  than  the  sister. 
sabhnb kachhd  lammd,  taller  than  all,  tallest. 

PRONOUNS.— The  Pronouns  of  the  First  and  Second  Persons  ore  thus 

declined.  They  have  special  forms  for  the  dative  singular. 


1 

Thou 

Nom. 

hau 

til 

A" 

mat 

tai 

Obi. 

mat 

tat 

Bat. 

miiijb 

tijo 

Gen. 

merd 

tSra 

cuamEal!. 


779 


Plur. 


I 

Thou 

Nom. 

as) 

fas) 

Ag.  . 

asd 

(usd 

Ohl. 

asa 

tusa 

Gen. 

hamdrd 

t umhdvd 

In  the  translation  of  tho  parable,  mat  is  sometimes  used  for  the  nominative  singular 
of  the  first  person,  instead  of  hau. 


The  Demonstrative  Pronouns  (also  used  as  pronouns  of  the  third  person) 
thus  declined : — 


Sing. 


Plur. 


This 

That 

Nom. 

eh 

se,  0 

Ag. 

in 7 

uni 

Obi. 

is 

us 

Gen. 

ise-rd 

use-ra 

Nom. 

eh 

se,  d 

Ag- 

iHli* 

unha 

Ohl. 

inha 

unluj 

Gen. 

inher'd 

unhe-rd 

are 


In  most  of  the  Western  Palmy!  dialects  those  pronouns  have  three  genders,  a 
masculine,  a feminine,  and  a neuter,  but  this  does  not  appear  to  he  the  case  in  Chame&li. 
In  the  adjoining  MaudeaU  {vide  p.  7'2li  ante ) the  neuter  oblique  singular  of  eh  is 
iddhi,  and  this  has  apparently  been  borrowed  in  Sentence  232,  where  we  have  iddhe-rd 
mill,  the  price  of  this. 

The  Relative  and  Interrogative  Pronouns  are  declined  as  follows : — 


Sing. 


Plur. 


Who  Who  ? 


Nom. 

j<> 

kun 

Ag. 

jin/ 

hunt 

Obi. 

jis 

kits 

Gen. 

j ise-rd 

kuse-rd 

Nom. 

j<' 

kun 

Ag. 

jinha 

kunha 

Obi. 

jinha 

kunha 

Gen. 

jinhe-rd 

k unhe-rd 

The  Neuter  Interrogative  Pronoun  is  Art/ or  A>7,  what  ? Mr.  Bailey  gives  its 
genitive  as  kudhe-rd  and  its  oblique  singular  as  kail.  Probably  another  oblique  form 
occurs  in  kinjd,  for  wliat  ? why  ? 

The  Indefinite  pronouns  arc  hot, anyone,  someone,  (agent  human,  obi.  kusianov  kmiu), 
and kiclichh,  anything,  something  (not declined) . Je-kdi,  whoever;  je-kiclichh,  whatever. 

The  Reflexive  Pronoun  is  apu,  self,  gen.  apud.  Note  that  the  initial  a is  short, 
not  long  as  in  other  Western  Paharl  languages. 

VOL.  PAllT  IV. 


5 a 2 


780 


WESTERN  PA1IA  HI. 


Mr.  Bailov  points  out  tbat  -id,  -jut,  -Jan  or  -lam  (or  -id,  -idi,  -iau,-iaui)  added  to  a 
pronoun  skives  emphasis.  Thus,  seidj  or  didi,  that  very  one  ; nniaui,  by  that  very  one. 

VERBS.— A. — Auxiliary  Verbs  and  Verbs  Substantive. —The  Conjugation 


of  the  Verb  Substantive  approaches  more  nearly  that  which  we  find  in  Mandeali,  rather 
than  that  of  other  "Western  Bahari  dialects.  There  is  no  trace  of  the  forms  with  s ( sd , 
ossa,  etc.),  which  are  common  further  East.1  The  present  does  not  change  for  person. 
Eor  all  persons  of  the  singular,  it  is  hoi,  and  for  all  persons  of  the  plural  kin.  This  hai 
means  ‘ I am  ‘ thou  art  ’ and  ‘ he  is  ’. 

The  past  tense  is  thid  or  fhiyd,  used  exactly  like  the  Hindi  thd.  The  masculine 
plural  is  t hie  or  Ihiye,  and  the  feminine  singular  and  plural  is  l hi. 

B. — Active  Verb. — The  Infinitive  always  ends  in  no,  even  after  r,  r,  or  1.  Thus, 
mdrnd,  to  strike.  Note  piind  or  pound,  to  fall,  and  Hid  (Hindi  and),  to  come. 

The  Present  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  dd  to  the  root.  Thus,  mania,  striking. 
If  the  root  ends  in  a vowel,  or  in  h preceded  by  a vowel,  then  n is  inserted.  Thus,  from 
h 'hand,  to  eat,  pres.  part.  khdnild ; from  chdhnd,  to  wish,  pres.  part,  chdhnd  d.  Mr. 


Grahame  Bailey  gives  the  present  participle  of  puna  or  pound,  to  fall,  as  ptidd,  instead 
of  panda. 

The  present  participle  of  rehnd,  to  remain,  is  ra  Hindu  ; of  (lend  or  daind,  to  give, 
diudd  ; and  of  lend  or  laind,  to  take,  Hilda. 

From  the  oblique  masculine  singular  of  the  present  participle  arc  formed  Adver- 
bial Participles,  Such  as  mdrde-i,  immediately  on  striking;  mdrde-hde,  while  striking, 
on  the  same  principles  ns  in  Hindi. 

The  Past  Farticiple  is  formed  by  adding  ed  or  yd  to  the  root.  Thus  from  mdrnd, 
to  strike,  past  participle  indeed  or  mdryd.  These  are  really  only  two  different  ways  of 
spelling  the  same  sound,  which  is  best  represented  by  the  form  indeed.  The  masculine 
plural  is  mare,  and  the  feminine  (singular  and  plural)  mart.  The  following  past  parti- 
ciples are  irregular:  — 


puna  or  pound,  to  fall 

past  part. 

pdd,  plur.  pc,  fem.  pel 

jdnd,  to  go 

95 

ged,  plur.  ge,  fem.  gel 

lend  or  laind,  to  lake 

• 9 

led,  plur.  le,  fem.  lei 

(lend  or  (laind,  to  give 

39 

dittd 

karnd,  to  do,  to  make 

99 

kit  id 

chhvhnd,  to  touch 

” 99 

ch h dhtd 

haihnd,  to  sit 

5 9 

baithd 

in  a,  to  come 

99 

ayd , plur.  ae,  fcm.  air 

relind , to  remain 

99 

redd 

hand,  to  become 

3) 

had 

Verbs  whose  roots  end  in  d or  dh  shorten  the  d in  the  masculine  of  this  participle, 
but  retain  the  long  d in  the  feminine,  as  in  a yd  (not  dyd)  given  above.  Thus 
galdnd,  to  say  past  part,  yala yd,  plur.  gc.lac,  hut  fern,  galdl f 
khdnd,  to  eat  „ khayd , plur.  khae,  fcm.  khdi.  . 

chdhnd,  to  wish  „ ehahea,  plur.  cholic,  fem.  chahi. 


1 T)r.  Vogel  gives  c.  set,  he  is,  .is  used  in  the  old  language  of  inscriptions. 


ciiamSai.I. 


781 


As  in  Mand&ili,  Cham&ill  lias  a Static  Pa8t  Participle  indicating  state  or  con- 
dition. In  j\lanc)6ajT  ( vide  p.  725)  the  static  participle  is  formed  by  changing  the  final 
ed  or  yd  of  the  past  participle  to  l and  adding  -rd.  In  Chameall  it  is  formed  by  chang- 
ing the  final  ed  or  yd  to  o-and  adding  -rd. 

Thus,  mar  da  or  mar  yd,  struck,  mdrb-rd , in  tho  state  of  being  struck  ; tired,  fallen, 
iiro-rd , in  tho  state  of  having  fallen. 

The  irregular  past  participles  exhibit  some  irregularities  in  the  formation  of  the 
Static  past  participle,  due  partly  to  change  of  accent,  and  partly  to  the  retention  of  old 
forms.  Thus 


pea,  fallen  static  past  part,  peb-rd 

ged,  gone  „ ' ,,  geb-rd  or  gachhb-rd 

led , taken  ,,  ,,  led- rd 

dittd,  given  ,,  ,,  ditld-rd 

kit  Id,  done  „ „ killb-rd 

clihiihtd , touched  „ „ c/ihu/ilb-rd 

bait  lid , sealed  „ ,,  bathb-rd  or  bithb-rd, 

ttyd,  come  ,,  „ ab-rd  or  acchb-rd 

* re  ltd,  remained  „ ,,  rehb-rd 

The  Future  Passive  Participle  is  the  same  in  form  as  the  infinitive,  as  mdriid, 
pi  in*,  nidrne  ; fern,  sing,  and  plur.  indent,  proper  to  be  struck,  about  to  be  struck. 

The  Conjunctive  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  i to  the  root.  Thus  marl,  hav- 
ing struck.  This  form  is  principally  used  in  intensive  compound  verbs,  as  in  cl  mil- j and, 
to  go  away.  For  the  usual  conjunctive  participle  kart  is  added,  as  in  marl-kart,  having 
struck.  Irregular  are  pel-kart,,  having  fallen,  from  pdnd  or  pannd,  to  fall,  and  dl-kari, 
having  come,  from  7 wd,  to  come. 

The  Noun  of  Agency  is  formed  by  adding  ne-wdld,  to  the  root.  Thus,  mdrnc-trdld, 
a striker,  one  who  strikes,  one  who  is  about  to  strike. 

As  in  other  connected  Languages,  the  2nd  person  singular  of  the  Imperative  is 
the  same  in  form  as  the  root.  The  second  person  plural  is  formed  by  adding  d to  the 
singular.  Thus,  mar,  strike  thou  ; mdrd,  strike  ye.  If  the  root  of  tlio  verb  ends  in  d, 
it  and  the  termination  d of  the  2nd  plural  coalesce  into  a single  d.  Thus  gald+d, 
say  ye,  becomes  gala,  so  that  the  plural  and  the  singular  are  identical  iu  form.  So  also 
jd,  go  thou,  or  go  ye.  Sometimes,  however,  in  such  cases,  in  order  to  distinguish  between 
the  singular  and  the  plural,  the  Panjabi  termination  b is  added  to  form  the  latter.  Thus 
in  the  parable  we  have  l ado,  clothe  ye,  and  pudb,  cause  ye  to  fall. 

Some  Imperatives  are  irregular.  Thus  : — 

Imperative. 


pdnd  or  paund,  to  fall 
hand,  to  become 
\nd,  to  come 
rehnd,  to  remain 
baihna,  to  sit 

In  tho  Parable  there  are  two 


2ml  feint'. 

2nd  plur. 

JJO 

pod 

ho 

hod 

a 

Id  or  do 

raili 

rdlut 

hath 

hchd 

instances  of  a first  person  plural  imperative,  ciz.: 


khdie,  let  us  eat,  and  karie,  let  us  make. 


I have  found  no  authority  for  these  elsewhere. 


782 


WESTERN  PAHARl. 


The  Old  Present  and  Present  Subjunctive  is  conjugated  as  follows 


“ I strike  ”,  “ I may  strike  ”,  etc. 

* 

Sing. 

Plur. 

1. 

mdrd 

mdra 

2. 

mare 

mdrd 

3. 

mdro,  mare 

mdran 

In  the  case  of  verbs  whose  roots  end  in  d,  the  a of  the  first  person  singular  and  plural 

generally  coalesces  with  the  d of  the  root  into  d,  so  that  we  get  from  galdnd,  to  say  : — 

Sing. 

Plur. 

1. 

gala 

gala 

2. 

galdd 

galdd 

3. 

galdd,  guide 

galhan 

Sometimes,  however,  the  full  form  galda  is  dlso  found. 

The  following  verbs  form  this  tense  irregularly : — 

puna  orpaund,  to  fall,  has  : — 

Sing. 

Phil*. 

1. 

poa 

poa 

2. 

pod 

pod 

3. 

po 

pon 

hund,  to  become,  is  declined  very 

similarly,  making  hoa,  etc.. 

but  its  third  person 

plural  is  bun,  not  hon. 

i$d,  to  come,  has  : — 

r 

Sing. 

Plur, 

1. 

3i 

ta 

y 

ta 

2. 

iye 

id 

3. 

iyd,  iye 

in 

jdnd,  to  go,  has  : — 

> 

Sing. 

Plur. 

1. 

• ca 
ja 

Ja 

2. 

jde 

JYl 

3. 

jdo,  jde 

jdn 

rehnd , to  remain,  is  regular,  except  that  its  third  plural  is  raihn. 

hailtyd,  to  sit,  makes  helm,  and  so 

on,  with  e in  the  first  syllable  throughout. 

dend  or  daind,  to  give,  has  : — 

Sing. 

Plur. 

1. 

ilea 

dea 

2. 

dee , dd 

dda 

3. 

deb,  dee , dd 

din 

lend,  or  laind,  to  take,  is  conjugated  exactly  like  dead  substituting  l for  d. 

The  Present  is  formed  from  the  present  participle,  with  the  present  tense  of  the 
verb  substantive.  The  participle  changos  for  gender  and  number,  and  the  verb  sub- 
stantive for  number  only.  Thus : — 

sing.  masc.  fiau  mdrdd  hai,  I strike  or  am  striking, 

„ fem.  hau  mdrdi  had,  ,,  „ 

plur.  masc.  asl  mdrdd  bin,  wc  strike  or  are  striking.  • , 

„ fem.  asl  mdrdi  Inn 


99 


cha.m8a.lL  783 

The  other  persons  of  each  number  are  identical  with  the  first  person,  with  the 
appropriate  change  of  pronoun. 

In  this  tense  the  verb  substantive  is  6ften  dropped,  so  that  we  have  the  present 
participle  alone,  as  in  haumdrdd,  T strike. 

The  Imperfect  is  similarly  formed  with  thid  or  thiyd.  Thus  : — 
sing.  masc.  hau  mdrdii  thiyii , I was  striking. 

„ fem.  hau  mdrdi  thi , ,, 

plur.  masc.  mi  tniirde  thiyd,  we  were  striking. 

„ fem.  mi  mdrdi  thi,  „ 

So  for  the  other  persons. 

A Present  Definite  is  formed  on  the  principle  of  the  Hindi  frequentative  and 
continuative  verbs  with  karnd  and  rah  mi.  Thus  : — 

hau  mdred  kardd  hai,  I am  striking,  I habitually  strike. 
hau  mdred  Jcardi  hai,  I (fem.)  am  striking,  I habitually  strike. 
haii  mdred  raihndd  hai,  I am  striking,  I continue  striking. 
hau  mdri  raihndi  hai,  I (fom.)  am  striking,  I continue  striking. 

Noto  that  with  karnd,  mdred,  is  immutable  (as  in  Hindi),  but  with  rehnd,  it  changes 
for  gender. 

For  another  example  of  this  tense,  compare  : — 

sc  dahgra-jo  chared  kardd-hai,  he  is  grazing  cattle  (sentence  229). 

The  Future  is  formed  on  the  same  principle  as  that  followed  in  most  Western 
Pahari  Dialects.-  The  syllable  Id  is  added  to  the  root.  Thus,  hau  mdrld,  I shall  strike. 
The  masculine  plural  is  mdrld,  and  the  feminine  of  both  numbers  mdrli.  There  is  no 
change  for  person.  A few  verbs  are  slightly  irregular  : — 
puna  or  paund,  to  fall,  has  paid, 

hand,  to  become,  „ hold, 

jdnd,  to  go,  „ jdtUd. 

relmd,  to  remain,  „ railild. 

The  verb  ind,  to  come,  is  regular,  making  lid. 

The  Past  Conditional  is>  as  in  Hindi,  simply  the  present  participle,  changing  for 
gender  and  number,  hut  not  for  person.  Thus  : — 

sing.  masc.  hau  mdrdd,  (if)  I had  struck. 

t,  fem.  hau  mdrdi,  ,, 

plur.  masc.  asi  marde,  (if)  we  had  struck. 

„ fem.  asi  mdrdi,  „ 

The  tenses  formed  from  the  past  participle  need  few  remarks,  being  formed  exactly 
as  in  Hindi.  Thus  : — 

hau  tired,  I fell. 

mat  mdred,  I struck  him. 

hau  tired  hai,  I have  fallen. 

mat  mated  hai,  I have  struck  him. 

hau  fired  thiyd , I had  fallen. 

mat  mdred  thiyd,  I had  struck  him. 


784 


WESTERN  PAHARl. 


The  Passive  Voice  is  made,  as  in  Hindi,  by  conjugating  jdnd  with  the  past 
participle.  Thus,  hau  inarea  jdndd  hat,  I am  being  beaten. 

In  the  Western  Panjab  there  is  a passivo  formed  by  adding  * to  the  root.  Mr.  Bailey 
gives  the  following  sporadic  specimens  from  Cham&ill,  which  agree  with  this  in  forma- 
tion : — 

samajhnd,  to  understand ; samjhidd  hai,  it  is  understood. 

chahna,  to  wish  ; chdhtdd  hat,  it  is  needed,  it  is  fitting,  it  is  necessary. 

Chahiyb  generally  stands  for  the  Hindi  chdhiye. 

Causal  Verbs  are  formed  much  as  in  Hindi.  Thus : — 

sunrtd,  to  hear,  causal  sundial, 
chugnd,  to  graze  (neut.),  causal  chugdnd. 
puna  or  pound,  to  fall,  causal  pudnd. 
charnd,  to  graze  (neut.),  causal  chdrnd. 
charhnd,  to  rise,  causal  charhnd. 

As  examples  of  irregular  causals,  we  may  quote  : — 
khdnd,  to  eat,  causal  khudnd. 

jdnd,  to  go,  „ gndnd,  to  cause  to  go,  to  lose. 

sikkhnd,  to  learn,  „ sikhdlnd. 

haihnd,  to  sit,  „ hihdlnd. 

Compound  Verbs  need  few  remarks.  Iutensive8  ore  formed  with  the  conjunc- 
tive participle  of  the  principal  verb,  as  in  clad/  jdnd,  to  go  away ; lei  ind,  to  bring ; let 
jdnd,  to  take  away;  mnkdi.  haihnd,  to  complete  entirely. 

As  an  example  of  an  Inceptive  compound  we  may  quote  karnc  laggnd.  Frequen- 
tative and  Continuative  compounds  have  been  dealt  with  under  the  head  of  the 
present  definite. 

The  only  available  specimens  of  Chameall  are  the  following  version  of  the  Parable 
of  the  Prodigal  Son,  and  the  List  of  Words  and  Sentences  on  pp.  862  ff.  Regarding  the 
character  in  which  the  specimen  is  recorded,  see  the  remarks  on  p.  771. 


785 


[No.  I.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAIlAltt  (CHAMEALl). 

Standard  Dialect. 

£»/)  1 il  L)  3 ^2  i (3  3^  ny  l\  ~h 

V | k k xr?  n&xC  * "(t  (»|  i SrC 

nf  3 ri  fr£ji  »/  i f (T)?  pfu's'] 

3i  %/)  i crS  Si. 

filin’'  u ^ 7^  (Wj6  \z<fl  xfl 

iV  > nsf  ET3  G$  Cfw^} 

\>  XX  TTzf^  l if  X 7?3  6o» 

YJX''^  ^ 6 Y[  fj^T  Yj^  5fa>/%  PtT 

cfi  Gtt  ? fftfl  iif  i i1  S iff  xf)  Gjt 
wn  > $x)  cjim?  > F3a  fT5  Gtf  6ti> 

CTMSL  wif  713  TTi  /ia  * <sl  5f-3  Gf)  3T3z/ 
fl  frfX3  73X3  7Je>  tfij  fe.  Gy?  VTJ|  TTvaf 

5 H 


VOI.  IX,  PART  IV. 


7S6 


western  pahA^I. 


us  1 us  >2r<f  6?r  5 (w/  Fstf  1 

us  £ ■ ft  tisil  (i?sj  / siwz/  ris 
vv  5 f><35i.  s/fi  (3*1  X38  s/1  *(6  wil 

jo  a >1  vi)  3 5T3  3 6 v|  V r\  s if  S 1 o6- 

Q/l.  X~/l  WVZL  V»  >08  *V  VTi 

Stt  31  jtco^  in  mif  ^ in  n 

JTTTf  l/u  37T3  ER  * Or  SiJT  ’ft 

b [i/l  iS'  M \ I (si'Si  STM  a.  XVfvf 
7/3I  PX  V3  1 1/-  ff  (jjl  X"<ft 
vivrs.  h -w3€  1 ms  5f5»  [3>o  jyj  il 

r>  / - r\  ^ O / -s  a ^ 

n32o  3n  Vi?T  ^ V37T  TJJy  27?  3 (3  J7  5> 

*n*'  cftf  Z^3  54]  X" j)  G'jT  "St  JT? 

muf  Vfi  sjtf  fcf  | Zf3  M ^ (3  JT  3J  JTmzf 

* 

V?  TTS it  i Jf3  3/  ifu  (Vi  >3 
tt3  e?3  <fr;  S|JT  S fe'S}  3£  ua.G^'l 


OHAMfiltl. 


787 


fa  mix.  >i  % jtco -Ef"  ys 

XVtS  X~  ill  Vj fz%  VTS  Q7i  'Si 

FpCrfof  V)  3 (?n  5 l/fJT3bl  Ja  3 U5 

>)  2 Men?  5iJ  pfpr]  ^3  7F3  Uffl  x(i2 
£lfl  W)1  Si  23  n )"  UK  nsl  fn/  R Ta 
f!  £1"  if  §ia  jtjt)  ftt/  fav(  ft  fric^fl 

ftu  I 3'  y 7tI  COTT  || 

z*3  Qr\  $ hf  u\  hi X vi  > i 

i\  «i5  j ^ uf  /zl  vrS  *|3js2  3 

I f f>/1  xfvo  Si  Tflfl 

Xjf)  Mje"  Si  23  X*'  3 I G^l  (pvt  S 

JTco  cr^  5 3/  3'<r  Wm  5 £7  3 5 5 

fa  tfvi  &£  6n  x {\  S ft  Si'*/ 

•STjTj/  y sH  JTl/  I Q^fl  UYl>/)  X" 

5flv(  3TsT  ^ XT^Z/f  | ^ Gft  i & 

5 tt  -i 

VOL.  XXj  PAM  IV. 


768 


3VE8TEBN  PAH  A R I. 


£3  3 VfZ  G'jFT  & MS'S.  CO  7f  I 

Qi^  Q\  tif  xfl  <H'  5 

<f3sf|  i^^rf  xj£  n yfl  wsH'i 
3 5f3  >0 /)  35  JTc^Z  WJg''  zf35- 

{)  jrcf  M ^ 3 y?  CO  3°\  fri  £ 

fiji'  * y\  5R5.  zf 5 
frf  -K»\  yVl  Y\X  I U3  f5i n 5™ 
aa>  35  yi,  5RT^  ji)  ^mzT) 

j/  H3  Jpff  (?tr  5 |3>0 
j/n  co^f  I GYI  (3  JT  ii  Jl<^>  ?A 

hrf  2 n3  x\  5 Cf3  3\ 

£os  nf  0 v?  if  3 1 y yfl  K'3<s^ 
5T3  $»'  S*!  5> 

3 S nil  JT  Vi'  Ox  if  f^5°l  sf)*a/ 

if  j\vf  VT3  irsfl  f\vf  7j 
fri  col  ijvf  II 


789 


[No.  I.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


Central  Group. 

AVESTEHN  PAHAJiT  (CITAMEALd). 


Standard  Dialect. 


TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 

(In  or<h-r  to  sei-uro  uniformity,  the  spoiling  »£  the  Transliteration  has  Wn  here  and  there  slightly  altered.  Doable 
let' ers  are  always  written  as  single  letters  in  the  original,  anil  this  also  has  been  eorrectod  in  the  transliteration.) 

TkkI-iidmI-rc 
One-man-of 
babbe-kane 
the- father- to  it- 

mifijo  tie.’ 
me -to  give* 

Ate  thbrhe-dliiare-pichchhe  lauhka-puttar  sabbh-kichchh  batoli  -hatbli  -kari 
And  a-few-days-after  the- youn  gee-son  everything  collected-collect  cd-having 

dur-desa-jb  chali-gea,  ate  utthe  apui  Jati-patl  bure-kamma-biohch 

a-far-counl ry-lo  went-away , and  there  Jus-on;  a property  bad-act  ions- in 

mukai-baitha,  tS  us-desa-manjb 

hacing-completed-sat , then  that-conntry-in 


do 

puttar 

tide. 

TJ  nha  - man  j hit 

nikke-puttre 

two 

sons 

were. 

The  m-f rom-among 

by-l  he- younger-son 

galayti. 

* ba-bba. 

F 

gbav-bari-ra 

besa 

mera  hai,  se 

wus-said, 

‘father, 

what 

property-of 

share 

mine  is,  that 

Ta 

uni 

apni 

lati-pati 

uriha- 

•jb  bandi-ditti. 

Then 

by-him 

his-own 

property 

them-to  was-dirided-out . 

guiii.  Ja  se 

sabbb-kiehebb 

was-lost.  When  he 

everything  , 

barn  ankul  pea, 

ate 

us-jo 

a- great  famine  Jell, 

and 

him- to 

us-dese-re  ikki-i 

idml-re 

lay 

that-  eon  ntry-of  a-man-of 

(to-)  skirt 

apne-kbettra-manjh 

sur 

elnirne-jb 

h is -oil'll- fields-  i a 
je  sikar-mukar 


husks 


swine  J'eeding-for 

sur  kliande-thie, 
thc-sicinc  eating-were,  ‘ 
koi  us-jb  nl  dinda  tliia. 

anyone  him-to  not  g icing  was. 

‘ mere-babbe-re  kitue 
‘ niy-f ather-of  how-many 

khai-kari  dene-jo  bill  hai,  ate 

eaten-haoing  giving-Jor  also  is,  and 
utthi-kari  ' apne-babe-kaebh  jallii,  ate 
arise  n-liaving  my-own-f 'other-near  will-go , and 


what 

par 

but 

IS 

then 


gf 


it-was-said. 


auklii  pel. 
distress  Jell. 
laggii, 

was-atf  ached, 
bhejya. 
it-was-senl. 

‘ imha-kane 
‘ them- with 
Par  jS 
But  tchc 

kainine 

servants 

hau  bill 
I hungry 

galala, 

will-say, 


Ta  o jai-kari 

Then  he  gone-having 
ate  uni  us-jo 

and  by -him  him-as-Jor 

Ate  uni  ckahea 

And  by-him  it-was-icished 

apna  pet.  bhar^,’ 


my-own  belly  I -may  -Jill ,» 

se 

surti-bichch 

ava, 

> he 

sense-in 

came, 

liin, 

jiuha-kaehb 

rbti 

are , 

whom-near 

bread 

kha 

marda-hai. 

llau 

dying-am. 


ns-]o 

him-to 


“ baba,  ruaT 
'■father,  by-me 


surge-ra 


ate 


tere-agge 


heaven-of  and  of-thce-before 


pap  kitta,  ate  a bo 
sin  teas- done,  and  now 


mat  ls-jog 
1 this-worthy 


in 

(am-hiot 


790 


WESTERN  PAHAKI. 

je  phirl  tera  puttar  boa.  Alin  jo  apne-kammgS-sahi  ikk 

that  again  thy  son  I-may-becomc.  Me  thine-own-servants-like  one 

hujjli.”  ’ Ts  se  utthi-kari  apne-babe-kachh  aya.  Pap 

consider."  ’ Then  he  arisen- having  h is- own- father-near  came.  + But 

ajje-tikar  dur-hi  thia,  je  use-re  babe  us-jo  dikkhya,  ate 

still  distant-even  he-was,  that  by-liis  by-father  him-as-f or  it-was-seen,  and 
us-jo  daya  al,  ate  dauri-kari  us-jo  gale  laya, 

him- to  compassion  came , and  run-having  him-to  on-the-neck  he-was -attached, 

ate  sunna  ditta.  Ate  puttre  us-jo  galaya,  ‘ babba,  max 

and  kiss  was-given.  And  by-thc-son  him-to  it-was-said , father , by-me 

surge-ra  ate  tera  pap  kitta-hai,  ate  abe  is-jog  ni  je 

heaven-of  and  of -thee  sin  done-is,  and  'now  this-icorthy  ( I-am-)not  that 

phirl  tera  puttar  hoE.’  Par  babbe  apne-mundyahE-jo 

again  thy  son  T-may-become.’  But  by-the- father  his-own-bondservants-to 

galaya,  * kliare-kachha  khax*e  kapre  kadhi  lei-ao,  ate 

it-was-said,  * gobd-than  good  garments  having-produced  bring-ye,  and 

us-jo  luao ; ate  use-re  hatthe  miguthi,  ate  paire  jute  puao ; 

him-to  put-on ; and  him-of  on-liand  a-ring,  and  feet-on  shoes  cause-tofall  . 

ate  asi  khaie  ate  khxxsi  karie;  is-karl  je  eh  mera  puttar 

and  we  may-eat,  and  happiness  may-make ; this  for  that  this  my  son 

marl-gea-thia,  se  jinda  hua ; gochi-gea-thia,  se 

having- died- gone- was,  he  living  became ; having-been-lost-gone-was,  lie 

mili-gea.’  Ta  khusl  karne  lagge. 

having-been- got -went.’  Then  happiness  to-do  they-began. 

Ate  use-rii  bara,  puttar  khettia-inarSjh  thia.  JE  gliare-re 

And  him-of  tlie-elder  son  the -field- in  was.  When  the-house-of 

ner  pujya,  gane-  ate  nachchne-ra  raaka  sunnya.  TS 

near  lie-arrived,  singing-  and  dancing-of  sound  was-lieard.  Then 


ikki-chakra-jo  sadi-kari 

pxxchchhya 

‘ eh 

kya  hai ? ’ 

Uni 

one-servant-to  called-having 

it-was-asked. 

that. 

'this 

what  is  ? ’ 

By-him 

us-jo  galaya  je,  * tera 

bhal 

aya-hai. 

ate 

tore- babbe 

dham 

him-to  it-was-said  that,  * thy 

brother 

come- is. 

and 

by-thy  father 

a feast 

lal 

is-karl 

je  se  jinda 

jagda 

pujji-gea.’ 

Uni 

was-prepared 

thief  or 

that  he  living 

leaking 

arrived’ 

By-him f 

chamki-karl 

andar 

jana  ni  chahga. 

Ta  use-ra  baba,  bahar 

angered-having 

within 

to-go  not  was-ioished. 

Then  him-of  the  father  outside 

ayE,  ate 

US-jo 

patyane  lagga. 

Uni 

uttar 

dei-kari 

came,  and 

him-to 

to-persuade  began. 

By-him 

answer 

given-having 

babbe- jo 

galaya, 

‘dikkli,  itnl-lmrsa-kachha  ma7 

teri  tehal 

karda-hai. 

thefather-to  it-was-said,  ‘ see,  so-  many-yearsfrom  I thy  service  doing-amt 


CrtAM^ALI. 


791 


ate  kadi  tero  galae-kaohha  bahar  nl  gea,  par  tai  ikk  chhelu  bhl 

and  evqr  thy  thing- said-from  outside  not  I-went , hut  by-thee  one  kid  even 

mitljb  ajje-tikar  nl  ditta,  je  mai  apne-yar-basa-kane 

to-me  foday-up-to  not'  was- given,  that  I my-own-friends-companions-with 

khusi  mana.  Par  jis-bele  Sh  tern  puttar  aya,  jinl 

happiness  may-celebrate.  But  at-what-time  this  thy  son  came , by-whom 

teri  lati-patl  randa-maKjh  guai,  use-re  tikar  dham  lal.’ 

thy  property  harlots-mwng  was-lost,  him-of  for  a-feast  was-prepared * 
TTnl  us-jo  galaya,  ‘ bachcha,,  til  sada  mere-kane  hai,  ate 
By-him  him-to  it-was-said,  ‘ child,  thou  alioays  of-me-near  art,  and 

je-kichchh  mera  hai,  sc  tera  hai.  Khusi  karna  ate  khusi 

whatever  mine  is,  that  thine  is.  Happiness  to-do  and  happy 

huna  jog  thiya,  je  eh  tera  bhai  mari-gea-thiya,  phiri 

to-become  proper  teas,  that  this  thy  brother  having-died-gone-was,  again 

jinda  hui-gea ; ate  goehi-gea-thiya,  se  mili-gea.’ 

living  became ; and  having-bee  n-lost- gone-  was,  he  ha  v i ng- been-found-  went.’ 


792 


gadt. 

The  Gaddis  are  a pastoral  tribe  inhabiting-  the  mountainous  Bharmaur  or  Brahmaur 
Wizarat  of  the  State  of  Chamba,  and  the  adjoining  parts  of  the  Kangra  district.  The 
Bharmaur  Wizarat  is  also  called  after  them  Gaddoran, — the  country  of  the  Gaddis.  They 
preserve  a tradition  that  they  are  descended  from  refugees  from  the  Paujab  plains,  their 
ancestors  having  fled  from  the  open  country  to  escape  the  horrors  of  the  Musalman  in* 
vasions,  and  having  taken  refuge  in  these  ranges,  which  wero  at  that  poriod  almost 
uninhabited. 

An  account  of  this  interesting  people  will  be  found  on  pp.  79  ff.  of  the  Kangra 
Gazetteer  (1904),  and  a fuller  one  on  pp.  137  if.  of  the  Chamba  State  Gazetteor  of  the 
same  year.  Their  language  is  called  Gadi  or  Bharmaurl,  and  the  number  of  speakers 
was  reported  for  the  purposes  of  this  Survey  to  be  as  follows  : — 

Chamba  • 12,446 

Kangra  .............  2,500 

Total  . 14,946 


These  figures  were  based  on  the  Census  of  1891,  and  at  the  Census  of  1901,  the 
number  reported  was  much  larger,  being  as  follows : — 

Chamba  .............  26,361 

Kangra  .............  4,385 

Elsewhere  ....  ........  183 


Total  . .30,929 

The  Bharmaur  Wizarat  is  situated  in  the  extreme  cast  of  the  Chamba  State. 
Further  east  lies  Kulu,  the  language  of  which  is  Kului.  To  the  south  lies  Kangra, 
where  Kangri  is  spoken.  To  the  north  lies  Lahaul,  the  language  of  which  is  Tibeto- 
Burmau. 

Gadi  is  a form  of  Cham&ili,  but,  as  might  be  expected,  it  shows  traces  of  the 
influence  of  Kului  and  of  Kangri.  It  also  possesses  several  independent  features.  One 
of  them  is  the  common  pronunciation  of  the  letter  6 as  sounding  something  like  the 
ch  in  the  word  ' loch,’  or  in  the  German  ‘ a oh.’  Thus  the  word  Sitynd,  to  hear,  becomes 
tekunna ; sikkhnd , to  learn,  becomes  khikkhnd  ; 6it,  ague,  becomes  khlt  ; and  dad,  ton, 
becomes  dakh.  It  will  he  remembered  that  in  other  Western  Pahari  dialects  this  £ 
retains  its  proper  sound  like  that  of  the  ss  in  * session,’  and  does  not  become  a as  in 
Hindi.  On  the  other  hand  in  Kashmiri  and  its  related  languages  6 becomes  h , and  wo 
may  fairly  reckon  Jeh  as  an  intermediate  stage  in  the  process. 

The  conjugation  of  verbs  is  often  peculiar.  Most  noteworthy  is  the  frequency  of 
the  termination  chh  added  to  the  roots  ol‘  many  .verbs.  Thus,  the  verb  gdhnd,  to  go, 
makes  gachha  (compare  the  Kashmiri  gatsha,  and  the  Sanskrit  gachchhdmi ),  I may 
go.  So  many  other  verbs,  sueli  us  ind  (Kashmiri  yin”),  to  come,  ichha,  I may  come ; 
bhond,  to  become,  bhuchha,  I may  become. 

The  Vocabulary  of  Gad!  contains  many  peculiar  words.  A brief  list,  culled  from 
various  sources,  but  mainly  from  Mr.  O’Brien’s  Kangri  Vocabulary,  is  here  given.  It 


gadi. 


793 


will  be  seen  that  several  of  the  words  have  a close  relation  to  corresponding  words  in 
Kashmiri : — 

aguh,  before. 
ajcho,  this  year. 

bob,  babb,  a father. 
bagfi,  a field. 
balnd,  to  say. 
bandnd,  to  divide. 
bat,  wind. 

bauhar,  the  upper  storey  of  a house. 

belt,  a marriage. 

bejchnd,  to  sit. 

betari,  a wife. 

bharukkh,  hunger. 

bhdnd,  to  become,  to  be. 

bhrukkhnd , hungry. 

bidr,  wind. 

bifhu-rd.,  seated  (past  participle). 
bun,  bunk,  down,  below  (Kashmiri  bon), 
bit  f lid,  a father. 

chhadnd,  to  finish,  complete. 
chhelru,  a goat,  lamb. 
chhikkd,  a load. 
chltirl,  wood. 

chlift-rd,  come  (past  participle). 

chimtd,  high. 

chop,  the  peak  of  a hill. 

<fab hand,  to  put  on  (clothes). 
dabt-karl,  severely  (of  a heating). 
dand , a tooth. 

dend,  to  cross  (a  pass,  etc.). 

dlidr,  a hill. 

dharirnd,  to  drag. 

dh  idl'd,  dh yard,  a day,  the  sun. 

dhid,  a daughter. 

dote,  to-morrow. 

gabhru  or  gobhru,  a boy. 
gachhu-rd,  see  guchliu-rd. 

gdhnd,  to  go  (past  participle  gachhu-rd,  Kashmiri  go 'slum). 

go,  gone  (past  participle)  (Kashmiri  gdv). 

gobhru,  see  gabhru. 

guayd,  to  cause  to  go,  to  lose. 

VOL.  IX,  PAET  iv.  * 1 


794. 


WESTERN  PAHARl. 


guchhu-rd  or  gachhu-rd,  gone  (past  participle). 
guhnti,  to  be  lost. 

haehchhd,  white. 
hdkhar , hdkkhri , the  eye. 
hernd , to  see,  look. 
hesd,  a share. 

ijai,  ijl,  a mother. 

inti,  to  come  (ct‘.  Kashmiri  yin”'). 

jabarti,  an  old  man. 
jella,  hard. 
jorti , a rope. 

ktiimti . a servant. 
khadnti , to  call. 

Jchaglii,  a chip,  splinter. 
khanda,  a flock. 
khartil.  lmir. 
jcharat,  loss. 
kharinti,  to  stand  up. 
kheil,  a porcupine. 

khikkhnti,  to  teach  (Kashmiri  hekhun). 

khdtti , an  ass. 

khunnti.  to  hear. 

kit t ha , together,  in  one  place. 

hod,  a fair. 

laina,  to  take. 
lam. 7,  fine,  smooth. 
land,  to  prepare,  apply. 

Itiri,  a wife. 

lauhkard,  lauhkrd,  small,  younger. 
le-inti,  lei-ind,  or  lei-eind,  to  bring. 
lei-gdhnd . to  take  away. 
lodha,  blood. 

ma,  a mother. 
mahnd,  mdhnu,  a man. 

tnalle,  towards,  with,  near  (=Hindostani  pas). 

mat  a,  much,  very. 

mulnd,  to  be  joined,  to  be  met. 

nabi,  a wife. 

nachrdhi,  the  fourth  day  from  the  present. 

■noi,  a river. 


GADl. 


795 


nakarjt  the  day  before  the  day  before  yesterday,  three  days  ago. 
naf,  a stone. 
rihal£h&a,  to  run  away. 
nikkd , a child. 

odhan,  apparel. 

palchlh  poind,  to  fight. 
parar,  a foot. 

parj,  the  day  before  yesterday. 

parohe , the  day  after  to-morrow. 

phiri  ind,  to  return. 

pichchhuh,  behind. 

pitth , the  hack. 

puhdl,  a shepherd. 

pund,  to  fall. 

put  hi,  on,  upon  (Kashmiri  peth). 
putr,  a son. 

raihnd,  rehnd , to  remain,  dwell. 

sane,  together  with. 
sank,  a bull. 
saraknd,  to  be  angry. 

seite,  with,  together  with,  by  moans  of  (Kashmiri  sTity). 
sund,  to  sleep. 
sun  ind,  a dream. 

tale , below. 
tauld,  quick. 
thandd,  lazy. 
trimat,  a woman. 

ndj,  sound,  noise. 

mind,  the  lower  storey  of  a house. 

ttntbar,  age. 

Authorities.— A full  account  of  the  Gadi  dialect,  with  numerous  examples  taken 
from  popular  songs,  by  the  late  Mr.  E.  O'Brien,  together  with  additional  notes  by  the 
ltev.  T.  Gralmme  Bailey,  is  printed  in  Appendix  II  to  the  lvangra  Gazetteer  (1901). 
This  lias  been  republished  in  the  ltev.  T.  Gralmme  Bailey’s  Languages  of  the  Southern 
Himalayas,  published  by  tin;  Boyal  Asiatic  Society  in  l'JOS.  See  also  Mr.  II.  A.  Bose’s 
The  Song  of  Sindh  u liir,  a Song  of  the  Gaddi  tcomen,  the  Shepherds  of  the  Outer 
Himalayas,  Punjab,  published  in  the  Indian  Antiquary,  Vol.  xxxviii  (1909),  p.  295. 

Pronunciation. — There  are  several  curious  changes  of  vowels.  The  vowel  a 
becomes  n in  knnidnd,  to  work,  to  earn,  and  it  becomes  i in  kitthd,  together.  'I  he  latter 
word  is  a contraction  of  ikatthd,  so  that  it  is  really  an  instance  of  the  transfer  of  the 
initial  i.  The  vowel  i becomes  u in  mulud,  to  be  met,  and  d becomes  a in  balnd, 
to  say. 

VOL.  II,  PART  IV. 


5 I 2 


796 


WESTERN  PAHArI. 


Attention  has  already  been  drawn  to  the  pronunciation  of  6 as  feh.  In  the  word 
bhrukkhtta,  hungry,  there  is  a curious  insertion  of  a non-original  r. 

Sometimes  a sonant  aspirate  loses  its  aspiration,  as  in  bandrtd,  to  divide,  for  bhawtf&d. 
This  is  the  regular  rule  in  Kashmiri  and  other  related  languages. 

Declension  - Tho  declension  of  the  Gadi  noun  is  more  like  that  of  Mandeajl 
than  that  of  Chameali,  although  it  also  has  points  in  common  with  the  latter.  The 
main  point  in  which  it  differs  from  Cham£a}I  is  that,  as  in  Mand£a}l  and  most  other 
Western  Pahari  dialects,  tho  oblique  form  of  the  plural  is  the  same  as  that  of  tho 
singular,  instead  of  having  the  Chameaji  ending  a. 

The  nominative  plural  is  generally  the  same  as  the  nominative  singular.  The  only 
exceptions  are  taibhaoa  masculine  nouns  in  a,  like  ghofd , a horse,  which  change  the  d 
to  e;  feminine  nouns  ending  in  consonants  like  bhen  or  behn,  a sister,  which  add  i ; 
and  feminine  nouns  in  d,  like  dhld,  a daughter,  which  add  d.  Thus,  ghore,  horses; 
bheni  or  behnl , sisters;  and  dhiud,  daughters.  As  examples  of  other  nouns,  we  may 
quote  ghar,  a house,  or  houses ; hat  hi,  an  elephant,  or  elephants  ; gobhru,  a young  man, 
or  young  men;  and  hull  (tho  Chameali  hurt),  a girl,  or  girls. 

Except  in  the  case  of  masculine  nouns  ending  in  consonants,  the  oblique  form, 
singular  and  plural,  is  always  the  same  as  the  nominative  plural.  Thus,  ghore,  hdthi, 
gobhru,  hill,  bheni  or  behnl,  dhiud . Masculine  nouns  ending  in  a consonant,  like  ghar , 
a house,  add  d in  the  oblique  form  singular  and  plural.  Thus,  ghard. 

The  agent  and  locative  (both  singular  and  plural)  of  masculine  nouns  add  e to  the 
nominative,  before  which  e nouns  like  ghbrd,  a horse,  drop  the  final  a.  Feminine 
nouns  in  t , like  knit,  a girl,  add  e only  in  tho  plural,  and  those  ending  in  a consonant, 
like  blien,  or  behn,  a sister,  do  not  take  e at  all,  but  use  the  oblique  form  in  both  the 
singular  and  the  plural.  Othor  feminine  nouns  add  e in  both  numbers.  We  thus  get 
the  following  forms  : — 

ghore,  by  or  in  a horse  or  horses. 

ghare,  by  or  in  a house  or  houses. 

hdthle,  by  or  in  an  elephant  or  elephants. 

gobhrue,  by  or  in  a young  man  or  young  men. 

hull,  by  or  in  a girl. 

kulle,  by  or  in  girls. 

bheni  or  behnl,  by  or  in  a sister  or  sisters. 
dhiue,  by  or  in  a daughter  or  daughters. 

Tho  above  declensions  are  conveniently  shown  in  the  following  table,  in  wliioh  the 
Vocatives,  which  exhibit  minor  variations,  have  been  added  : — 


Nom.  Sing. 

i 

I Nom.  Plur. 

! 

| Oblique 

j Sing,  arul  Plur. 

Agent.  Sing,  and  Plur. 

l Vocative 

i Sing- 

Vocative 
J Plur. 

ghdrft,  a horse. 
ghar , a house. 
hdthi,  an  elephant. 
gijblirfi,  a young  man. 
hull,  a girl. 
bhen , a sister. 
dhtUf  a daughter. 

ghore 

ghar 

hdthi 

gdbhrii 

hull 

1 bheni 
dhiud 

ghdre 
ghard 
hdthi 
• gobhrd 
hull 

bheni 

dhiud 

ghGre 
gliare 
hri /hie 

gobhrue  1 

hull  (fiing.),  Tiulie  (plur.) 
bheni 

dhiue 

] ghore 
i ghard 
j hd  thin 

I gGbhrud 
kulle 
| bheni 
dhiue 

ghdroo 

ghard 

hdthid 

gobhrud 

kulid 

bheniO 

dhiud 

NoTfi.— Tho  geLitive  of  ghar  may  1 e either  ghar,:-ra  or  (as  in  CbamBall)  gharS-rd . 


oAnt. 


797 


The  usual  postpositions  arc  : — 

Ace.-dat.  jo , bo,  go,  to  or  for. 

Instr.  seite,  with  (by  means  of). 

A bl.  than,  thdu , from ; maiijhd,  from  in  ; seite,  with  (together  with). 

Gen.  rd,  of. 

Loc.  manjh,  ma,  mail , in;  malle , near  ( =pds) . 

Of  the  above,  rd  is,  as  usual,  an  adjective,  becoming  re  when  the  governing  noun 
is  in  the  masculine  oblique  singular  or  in  the  masculine  plural,  and  ri  when  the  govern- 
ing noun  is  feminine. 

Regarding  jo,  seo  the  remarks  under  the  head  of  Cliameall.  With  bo,  we  may 
compare  the  Kului  he;  and  with  yd,  the  gai  of  the  iluiya  form  of  the  PiSacha  lan- 
guages of  the  North-West  Frontier.  It  may  bo  mentioned  that  forms  related  to  bo 
also  occur  in  several  other  forms  of  the  latter-named  languages.  Tlius,  Wai-Ala  Kafir 
has  ba  for  the  genitive  and  bS  for  the  ablative;  and  Bashgali  Kafir  has  bit,  as  a prefix 
for  the  locative.  With  seite,  we  may  compare  the  Kashmiri  sut*  or  silly. 

Verbs  of  saying  take  either  seite,  or  jo,  as  the  postpositions  governing  the  person 
addressed.  Thus,  bahbe-seite  bald,  he  said  to  the  father ; tis-jb  bald,  he  said  to  him. 

The  oblique  form  alone  is  sometimes  used  for  the  accusative.  Thus,  in  the  Parable, 
we  have  jisd  chijd  sur  khbndc,  lisa  ami  khdti,  what  thing  the  swine  eat,  that  also  I may 
eat. 

Adjectives  follow  the  usual  rules,  and  need  no  remarks. 

The  oblique  form  of  ok,  one,  is  akki. 

PRONOUNS  — The  Pronouns  of  the  First  and  Second  Persons  are  thus  de- 
clined. As  in  Kangri  Panjabi  they  have  special  forms  for  the  dative  singular. 


Sing. 

I 

Thou 

Nom. 

ud,  mU,  an 

/ it 

Ag. 

•v  v 

met , me 

>V)  'V 

taT,  te 

Obi. 

mE 

tuddh 

Dat. 

mft,  miu7ju,  minjo,  mftgd 

htjjo,  Id  yd 

Gen. 

min'd 

lent 

Plur. 

\ 

Nom. 

assr,  ass}9  assU 

lit  see,  tussd 

Ag. 

. asse 

htsse 

Obi. 

assn 

hi  ss  a 

Gon. 

imld , indhd 

tdndd,  litndh 

ami  means  ‘ I also  ’. 


798 


WESTERN  PAHArI. 


The  Demonstrative  Pronouns  (also  used  as  pronouns  of  the  third  person)  are 
thus  declined : — 


This,  he,  she,  it 
Sing. 

Nom.  ih 

Ag.  inni 

Obi.  is 

Gen.  ise-rd 

Plur. 

Nom.  ih 

Ag.  iyy€ 

Obi.  ia,  itih 

Gen.  ia-vd , inhe-ra,  inhd-rd 


That,  he,  she,  it 

it  h,  oh 
wmi 
m 

use-rd 


oh 
mye 
ua,  unh 

ua-rd,  unhe-ra,  unhd-rd 


No  instance  of  feminine  or  neuter  forms  has  been  noted. 


The  Relative  and  Correlative  Pronouns  are  thus  declined.  The  Correlative  is 
also  used  as  a definite  demonstrative,  and  as  a pronoun  of  the  3rd  person. 


Who,  which,  what 

That,  he,  she. 

Sing. 

Nom. 

/*.  jo 

so 

Ag. 

jinni 

tinui 

ObJ. 

jas,  jissd 

f is,  tas,  lissd 

Gen. 

jase-rd 

lise-rd 

Plur. 

Nom. 

K>  j» 

80,  8dl 

Ag. 

j~>yye 

tiyye 

Old. 

. . at 
jia 

tia 

Gen. 

jia-rd 

tid-rd. 

Instead  of  tis,  Use,  we  also  find  it's,  tese.  This  is  little  more  than  a variety  of 
spelling. 


The  Interrogative  Pronouns  are  thus  declined 


Who?  which? 

What?  (neuter) 

Sing. 

Nom. 

Jam 

kid,  kyd 

A 

kvni 

Obl. 

leas 

(dat.)  kajd 

Gen. 

kase-rd 

kate-rd 

Plur. 

• 

Nom. 

lcun 

Ag. 

kiyye 

Cbl. 

hi 

Gen. 

kia-rd 

gA»I. 


799 


The  Indefinite  Pronoun  kol,  anyone,  someone,  is  thus  declined  : — 

Sing. 

Nom.  kol 

Ag.  hunt  • 

Obi.  kaski 

Gen.  kaskl-rd 

There  is,  as  usual,  no  plural. 

Mr.  O’Brien  gives  no  word  corresponding  to  the  Hindi  kuchh , but  in  the  Parable  we 
have  kichh.  anything,  something. 

The  Reflexive  Pronoun  is  apu  or  appe,  self.  Its  agent  is  apu,  genitive  apnd,  and 
oblique  form  apu.  Note  that,  as  in  Cham&Lll,  the  initial  a is  short. 

Other  Pronominal  Forms* 

Mr.  O’Brien  gives  the  following  : — 

itund,  etrd,  this  much  or  (pi.)  many ; utund,  that  much  or  (pi.)  many ; tat und, 
tetrd , that  much  or  (pi.)  many;  jitund,  jetrd,  how  much  or  (pi.)  many; 
katfind , ketrd , how  much  or  (pi.)  many? 

eti,  this  many  ; nti,  that  many  ; tell,  that  many ; jeti,  as  many  ; keli,  how 
many  ? 

inhd,  of  this  kind ; unhd , of  that  kind;  tin  fid , of  that  kind,  and  so  on. 

ebe,  now;  lane,  tekhane,  then;  jane,  jejchane , when;  fume,  kanhe , kelchane, 
when  ? 

it  hi,  here;  tethl,  there;  jethi,  where;  kathi  (sic),  where? 

era,  ird,  ihrd,  hither ; urd,  thither;  terd,  thither ; jerd,  whither;  Jcahrd,  hard, 
whither  ? 

iha,  in  this  manner,  thus  ; ttlia,  in  that  manner,  so  ; jiha,  in  what  manner;  kiha, 
in  what  manner? 


CONJUGATION. 


A. — Auxiliary  Verbs  and  Verbs  Substantive. 


The  Present  tense  of  the  Verb  Substantive  is  conjugated  as  follows : — 


Sing. 

1.  hot,  hd 

2.  fiat,  hd 

3.  hd 


Plur. 
h&,  han 
hin,  han 
hin , han 


It  will  be  seen  that  hd  may  be  used  for  any  person  of  the  singular,  and  han  for  any 
person  of  the  plural.  Hd  does  not  change  for  gender. 

The  Past  tense  does  not  change  for  jjerson.  Its  masculine  singular  is  thu,  and  its 
masculine  plural  thle.  The  feminine  of  both  numbers  is  thi. 


600 


WESTERN  PAUARI. 


B, — Active  Verb. — Several  of  the  most  common  verbs  in  Gadi  have  forms  which, 
are  strange  to  other  Indian  languages. 

Such  are : — 
balnd,  to  say. 
lekhnd.  to  sit. 
bhdnd,  to  become. 
gdhnd,  to  go. 
ind,  to  come. 

Most  of  the  above  are  also  irregular  in  their  conjugation.  With  be}ch.n<it  we  may 
compare  the  Kashmiri  behun,  to  sit ; with  bhdnd,  tno  Kashmiri  b(h)6toun,  to  become ; 
with  gachhfi,  I may  go,  the  Kashmiri  gahthnn,  to  go  ; and  with  ind , the  Kashmiri  gin", 
to  come. 

The  Infinitive  is  made  by  adding  nd  (or  after  r,  usually,  but  not  always,  no)  to 
the  root.  Thus,  bejchnd,  to  sit ; mania  or  mdrnd,  to  strike.  The  oblique  form  is  used  as 
an  infinitive  of  purpose  as  in  stir  chdrne  bheju , he  sent  him  to  feed  swine. 

The  Present  Participle  has  three  forms.  One  is  formed,  as  in  Chamgali,  by 
adding  dd  to  the  root.  Tims,  mdrdd,  striking.  Another  adds  andd  to  the  root,  as  in 
mdrandd,  striking.  The  third  adds  nit,  as  in  mdrnit,  striking,  bekhnU.  sitting. 

Verbs  whose  roots  end  in  a vowel  or  in  a single  h add  ndd  to  form  tho  present 
participle.  Thus,  from  bhdnd,  to  become,  we  have  bhdndd  and  bhunit ; from  ind,  to 
come,  we  have  indd  ; from  gdhnd,  to  go,  we  have  gahmld  and  gdhnit,  and  from  relind,  to 
remain,  we  have  rehndd  and  re h nit. 

The  verb  dend,  to  give,  has  its  present  participle  dindd  and  denit.  Laind,  to  take, 
on  fhe  other  hand  is  regular,  making  laindd,  and  lainit. 

The  verb  balnd,  to  say,  has  its  present  participle  balandd  or  bandd,  as  in  sachch 
bande-hin,  they  are  speaking  the  truth  (Specimen  II). 

The  Past  Participle  is  formed,  as  in  Kului,  by  adding  u to  the  root.  Thus,  mar d, 
struck.  Sometimes,  however,  and  especially  in  the  formation  of  the  passive,  the 
Chameali  form  in  ed  or  yd  is  used.  Tims,  mdryd  gdlind,  to  be  struck. 

Many  verbs  form  their  past  participles  irregularly.  Wo  may  quote  the  following : — 


Past  Participle. 


bhdnd, 

to  become 

blind  or  bhuchhurd. 

gdhnd, 

to  go 

yd  (plur.  gae  or  ge)  or  guclihurd 

ind, 

to  coine 

d (plur.  de,  fem,  di)  or  chhurd  (sic) 

bejchnd, 

to  sit 

bailhd,  bit  hard  or  bejehurd 

dend. 

to  give 

dittd 

laind. 

to  take 

led 

puna. 

to  fall 

'pen 

Idgnd, 

to  begin 

laggd 

Kama,  to  do,  is  regular,  having  hard. 

The  termination  rd  of  bhuchhurd,  etc.  is  evidently  the  same  as  that  of  the  static 
participle  of  MandCali  and  Cliamfiaji,  but  these  words  have  the  force  of  an  ordinary  past 
participle,  as  well  as  that  of  the  static  past  participle. 


GADl. 


801 


Other  verbs  form  the  Static  Past  Participle  by  addin"  rd  to  the  ordinary  past 
participle.  Thus,  mdru,  struck,  mdru-rd,  in  the  condition  of  one  struck,  the  Hindi  ward 
liud . So  hern,  seen,  heru-rd,  in  the  state  of  one  who  is  seen,  — ddkhd  hud. 

The  Future  Passive  Participle  is  the  si  mo  in  form  as  the  infinitive.  Thus, 
tndrnd,  plur.  mdrnd,  fom.  sing,  and  piur.  vidrnl,  proper  to  be  struck,  about  to  be  struck. 

The  Conjunctive  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  i to  the  root.  Tims,  uiirl, 
having  struck.  This  form  is  principally  used  in  intensive  compound  verbs,  as  in  nukhi 
gitfeyit,  to  run  away.  For  the  usual  conjunctive  participle  kur  or  /curl  is  added,  as  in 
murl-kurl,  having  struck. 

Another  form  of  flic  conjunctive  participle  is  simply  the  root  alone,  as  in  mdr, 
having  struck. 

The  followiug  verbs  make  their  conjunctive  participles  irregularly : — 

Conjunctive  Participle. 
bhdnd,  to  become  bhitc/th(l)-kur(l) 

gdliiiit,  to  go  (jachh  (l)-kur(l) 

ind,  to  come  d(l)-kur(l)  or  ichh(l)-kur(i) 

loindy  to  take  /i‘(l)-kur(l) 

(lend,  to  give  <Il-ki<r(l) 

An  Adverbial  Participle  is  formed  bv  adding  slid  (the  Kashmiri  silly)  to  the 
oblique  form  of  the  present  participle.  Thus,  mdrumld  site , on  striking. 

As  usual  ilie  second  person  singular  of  the  Imperative  is  the  same  in  form  as  the 
root,  and  the  second  person  plural  adds  d.  Thus,  mdr,  strike  thou  ; mdrd , strike  ye. 

The  following  are  irregular  : — 

Imperative. 

Sing.  2.  Plur.  2. 

yd  hud,  to  go  gdh  (juchhd 

Ind,  to  come  dl  did 

The  Old  Present  and  Present  Conjunctive  is  thus  conjugated  : — 

‘ I strike  ’,  * 1 may  strike 


Sing. 

Plur. 

1. 

mdrd,  mitrn 

murd,  mdrd 

2, 

mure 

mu  run,  rnuru 

• * 

»*, 

mdrd 

mu  run 

Irregular  are 

From  bhdnd,  to  become 

Sing. 

Plur. 

1. 

bhuchhU  (-a) 

bhuchhd  (-a) 

2. 

bhue 

bhu ii,  bit  Pit 

a. 

blind 

blip  n 

From  gdl nit,  to  go 

Sing. 

Plur. 

1. 

go  child  (-(?) 

guchh  d (-d) 

24|  ga child 

gochhd 

3. 

gu chhd 

gulden 

VOL.  IX, 

PAKT  JY. 

802 


WESTEHN  PAHA  HI. 


From  ilia,  to  come 
Sin". 

1.  ichhu  (-«) 

2.  dlS 

3.  did 


Plur. 
ichJm  (-a) 
did 

i/i  or  ain 


The  Future  is  formed  by  adding  Id  to  the  old  present.  The  Id  changes  lor  gender 
and  number,  and  then,*  is  a tendency  to  drop  the  terminations  of  the  Old  Present. 
Thus : — 


* I shall  strike,’  etc. 


Sing. 

riuv. 

Ma>o 

i 

l'Ym. 

Muse. 

Fein. 

1.  mdriildy  mdrld 

iiLirlt 

mdrule , mdrlP 

j mdrll 

2.  in aril 

hid  rli 

marli* 

mtlrll 

3.  maria. 

a/ aril 

marl* 

! 

j marli 

It  will  be  seen  that  mdn 

"Id  {-Id,  -H)  can  be  used  for  all  three  persons 

;.  Tire  first  is 

the  only  person  that  retains  the  old  terminations.  The  following  verbs  have  irregular 
futures.  Only  the  first  person  masculine  singular  is  given  in  each  ease : — 


From  bhdna,  to  become, 
From  gdhnd,  to  go, 
From  ind,  to  come, 
From  Jaind,  to  take, 


bhnchhuld  or  hhdhl 
gachhfdd,  gichhftld  or  gdhld 
chhuld  (*io)  or  ild 
laftld  or  laid. 


For  the  Present,  the  present  participle  in  ild  or  amid  is  used.  The  Present  Parti- 
ciple in  nu  is  also  employed,  but  only  in  the  first  and  second  persons.  Thus  : — 


‘ I strike,’  etc. 

Singular. 

Plural. 

» 

Masc. 

Few. 

Mast*. 

Fein. 

1.  mar  da,  mar  undo,  or 
m&rnii 

hvlrdi.  mamndi  or  mdrnti 

wdrdt’y  mdnnulfi  or  mdntu 

mdnlt . m irandi  or  marnu 

2.  mdrddy  marandd  or 
mar  nd 

m drdJy  md ran d i o r md r nti 

. 

mardoy  m<irande  or  mdrnu 

mdrdfy  mirandl  or  mdrnu 

3.  mdrJd  or  mamndi 

1 

mar  If  or  rn-lmndl 

,ndrd~  or  m i ramie 

mardl  or  mdrantU 

Those  verbs  which  have  irregular  present  participles,  arc  irregular  in  the  seme 
way  in  this  tense. 


GA1>I. 


803 


The  Present  Definite  is  formed  by  conjugatin''  the  present  tense  of  the  verb  sub- 
stantive with  the  present  tense. 

Thus:— 

mdrdd  hu,  marandd  hu,  or  mdrnu  h it,  I am  striking ; 
mdrdd  hat,  marandd  hat,  or  manic  hat , thou  art  striking; 
rndrdl  hd  or  mdrandl  hd , she  is  striking. 

Any  form  of  the  present  tense  of  the  Auxiliary  verb  may  be  used. 

The  Imperfect  is  formed  by  conjugating  the  past  tense  of  the  verb  substantive 
with  the  present  participle  in  dd  or  amid.  The  participle  in  u v does  not  appear  to  be 
used  iu  this  tense.  Both  the  participle  and  the  auxiliary  verb  change  for  gender  and 
number,  but  neither  changes  for  person.  Thus  : — 

mdrdd  tint  or  marandd  thd , I (mnse.)  was,  thou  (mase.)  wast,  or  lie  was  strikin'?. 
mardl  tin,  I (fern.)  was,  thou  (fern.)  wast,  or  she  was  striking,  and  so  on. 

The  tenses  formed  from  the  past  participle  are  made  exactly  as  in  Hindi.  Thus:  — 
au  d or  ad  chhurd,  I came. 
met  indru,  I struck  him. 
au  d hu  or  ad  chhiird  hu,  I have  come. 
met  mar  Ft  hd,  I have  struck  him. 
ad  d Hut  or  ad  chhurd  I lift,  I bad  come. 
met  mdrit  Hut,  i bad  struck  him. 

As  will  be  seen  in  the  case  of  Inn,  to  come,  so  other  verbs  which  have  double  forms 
of  the  past  participle,  can  use  either  of  them  in  the>e  tenses.  Tims  : — 
ad  bhttd  or  ad  bhnchhFtrd,  I became  ; 
au  ff d or  ad  guchlu'ird,  i went ; 
ad  baithd  or  ad  bifhftrd , I sat ; and  so  on. 

Passive  Voice. — As  explained  above  the  passive  voice  is  made  by  conjugating  the 
Chamfali  past  participle  in  cd  or  yd  with  gdhnd.  Thu> : — 
ad  mar  I/d  gdhndn,  I am  being  beaten. 
au  mdri/d  gahnild  thFt,  I was  being  beaten. 
ad  mdryd  fjFthld , I shall  be  beaten. 

Sometimes  we  come  across  the  passive  formed  with  7,  as  in  other  Western  Paliarl 
dialects.  Thus  pakarlnd,  to  be  seized,  pah  arid  gad,  they  (the  thieves)  were  seized. 

Causal  Verbs  seem  to  bo  made  as  elsewhere,  but  very  few  examples  are  forth- 
coming. 

battnd , to  be  made;  banana , to  make. 

gdhna,  to  go  ; guana,  to  eause  to  go,  to  lose. 

khunnd,  to  hear ; khundnd.  to  cause  to  hear,  to  tell. 

Compound  Verbs. — These  are  much  as  in  other  Paliarl  languages. 

Intcnsives,  like  bandl  (lend,  to  divide  out,  ov  gnat  chhadnd,  to  squander,  arc  common. 
Inceptives  oceur  in  phrases  like:  so  ht  tiled  I bhbnd  laggd,  lie  began  to  be  in  want. 
Three  specimens  arc  given  of  Gadl.  The  first  is  a version  of  the  Parable  of  the 
Prodigal  Son,  the  second  is  a folk-tale,  and  the  third  a short  folk-song.  Regarding  the 
character  iu  which  they  are  recorded,  see  the  remarks  on  p.  771. 

VOL.  IX,  PAUT  IV. 


5 K ~ 


804 


[ No.  2.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAHARl  (CHAMEALI). 

GAdI  Dialect.  (State,  Chamba.) 

Specimen  I. 

crW)  > ■jof  M3,  sflz  i 

^ fn*  3 7T  a i i' 

ill  foil  i §£  fuS  M3, 

f>tf>  !><£  wil  M3a>f  3i  JJwf)  JT  5i3 

3il  ums£\  rft  mrfif  fail  i 

{'  3\  7T&  {>01  JTrtfe  *3  3'  13TT  y^M^yi} 

iff  cna.x’%  i f ft  ~»irx^s  35  «j f i 
i1  I37t  )1c5M  J Ei  >/]  nsxt  Y1S5  37  I {' 

B’ll  WU'ft  ZfJTilii  m I/3S 

• ss?  SSf 

f37r  % jf&  * 3i  fW  jfl£  |ra  tf'aT 
fof  wrfl  ^6'  i / ‘{jrr  y>  £c£  fih/ 

V • ♦ 


GrADl. 


805 


1 1 * y\>  (j£\  Kbit's  j vjs 

3 l/tt3  Vr\  >fri  (317^  >)  v|i]  3*1 

f$h  w6  ^hsC  y?33j  f i *7(^3 

"Xjf)  M M "S*.  if  if  ■ Y]  cn  fjf  )j  m'  f 

I3tr  3i  3 fH  i}  TT}ff  f Pi3  5/ 

lAl  X£  ^ f?T  >JT  jf  > liil  3/  M3. 

^ I iil  3f  JS  S3  >0?  13 >)  3*1 3^  |9j*i  4]  3MI 

* 

$ Gil  xil  vm^L  ifi  yi&  jcjg>  1 7T  wy> 
i~3  m *£3  1 Qrr  y*  3 il  xil  4$  > -w^3j^>3fli 
i-  fl  >cfl  13' FT  Tff3  M^I 

• X 

>05.  foTI^  CT 3 yi  3 Z.X  I3J3  I M.3. 

f - 

$3^  >1  3<  3 (h  Fi  rpf \ S wS  SS 

tfu  xi  f mi(  (frr  5^  i > if 
H3.  ^3  33  1 if*;  pr  a xn 


806 


WESTERN  1’A.HArL 


>1  «r«  >1  M.T  MS'  ^"^2.  K'1,‘1 

m(f  vf  t Sn  >i  arf  Tf3 

f3?T  3 3ET  )i<f  I 2f3^ 

oT  ^ mVI  'rfJ\  mV)  xfdhf 

Ji  33  nf  HA  37  f CT?  Ef) 

^f)  JT^I  3T  M 7f  ^ rtco'l 

jt  i / nt  ^zft  wa  cojf  ii 

f37(  f Y\{  M3.  ^3lil  V[*k  f I 

t ^5  ^ V no-  w2^ 

@Z7f)l  ^Ol)  I f wl  ^ £ &pj) 
xil  ^ 23  v/1  i"  i 3^  6fl  6 n > 
2fg  3^3?  V\  \ 7[  IS  44  2f>7 

tot  S'  fn  wo  >o1  >1  (3V1 S 

fjSl  y\<v  1 GX1  >o1 


Glut. 


807 


UIMV.  Yl^  l ( 7Tfi  I 13 JT 

1 i<&  £){}  >t/I  13 7[  £ 

wj)  2^  7[£3  34  Y\  £3Sil  2<\ 

3 il  20.55  XyS3  v|  (f  I £ VfG  >if  Jj]  3 /I 

5Tco  ^ U&  < «3l/  | LQ  3 XJU 
v? >1  <W1  2f>r;fl  / )j|55  if  I3J3  >f)  fi 

crus.  e6^tT  wS  yVI  xf  1 ^ 3/ 

23  IJ^  vf  3f  &&AlC  mSTMS. 

Y\J  JTpf(f  fa/3^  3 I3fr  3 3fc  27TX  We  1 
H'jJI  13  ?T  $ 2»  W 3 "M3.  4 1T3JX 
V|  >7©  53lT  I > vj/  <3^  n 3/3  I 

Ui  y TT(  >OS?  W3  vrfl  gZ!. 

V>^i  ? ^ 3,  23  3jY(f  y^JTf'fr  W5r 

7Ic5]  JT  ®r  jqcp]  JT  II 
— * ^ ^ 


808 


[No.  2.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 


AYE  STERN  PAI1ART  (CHAMEALl). 


Gaiu  Dtalect. 


(State,  Chamka.) 


Specimen  I. 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 


• Note. — In  the  v». lmvuhir  character  double  h-tt»*rs  arc  not  indicated,  the  single  letter*  being  gi\en  instead.  In  this  ami 
the  fulloAving  transliterations  double  letters  are  >o  written  \vhene\«v  thev  occur.* 


Akki-mahnu-re  diu 

One-man-of  two 

l>abb£-selte  balu, 

the-fathcr-lo  it-was-said, 
mu! da -ha  so  dr*.’  Ta 

being-got-is  that  give*  Then 

Thoyhe-dliiaye-pichcho  lauhkayii 
A-fetc-days-afler  tlie-younger 


a* 

a-far-count  ry-to 


gufii-ditti. 


icon- squandered. 

tis-inulklia-mafijh 

thal-tand-in 

Ts 

Then 


cliali-go, 

went -away, 

T:T  jo 
Then  when 


puttar  tiuo.  Tia-thau  laubkayo-put  t ro 

sons  were.  Them-from  by-the-younger-son 

ho  bapii,  gliarbarl-ra  besa  jo  mi  ft  jo 

O father,  the-propert  y-of  share  which  to-me 

unni  ghavbavl  handl-ditti. 

by -him  the-propert  y was-dirided-oul. 

puttar  sabh-kichh  kittha  kari 

son  everything  together  having-made 

tot  la  apiii  gharbarl  luehpanft-malt 

there  his-own  property  debauchery- in- 

_ ry, 

sabb-kiebb  gufu-chkadu,  ta 

everyth  i ng  tcus-sq  uandered-complelety,  t hen 


ate 

and 


bayft  ankaj  pou.  Ta  so  kaukal 

a-great  famine  Jett.  Then  he  poor 

tis-mulk  lie-re  akkl-sahukare-malle  go. 

that -country -of  one-banker-near  hc-ioent. 


lagga. 


apm-l>agyl-jo  sur  ckarne  blieju.  Tis-jb  clniu 

his-oicn-fields-to  swine  to-feed  he-wasscnt.  ILim-to  wish 


chija 
things 
dinda-thu. 
gicing-icas. 

glia  re 

in-lhe-home 

bbnikklma 

hungry 


suv  kliande,  t isa 
the-swine  eat,  those 


ami  khan.’  Tfi 

I-also  mny-eat Then 


Ta  surti-manjh 
Then  'memory -in 

kotro 
how-many 

marda-lia. 


dying -am. 


icbhl-kari 
eome-hc wing 

kamo  liiu, 

servants  are. 

Ail  :itiIiT-kaii 
/ arisen-having 


balu 

if -was-satd 
tia-ju 

! hem-la 


blioiio 

to-become  began. 
TS  tiuul 

Then  by-hint 

tli  ii  jo,  ‘ jisa 
was  that,  ‘ what 

tis-jo  kol  5 ua 
hirn-to  anyone  not 
‘ merc-babbe-ra, 
‘ my-falher-of 

mat!  roll  biu,  aii 
much  breads  are,  l . 


.ic, 

that, 


a piio-babbe-malle 
my-own-father-io 


gicliliula 

will -go 


ta 

then 


OADl. 


809- 


tis-jb 

balula, 

“he 

bapu, 

/V 

me 

surge-ra 

ate  tera 

pap 

karu ; 

him-to 

1-will-say, 

“ 0 

father. 

by-me 

heaven-of 

and  of-thee 

sin 

was- don  e ; 

abb 

is-jbg 

na 

pliiri 

tera  puttar  bann. 

JihS  terb 

now 

this -worthy 

not 

that 

again 

thy  son 

I-  may-become. 

As  thy 

hbr 

kamb 

hin 

tiha 

mifijo  1)1 

rakli.”  ’ 1 

r*— 

- 11 

utthl-karl 

Other  servants  are  so  me  also  keep."  ’ Then  arisen- Jut  ring 

apne-babbb-mallb  clialu.  So  a je-tiyli  dur  tku,  tis-jb  lien -bar! 

his-oion-fatlier-to  he- went.  He  still  Jar  was , him  (ace.)  seen-having 

babbe-jO  dard  laggl.  Ta  so  daurl-karl  tis-seite  pyarl 

the-father-to  pity  was- at  l ached.  Then  he  run-having  him-with  affection 

karne  laga,  ate  mate  plibku  ditto.  Puttre  tis-jo 

to-make  began,  and  many  kisses  v;ere-gircn.  By-the-son  him-to 


balu 

* lie 

bapu,  mb 

surge-ra 

ate  tera 

pdp 

karu. 

it-was-said 

that, 

£ O 

father,  by 

-me 

heave u-of 

and  of-thee 

sin 

was-done. 

tii  abb 

is-joga 

na 

je  pliiri 

1 bra 

put  tar 

bhuohbn.’ 

Babbe 

then,  now 

this- fit 

not 

that  again 

thy 

son  I- 

•may-become' 

By 

-the- father 

a pne 

kamb- jb 

balu 

T> 

‘ kb  are 

kb  arb  odban 

kadbl 

his-own 

servant s-to 

it-was-said 

that, 

• good 

good  a]/ part  l 

ha  ring-brought -forth 

lel-ii, 

ta  tis-jb 

dabliai-dea  ; 

ate 

tisb-re 

hatthe  i 

ingutlu,  para re 

bring, 

then  him-to 

pul-on  ; 

and 

him-of 

on-the-hand 

s 

1 

* ^ 

1 

£ 

jut  a.  Ate  dham  la,  je  assl  kbal-kari  kliusi  knra ; 

shoes.  And  a-feast  prepare,  that  ice  eaten-haring  rejoicing  may-make ; 

klbS  jb,  bli  mera  put  tar  marl-gb-thu,  abb  jibirl  jl-bhua ; 
why  that  this  my  son  dead- gone-teas,  non:  again  living-become  . 

gulil-gb-thu,  so  abo  nniji-go.*  Ta  sal  badhal  banno  lagge. 

lost -gone- was,  he  now  got-wenl .*  Then  they  rejoiced  to-become  began. 

Tisb-rfi  mota  puttar  bagii-andar  thu.  da  ghare-nerb  a, 

llim-of  the-elder  son  thc-Jield-in  was.  When  1 hc-hovse-near  he-came, 

gane-naehchne-vi  uaj  khuni.  Ta  akkl-kame-jb  kbadl-kari 

singing-dancing-of  noise  was-hcard.  Then  a-serrant-to  called-hacing 

puchclihu  jb,  * eh  ki  ha  r ’ Ta  uunl  us-;jo  balii 

it -was -asked  that,  ‘ this  what  is ?'  Then  by-him  him-to  il-was-said 

jb,  ‘tera  bhal  a;  so  tere-babbe  dham  lal-lia,  is-galla-kavl 

that,  * thy  brother  came;  so  by-thy-falher  a-feast  prepared-is,  this-thing-for 

je  tis-jo  raji-bajl  mulu.’  Uunl  sarki-karl  apne-mane 

that  "him-to  in-good-case  he-was-gol 2 By-him  angered-having  in-his-own-n.  ind 

balu  je,  * andar  na  gachha.’  Tise-re  burlie  baliar 

it-was-said  that,  « within  not  I-may-go .*  Him-of  by-the-father  outside 

ichhl-karl  tis-jo  patiau.  Tinni  babbe-selte  balu, 

come-having  him-to  it-was-appeased.  By-him  the-father-to  it-was-said, 

•tot.  IX,  PART  iv.  6 1 


S10 


WESTERN  PAHArI. 


‘ her,  me  ituni  bahre  tori  ^ghal  karde  bhui.  T8l  au  kadi 

‘ see,  by- me  so- many  years  thy  service  a-doing  became.  Then  I ever 

( orl-galla-thaS  bahar  na  bhua.  Par  te  kade  mufijo  akki 

thy -word- from  outside  not  became.  But  by-thee  ever  to-me  one 


bakri-ra 

clihelu 

na  ditta. 

3° 

mn  apne-yar-basa-seite 

khusl 

goat-of 

kid 

not 

tcas-given, 

that 

I my-own-friende-with 

rejoicing 

kam. 

Je 

tera 

eli 

p uttar 

a,  jinni  tera 

lata-pata 

may -make. 

Who 

thu 

this 

son 

is,  by -whom  thy 

goods 

luchpane-mafljh  gunl-ditta,  te  tise-re-taT  dharn  la'i.’ 

debauchery-in  leas-sqnandered,  by-thee  him-of-for  a-feast  ir  as-prepared.' 

Tinni  iis-jo  balii,  ‘ lie  put  tar,  tfi  sarta  mfS-malle  rehnda. 

By-hi  n him-to  it-icas-said , ‘O  sou,  thou  ever  me-near  dwellest. 

Je  mera  ha,  so  tera  ha.  Par  khusl  karni  ate  khusl 

IFhat  mine  is,  that  thine  is.  But  rejoicing  to-be-done  and  rejoiced 

bhunti  javur  tlm,  is-galla  je  eh  tera  bhal  mua-thu, 

to-be-become  necessary  was,  for-this-thing  that  this  thy  brother  dead-was, 

abe  jlnda  bhua ; guhl-go-thu,  mull-go.’ 
note  living  became;  lost-gone-icas,  got-icent.' 


811 


[ No.  3.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PA  FI  A lit  (CIIAMfiALT). 

GAdI  Dialect.  (State,  Cka.mba  ) 

Specimen  II. 

A E.OLK-TALR. 

wxl  n&Ti  5 'hS  Si  Sil 

x^(  jt2  sfle  i if  nx  aj)  xr/\  snji 
yTi  $ 3iS  i3^  y>  if  yiq,^  vpj] 

Jlffl  Tl  ?v}/l  i33J<]  *fl  sk1}  #'  Mxsf 

f zjf  % $-)  Gtff  iij/1  V] 

3 7T  ER-Qi  |T  Z^3~  3F[  £ 

Wyscl  i/iys£?  irj/jif)  zfl  I 

Tfil  J3  (Jr  \3  7t  fi  mj1!  JJTjl 

* % 

vfe  yoi  Sd.  ^71  zyffi 

^3  TT (f  3i  7?  Si  Ti'l 

> ^ ' - , 

, VOL.  ix,  part  iv.  •'  L ~ 


812 


WESTERN  TAHA^l. 


mWIe  JTE  I >f  (3*^  5/  >1 

3 rfco  a-r"  jp,  $ n & 

&£  3T2  3 m /> 

myi  >ol  h 3 nSfo  vu  S 

?P>0  7£B  f>^>  TTf  WH'ZL  (faj 

ijflSf  & f 3^  I / j5"  iSW*" *f  ^ 

IT co  coif  | |3*T  TT3  JTco 

*A[S  I yfco>/  Tf^YfS.  7TJT  71  IT 
^2.^  &3ll  V?oT>?  3^1  Jf 
VIGff>  TO  JTU  AJU  13^,  3^  /f  3|T 
T7T3  FT  TO  >/)  IJJ3  II 


813 


t No.  3.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAH  A lit  (CIIAMEA.LT). 

Gad!  Dialect.  (State,  Chamba.) 

Specimen  II. 

A EOLK-TALE. 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 

Akkl-mahnu-rc  "hare  dui  chor  chorl  karne  gae-thlc.  Je 

One-man-of  in- the- home  two  thieves  theft  to-do  gone- were.  When 
sand  dl-kari  andar  puj  jb,  ta  herande-hin,  je  so 

a-mine  given-having  within  they-arrived,  then  seeing- they -are,  that  that 

mabnu  akkl-janani,  je  bauhari  rehndl-thi,  cboti-thau 

man  by-one-woman,  who  (in-)  the-upper -story  living- was,  tlie-hair-tuft-by 

pakarura-thu ; ate  diii,  je  bun  uane  rehndi-thi, 

he-seized-was ; and  by -another,  who  below  in-the-lower-story  living-teas, 

tCse  jaugha-thau  pakarura-thu,  ate  us- jo  apni-apnl-kanari 

as-for-him  thc-leg-by  he-scizcd-was,  and  him  (aec.)  her-own-her-own-direction 

dhaiirandi-thl.  Sari  rat  tiyyl  tise-rl  larl-jhagrl 

dragging-they-were.  The-wliole  night  by-them  him-of  fighting-quarrelling 

karl.  Bura  lial  karfi.  Clior  is-tmna.se  herande 

t cas-niade.  Had  plight  teas- made.  The-thieves  at-this-spectacle  watching 

rake.  Itne-mS  bhayag  bhuebh-gai,  kor  s«'>  chor  tethi 

remained.  Thc-meantinie-in  morning  became,  and  those  thieves  there 

pakarle-gae.  J5  tia-chbra-jb  ghara-re  malka-sanc  raje-malle 

caught-were.  When  those-thieves  (acc.)  the-house-of  master-with  the-king-near 

lel-ga5,  ta  chore  raje-selte  arj  karl  je, 

were-taken-aicay,  then  by -the-thieves  the-king-to  representation  was-made  that, 

*h8  maharaj,  assu-jo  Sarkar  sabb-kichb  saja  dea,  appan 

* O King,  us- to  Your-Majesty  every-kind-of  punishment  may-give,  but 

indg  dui  ddl  boh  na  blnm.’  Ta  raje  tia-thau 

of -us  two  ttoo  marriages  not  let-therc-be?  Then  by-the-king  them-from 

sabh  gall  puchchhne  lai.  Tiyg  sabli  gall  ghara-re 

the-whole  affair  to-ask  was-applied.  By-them  the-wliole  affair  the-house-of 


814 


WESTERN  TAHARl. 


malka  sahmne  saclieh  sachch  kfiunai-dittT. 

master  before  true  true  was- made- to-be -heard.  J3y 

L‘*lu  i<‘»  ‘ maharaj,  ohov  sachch  bande-hin.’ 

it-was-said  that , 4 King , the-thieves  truth  speaking -are .’ 

hasu,  ate  so  chor  ehliayi-ditte. 
laughed , and  those  f hie  res  were- ret  eased. 


Malke  bhi 

the-master  oho 

la  raja 
Then  the-king 


FREE  TRANSLATION  OF  THE  FOREGOINGL 

Two  thieves  w'ent  to  commit  burglary  in  the  house  of  a certain  man.  They  made 
an  opening  in  the  wall  of  the  house  and  entered.  The  lirst  thing  they  saw  Avas  one  wife 
of  the  owner  of  the  house  pulling  him  upstairs,  by  the  top-knot  of  his  hair,  to  her  room 
in  the  upper  story,  while,  at  the  same  time,  another  AA'ife  was  dragging  him  downstairs 
by  his  leg  to  her  room  in  the  lower  story.  The  thieves  spent  the  whole  night  watching 
these  tAvo  women  quarrelling  for  their  husband.  Wretched  indeed  Avas  his  plight. 
When  day  broke  the  thieves  were  caught,  and  were  marched  off,  together  Avitli  the  owner 
of  the  house,  to  the  king.  Then  the  thieves  made  humble  petition  to  tho  king,  1 Your 
Majesty,’  said  they,  ‘award  us  any  punishment  you  think  fit,  but  don’t  order  us  each  to 
marry  tAvo  wives.’  The  king  demanded  from  them  an  explanation  of  all  this.  The 
tliieA'os,  in  the  presence  of  the  OAArner  of  the  house,  told  the  whole  story  exactly  as  they 
had  seen  it,  and  their  Avords  were  confirmed  by  him.  So  the  king  laughed  and  let 
them  go. 


816 

[No.  4] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  1' A IT  ART  (CJTAMEALl). 

GAdI  Dialect  (State,  Chauba.) 

Specimen  III. 

A POPULAR  SONG. 

5>  W1  <mj  <3  im  wfa  i />  swl  xw  i 

ft  3j*{\  jfcf  Jft'l  Tim))  }\  v\d  ii 
aj^fl  yi>  urid  jJzf  i 
ft  zonl  m3  yfna  urn  t<  srif  */  u 
rff  f xio>^  ^Cia  iyT&mlmj  n 


816 


Central  Group. 


[No.  4.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 

WESTERN  PAIlAltl  (OHAMEALI). 


GAoi  Dialect.  (State,  Cham  u a.) 

Specimen  III. 

A EOLK-SONG. 

transliteration  and  translation. 

ltaja-Dharml-chande  hart"?  bare  dliaram  kmnae. 

By-Raja-DharmJ-chand  great  great  holy -work#  v'ere-carried-out. 

E a j a - Dh  a rn  1 i- eh  a li  do . 

By-  Raja- Dharmi-chand. 

Raja-Dharmi-clianda  Devi  sunindi-jo  ai. 

(To-)  H aj  a - T>  h arml-chand  Devi  a-d  ream- for  came. 

Devi  balandi,  * inaJSjli-KAiiurrt*  dehrn  lean.’ 

Devi  says,  ‘ in-mid-Kangra  a-t angle  is-lo-be-bnilt .’ 

ltaja-Dliarmi-chande  Kamiro  delira  liana  ia. 

By- Raja-  Dharmi-chand  in- Kang  ra  a- 1 eagle  leas-built. 

Mata  Ambika-ra  delira  ha1?  a in.  Eaja-Dharmi-chande. 

Mother  Amb'tka-of  a-t  angle  ivas-built  by-Raja- Dharmi-chand . 


FREE  TRANSLATION  OF  THE  FOREGOING. 

Raja  Dliarmi-ehand  did  many  pious  works. 

Raja  Dharmi-chand. 

The  Goddess  Devi  appeared  to  him  in  a dream. 

She  said,  * build  a temple  in  mid  Kangra.’ 
liaja  Dharmi-chand  built  a temple  in  Kanjjra. 

He  built  a temple  in  hon<  ur  of  Mother  Ambika. 


817 


CHURAHT. 

The  main  river  of  the  Chamba  State  is  the  Ravi,  and  its  valley  is  divided  into  the 
three  Wizarats  entitled  'the  Sadr,  the  Churah,  and  the  Gadderan.  The  dialeet  of  the 
Sadr  Wizarat  is  Standard  Chamea}!,  that  of  the  Gadderan  is  Gadi,  both  o'.  which  liave 
been  already  described.  The  dialect  of  the  Churah  Wizarat  is  known  as  Churahi. 
Geographically,  Churah  occupies  the  entire  basin  of  the  river  Siul,  a tributary  of  the 
liavi,  and  lies  to  the  north  of  the  Sadr  Wizarat,  having  tin*  Gadderan  to  its  South-east. 
A full  account  of  the  people  of  Churah  and  of  their  customs  will  be  found  oil  pp.  132  if. 
of  the  Chamba  Gazetteer  (1904). 

The  Churahi  dialect  is  much  more  closely  connected  with  Standard  Chameali  than 
is  Gadi.  The  number  of  its  speakers  was  reported  for  the  purposes  of  this  Survey  as 
27,301,  all  of  whom  were  inhabitants  of  the  Churah  Wizarat.  Two  specimens  of  this 
dialect,  a version  of  the  l’arablc  of  the  Prodigal  Son,  and  the  statement  of  a person 
accused  in  a criminal  court,  are  appended.  The  language  of  the  former  is  comparatively 
pure,  while  that  of  the  latter  is  somewhat  mixed  with  forms  borrowed  from  Hindi  and 
PuBjabi.  Such  borrowed  forms  will  be  ignored  in  deseribing  the  dialect.  Besides 
these  specimens,  as  further  materials  we  have  the  usual  last  of  Words  and  Sentences 
printed  on  pp.  862  IT.  and  a full  account  of  the  dialect  by  the  "Rev.  T.  Graliame  Bailey, 
published  as  an  Appendix  to  the  Chamba  Gazetteer,  and  reprinted  l»v  the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society  in  his  Languages  of  the  Northern  Himalayas  (London,  1908).  The  following 
grammatical  sketch  is  mainly  based  on  Mr.  Bailey’s  excellent  work,  but  forms  occurring 
in  the  specimens,  and  not  mentioned  hv  him  are  also  included. 

Vocabulary.— As  in  the  other  Chamba  dialects,  the  vocabulary  includes  several 
words  which  are  strange  to  those  who  are  familiar  only  with  the  language  of  the  Panjab 
plains.  A long  list  is  given  by  Mr.  Bailey,  from  which,  and  also  from  the  other  sources, 
the  following  shorter  list  is  compiled. 

In  dealing  with  Gadi  attention  has  been  called  to  the  number  of  points  of  agree- 
ment with  Kashmiri.  These  are  also  numerous  in  Churahi.  and  it  is  not  necessary  to 
draw  attention  to  them  again. 
agg,  fire. 

agga  agrhe,  in  front,  before,  cf.  hag  re. 

ainit,  ainu,  einft,  to  come. 

aim,  ugly,  bad. 

ajj,  to-day.  *’• 

akhrt,  the  eye. 

ankdl,  a famine. 

hahb,  babb , bobb,  a father. 

badda,  big. 

bandnd , to  divide. 

barb,  a year. 

ba.it,  a father. 

heir,  bhehar,  outside. 

bet# ft,  to  sit. 

vot.  UK,  PART  IV. 


818 


WESTERN  PAHAJU. 


bhdkli,  a statement  of  a party  in  court. 

bheddd,  bltradd,  a sheep. 

bhdhar,  heir,  outside. 

bhin,  a younger  sister. 

bhbnd , to  be,  to  become. 

bhradd , blieddu , a sheep. 

ihrnkkbnd,  hungry. 

bhydg,  morning. 

butt,  a tree. 

chand  or  charnd,  to  graze  (intr.). 

china  or  chdrnd , to  cause  to  graze,  to  feed  (cattle). 

chad  the,  two  days  after  to-morrow,  two  days  before  yesterday,  the  third  day 
from  to-day. 
chhadnd , to  place. 
chhel,  beautiful. 
chbti,  a hill-top. 

dah,  pity,  compassion. 
daiddl,  an  elder  sister. 
daliddri,  lazy. 
ddint,  an  ox. 
t lend , dind,  to  give. 
dhf’it,  dliiu , a daughter. 
dhuntyd,  to  prepare,  make  ready. 
dih,  a day,  the  sun. 
dotte,  to-morrow. 

ebbe,  now. 
einii,  sec  ainu. 
erha,  from  here. 
eri,  here. 

etrd,  e t cored,  so  (this)  much  or  many. 
el  tin,  here. 

gd,  a cow. 
gabliru,  a boy,  lad. 
gdhnhu,  to  go. 
giralyd,  a village. 
gitthe,  together,  cl',  kittlia. 
gndnd,  to  lose. 

hachchlid,  white. 
hdgre,  before,  of.  aggar. 
hantnd,  to  walk. 
hatt,  a hand. 
lietth,  below. 
hi,  yesterday. 


id/id,  here. 
in  (Id,  down. 
ilea,  like  this. 


CHURAHl. 


819 


janel,  betrothal,  marriage. 
jdri,  wliere. 

jetrored,  which  much  or  many. 

jet  (hi,  where. 

jharnu,  to  fall. 

jidheo , when. 

jitea,  like  which. 

jo,  n wife. 

jU(/td,  well,  thoroughly. 

bain!,  keini,  why  ? 
kumri,  a servant. 
hand,  from. 

leant',  kine,  keni , with,  together  with. 
kaldb , a hook. 
keini,  see  kainf  . 
keni,  see  /cane. 

ke fro  red,  how  much  or  many? 

khaldnd,  to  give  to  eat. 

k/tdnd,  to  eat. 

kho/d,  an  ass. 

kid/ted,  when  ? 

kid/ted,  sometimes,  ever. 

kind,  see  kane. 

kited,  like  what  ? 

kitthd,  together,  cf.  ffitthe. 

koi,  kart,  where  ? 

knit,  a girl,  a daughter. 

Iddhd,  near. 
laina,  to  take. 
likrd,  a garment. 
land,  to  clothe. 

man j ltd,  from  in. 
mans,  muns,  a man. 
maud,  mania,  to  die. 
man  ft,  tudrnft,  to  heat. 
niafdu,  a man. 
maid,  much,  many,  very. 
mdthfd,  small,  younger. 
mehnft,  a man. 

▼01*  IX,  fAKT  IV. 


5 u 2 


S20 


WESTERN  PAHARl. 

mun$,  mans,  a man. 
mu  ft/ dr,  full  grown. 

nak , the  nose. 
nasnd,  to  run. 
tier,  nlr,  near. 
nikkd , small. 
tiir,  tier,  near. 

bit  hi,  there. 

pad  hr,  a plain  level  country. 

paid,  pair,  per,  a foot. 

pait,  belly. 

pdkhrtt,  a bird. 

parlte,  day  before  yesterday. 

pars  ft,  day  after  to-morrow,  day  before  yesterday. 

patti,  a field. 

pend,  pinit , to  drink. 

pebdnd,  to  give  to  drink. 

per , see  paid. 

pichchU,  picli cliff,  behind. 

pinda,  the  body. 

pitth,  the  back. 

pran,  upon. 

pnjjnd,  to  arrive. 

puttar,  a son. 

raihnlm,  to  remain. 

sadanh,  to  call. 

site,  with,  together  with. 

sikhrnd,  to  learn. 

sir,  head. 

sirudl,  hair. 

sulcli,  the  moon. 

hindnd,  to  cause  to  hear,  to  tell. 
sunnd,  to  hear. 

tauld,  swift,  quick. 
teri,  there. 
tidheo,  then. 
fir,  the  eye. 
trimat,  a woman. 


nbre,  up. 

uendi,  pevedi,  round  about. 


churahI. 


821 


utea,  like  that. 
uthrd , high. 

utrdred,  so  (that)  much  or  many. 
ydhe,  a mother. 

Note  how  the  ordinary  ddnd,  an  ox,  has  become  ddnt. 

Written  Character. — The  Chamha  variety  of  Takrt  has  been  employed  in 
writing  the  specimens.  In  the  ease  of  the  standard  dialect  the  specimens  have  been 
printed  in  rough  imitation  of  Chameall  movable  type.  1 n the  present  instance  they  are 
given  \n  facsimile  of  the  written  hand.  See  the  remarks  on  p.  771. 

Pronunciation. — ’Mr.  Hailey  points  out  an  interesting  occurrence  of  epenthesis, 
such  as  we  find  in  Kashmiri.  By  epenthesis  is  meant  the  change  in  the  sound  of  a 
vowel  caused  by  another  vowel  which  follows  it,  just  as  in  English  the  a of  the  word 
‘ man  ’ becomes  in  the  plural  ‘ men  owing  to  the  presence  of  an  i in  the  old  Anglo-Saxon 
‘*manni  \ Similarly  the  word  for  ‘ eating  ’ is  khatd,  the  feminine  of  which  is  not  khati , 
as  we  might  expect,  but  khaiti.  So  the  feminine  of  khdnd,  to  eat,  is  not  khdni,  but  khainl. 
This  particular  epenthetic  change  of  a followed  by  i is  common  in  Kashmiri  and  the 
allied  languages,  but  has  not  been  noted  further  east  than  Churahi.  On  the  other  hand* 
instances  of  epenthesis  in  connexion  with  other  vowels  have  frequently  been  pointed 
out  in  these  Pahari  dialects,1  and  are  no  doubt  more  oommon  than  has  been  shown, 
as  (except  in  one  language)  it  is  not  customary  to  indicate  them  in  writing.  The  one 
exception  is  the  Central  Pahari  language  Kumauni  (ride  pp.  li  t ff.),  in  which,  owing 
to  the  system  of  spelling  adopted,  the  important  rdle  which  epenthesis  plays  in  a Pahari 
language  is  made  very  clear. 

As  in  some  other  Western  Pahari  languages  the  Amwel  scale  is  rather  indefinite.  For 
instance  we  have  a instead  of  i in  the  word  katdb,  a book,  instead  of  kitdb,  and  i instead 
of  u in  likre  for  lukve,  clothes. 

There  is  a tendency  to  drop  aspiration,  especially  after  sonant  mutes.  Thus  while 
we  have  once  or  twice  the  Hind!  bln,  we  usually  have  hi,  also.  On  the  other  hand  we 
have  an  h prefixtxl  in  aggar  or  hag  re , before. 

Sometimes  sonant  mute  consonants  are  hardened.  Thus  tlie  common  word  ddnd,  an 
ox,  becomes  ddnt. 

The  letter  r presents  several  curious  irregularities  and  these  are  the  more  worth 
noting,  as  this  letter  also  exhibits  many  unwonted  changes  in  the  PiSacha  languages  of 
the  North-West  Frontier.  Before  another  consonant  r is  usually  elided.  Thus  mama, 
to  strike,  becomes  mdnd,  and  chdrnd,  to  graze,  becomes  chdnd.  We  have  noticed  the 
same  elision  of  r in  the  Rath!  dialect  of  Garhwali.  In  the  Pisacha  languages  r is  A erv 
frequently  elided. 

On  the  other  hand,  r sometimes  becomes  r or  d.  This  is  most  prominent  in  the  ease 
of  the  genitives  of  the  personal  pronouns,  where  Ave  have  asrd,  our  ; trnrd,  your ; mindd, 
my ; and  tindd,  thy.  But  it  also  occurs  in  other  words,  as  in  mardu,  a man.  A similar 
change  occurs  in  the  Kafir  Pisacha  languages,  where  we  have,  e.g.,  the  Bashgali  dyne, 
far  ; and  bar , outside.  Again,  in  Kashmiri  r and  d are  frequently  interchanged. 

1 E.g.  Kiftbali  biihn , a sister,  obi.  bauhqe. 


822 


AVE  STERN  PAH  A E l. 

In  Gadi  we  have  come  across  instances  of  the  occasional  insertion  of  r,  where  it  is 
not  expected,  and  the  same  occurs  in  Churahi.  Thus  avc  have  bhrukkhnd,  hungry ; 
bhradd  or  bheddit,  a sheep ; hag  re,  aggar  and  agge,  before  ; and  Hikhrnd,  to  learn.  The 
insertion  of  tin;  r in  the  last  example  is  especially  remarkable. 

The  letter  r shows  a tendency  to  become  /,  as  in  /at l/,  a girl,  the  Chameali  hurt,  and 
Kashmiri  kin" . 

Declension. — The  principal  divergence  from  file  standard  dialect  lies  in  the  declen- 
sion of  masculine  nouns,  like  g/iar * a house,  ending  in  a consonant.  In  Standard 
Cliameajl  these  make  their  oblique  forms  by  adding  d,  as  in  ghard.  (lad!  follows  the 
same  rule.  Both  dialects,  however,  change  the  d to  e in  the  genitive.  Thus  ghare-rd. 
Churahi,  on  the  other  hand,  has  e throughout  for  the  oblique  form.  The  following  table 
exhibits  the  various  declensional  forms  in  a convenient  shape  : — 


Nominative  Singular.  ! 

i 

| Nominative 
| Plural. 

Oblique  Singular  A 
| ami  Plural. 

irt’tsT  ami  Loral  i\r  Singular 
ami  Plural. 

Vocative 

Singular. 

Vocative 

Plural. 

! 

gUora , a horse 

gliop > 

ghorf' 

ghor » 

gh  fired 

ghorefi 

ghar,  a house 

tjhitr 

(jhari • 

glut  r>: 

ghard 

ghi  ro 

hiithtj  an  elephant 

hat  hi 

j 

j luithi 

(sg.)  hath?. 

(pi  J hat  hr 

hit  hid 

hit  hid 

kuli,  a girl 

knit 

j 

hut  J 

knj 

hull * 

j hulfZ 

bhtn,  a sister 

j hhfni 

bhlnJ 

hhln  ~ 

b hi nth 

bhinift 

Jheu,  a daughter 

! dMu* 

dhtfud 

dinars 

dhru 

dhrtid 

gd,  a cow 

yar  \ 

(SK-)  9*1,  j 
(pi.)  ijal.T.  . 

(sg.)  ,yb\ 

(p1)  9n*- 

gde 

giin 

It  Avill  be  seen  that,  except 

in  the  case  of 

ghar,  the  declension 

is  almost  the  same  as 

that  of  Standard  Chameali. 

The  most  common  postpositions  are  : — 

Accusative-Dative,  ni,  to  ; re-let,  for. 

Ablative,  hand,  kaehchhd,  from;  nianjhd,  from  among;  Id,  with,  by  means  of; 
kune,  kind,  or  ken 7,  and  n vie,  with,  together  with. 

Genitive,  rd  or  rb. 

Locative,  majb,  wanjh,  mdht  in  ; pran,  upon. 

As  remarked  in  the  case  of  G full,  setii  is  connected  with  tlio  Kashmiri  siitg.  The 
Genitive  postposition  is  rd  or  rb.  It  will  be  remembered  that  in  the  more  eastern 
dialects  of  Western  Baliar!  the  terminations  d and  b are  interchangsablo  for  nouns  like 
ghbrd,  a horse,  and  that  sometimes  the  o termination  is  the  ouly  one  used.  In  Standard 
Chameali  and  Gadi  no  b terminations  have  been  noted,  nor  have  they  been  noted  in  the 
ease  of  nouns  in  Churahi.  In  the  eastern  dialects  we  sometimes  have  h instead  of  b,  and 
in  Kulul  infinitives  end  in  nd  >r  nd.  The  same,  it  will  be  seen,  is  the  case  with  infini- 
tives in  Churahi. 

A few  Churahi  nouns,  such  as  'inehnd,  and  murdd,  both  mcaniug  * man’,  and gabhru, 
a boy,  end  in  v.  This  howc\  cr,  does  not.  change  in  declension,  thus  the  geniti\rc  of 
mehnii  is  mehnn-rr . 


CHUHAHI. 


823 


Moreover,  as  we  see  here,  in  Churahi,  the  genitive  postposition  is  ra  or  ro.  This,  as 
elsewhere,  is  an  adjective  becoming  re  when  agreeing  with  a masculine  noun  in  an 
oblique  case  singular  or  in  the  plural,  and  rl  when  agreeing  with  a feminine  noun. 

The  use  of  ni  for  the  accusative-dative  is  peculiar  to  Churahi.  Clmmeall  and  Gad! 
have  jo.  Its  nearest  relative  is  the  Punjabi  nu. 

Adjectives  follow  the  usual  rules.  Those  in  a,  changing  the  a to  a or  i,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  genitive.  Comparison,  as  usual,  is  formed  by  putting  the  noun  with  which 
comparison  is  made  into  the  ablative,  as  in  bhini-kand  laiumd,  taller  than  the  sister  ; 
sabhnd-kand  khard,  best  of  all,  best. 

PRONOUNS. 

The  first  two  Personal  Pronouns  are  thus  declined.  In  the  second  specimen 
some  forms  will  be  found  which  are  not  given  here.  They  are  either  borrowed  from 
Chameali  (e.g.  miff  jo , to  me)  or  from  Hindi  (e.g.  tnmhdro,  yonr)  : — 

I Thou 

Sing. 


Xom. 

aii,  hail 

tii. 

\<T 

* '-v 

uu , mat 

tt,  tat. 

Obi. 

7)10,  aiti 

tau. 

Gen. 

hijnrta,  mindd 

findd. , t ind  it. 

Plur. 

Xom. 

ds.se,  ahe 

tde,  tube. 

Ag. 

as-se,  ahe 

the,  tuhe. 

Obi. 

ass  a 

tod,  tod,  tud. 

Gen. 

as  {a 

t mird,  tuhdrd. 

The  genitives  singular  and  plural  should  be 

noted.  In  the  singular  they  end  in 
□ * 

ndd,  and  in  the  plural  in  ra.  The  use  of  those  cerebral  letters  is  peculiar  to  Churahi. 

We  may  compare 

the  Panjabi  plurals  and  da , 

our, 

and  tuhddd , your  ; and,  in  the 

Pothwarl  dialect  of  Lahnda  or  Western  Panjabi, 

madd,  my ; asiddd,  our  ; tadd,  thy ; 

and  tusiddd,  your. 

This  cerebrnlization  does  not 

occur  in  the  other  pronouns. 

The  Demonstrative  Pronouns,  which  are 

also 

used  as  pronouns  of  the  third 

person,  are  declined 

as  follows  : — 

This 

That 

Sing. 

Nom. 

Oh 

o,  oh. 

Ag. 

ini 

uni. 

Obi. 

Os  (tern,  esse) 

us  (fern.  usse). 

Gen. 

esserd 

tiserd. 

Plur. 

Nom. 

Oh 

d,  oh. 

9 

Ag. 

inha, ind 

unha,  lind. 

Obi. 

iuhd , ind 

nnhd,  nna. 

Gen. 

in  herd 

tin  herd. 

824 


WESTERN  PAHA^l. 


It  will  be  seen  that  the  oblique  form  has  a separate  word  for  the  feminine  singular. 
.A  a in  other  Western  Pahari  dialects,  this  feminine  form  is  used  only  as  a substantive. 
When  the  pronoun  is  an  adjective,  ea  or  us  is  used  even  when  agreeing  with  a feminine 
noun.  In  the  second  specimen,  the  form  aserd  occurs,  meaning  ‘ her  * {ase-ri  janei-rd, 
of  her  betrothal).  It  is  probably  a variant  of  userd,  or  it  may  be  a feminine  form,  like 
usse.  The  same  specimen  has  a feminine  agent  singular  in  nssd  Syale  mahnu-kachchha 
puchchhyd , she  asked  the  Syala-man. 

The  Relative  and  Correlative  pronouns  are  declined  as  follows.  The  Correlative 
is  commonly  used  as  a pronoun  of  the  third  person,  and  also  as  a demonstrative  pro* 
noun : — 


Sing. 

Who 

# 

That 

Nom. 

se. 

Ag. 

jini 

tint,  tend,  tisnl. 

Obi. 

jie,  jus  (fern,  jasse) 

tis. 

Gen. 

jiserd,  j aserd 

fiserd. 

Plur. 


Nom. 

j? 

se. 

Ag- 

jinhd 

tinhd. 

Obi. 

jin  lid 

tiithd. 

Gen. 

ji inherd 

tin herd. 

In  the  Parable  we  have  once  tianl  for  the  agent  singular  of  se  ( Usui  manS  bold,  he 
said  in  his  mind). 


The  Interrogative  Pronoun  is  thus  declined  : 

Who  ? 

Sing. 

Nom. 

kand. 

Ag. 

hunt. 

Obi. 

kos. 

Gen. 

koserd. 

Plur. 

Nom. 

kapu. 

Ag. 

kunhd.. 

Obi. 

kunhd. 

Gen. 

kunherd. 

The  neuter  Interrogative  Pronoun  is  kutu  or  kitu,  what?  Its  other  forms  have 
not  been  noted,  except  the  genitive,  which  is  ked-rd. 

The  Indefinite  Pronouns  are  koi,  anyone,  someone , and  kichchh , anything,  some- 
thing. Kod  has  its  agent  kenni,  and  its  genitive  kisera.  Kichchh  does  not  change  in 
declension. 

Je-ko  is  whoever,  and  je-kiohch,  whatever. 


CHUltAUl. 


825 


CONJUGATION.— A. — Auxiliary  Verbs  and  Verbs  Substantive. 

Mr.  Bailey  gives  the  present  tense  of  the  verb  substantive  as  a or  ate,  the  latter 
not  being  used  in  the  first;  person  singular.  Otherwise  these  are  used  for  any  person  of 
any  gender  of  either  number.  The  specimens  give  several' variants  of  these.  There  is 
at  as  well  as  a,  and  ate  instead  of  ate.  Moreover  there  is  a feminine  form  aitl  or  all 
as  in  mail  rbtl  aitl,  there  is  much  bread  (Sp.  I.),  and  hull  take  niorl  all,  you  took  away 
the  girl  (Sp.  II). 

In  the  second  specimen  we  also  have  he,  which  is  borrowed  from  Chameali,  being  a 
corruption  of  hai. 

The  Past  tense  is  thid,  then  or  thin,  pi.  thie  or  thie  ; fern.  (sg.  and  pi.)  thl.  Mr. 
Bailey  also  gives  thie  for  the  feminine,  a peculiar  form,  which  I have  not  noted  else- 
where. 


B— The  Active  Verb. 

The  infinitive  ends  in  nd  or  nil.  After  r the  termination  is  nd  or  nd.  Thus,  jharnd 
or  jharnd,  to  fall ; hhbnd  or  hhbnd,  to  heooine  ; mama  or  mdrnd,  to  strike. 

As  stated  under  the  head  of  nouns  substantive,  the  final  letters  d and  a arc  intei- 
changeahle,  but  nd  is  tlic  more  eommou  form. 

When  the  root  of  a verb  ends  in  r,  the  r is  usually  dropped  before  a termination  begin- 
ning  with  a consonant,  so  that  the  more  usual  form  of  murnd  is  mdnd  ; similarly  we  have 
charnu  or  chdnd,  to  graze  (cattle) ; while  for  harnd.  to  do,  we  have  hand  or  even  kdhnd. 

When  the  infinitive  of  a transitive  verb  governs  a feminine  noun  it  is  itself  (as  in 
Kashmiri)  put  into  the  feminine.  The  feminine  is  formed  by  changing  the  final  d or  u 
to  l,  and  an  i is  also  epent helically  inserted  before  the  n or  u as  explained  under  the 
head  of  pronunciation.  Ilonce  the  feminine  of  mdnd,  to  strike,  is  mdini  or  mainl.  ‘ 1 <j 
strike  the  hoy’  is  gabbed  mdnd,  while  ‘ to  strike  the  girl’  is  hull  mainl. 

In  Churahi  the  infinitive  does  not  -appear  to  change  in  declension;  thus,  in  the 
Parable,  we  have  chdnd  (not  did  tie)  hliejd,  ho  sent  him  to  graze  (swine). 

A weak  infinitive  formed  by  dropping  the  final  vowel  is  sometimes  found.  Thus,  in 
the  Parable,  we  have  maran  laggb,  lie  began  to  die.  It  will  he  observed  that  here  the 
termination  is  n not  n,  although  pieceded  by  r.  It  must,  be  confessed  that  the  rule  about 
having  a dental  n after  /•  is  very  carelessly  observed. 

If  the  root  of  a verb  ends  in  h,  the  h is  sometimes  repeated  after  the  n of  the  termi- 
nation nd  or  nd.  Thus,  the  infinitive  of  gdh,  go,  is  gdhnhd,  to  go,  and  of  raih,  remain, 
raihyhu,  to  remain. 

The  Present  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  td  to  the  root.  Thus  from  jharnd, 
to  fall,  jliartd , falling.  If  the  root,  ends  in  a vowel  then  n is  inserted.  Thus,  bhond,  to 
become,  hhontd,  becoming.  The  Cham&ill  forms  in  dd  aro  also  used,  so  that  we  have 
also  jhardd  and  bhbndd.  Sometimes  the  n is  reduced  to  a mere  nasalization  of  the  pre- 
ceding vowel,  as  in  hhatd  from  hhdnd,  to  eat. 

When  the  root  ends  in  r,  this  r is  usually  dropped  before  the  td  or  dd,  as  in  the  case 
of  the  infinitive.  Thus,  mart  a or  mata,  striking  ; harfd,  kata  or  kdlitd , doing. 

The  feminine  of  the  present  participle  is  formed  by  changing  the  final  d to  7,  with 
an  epenthetic  insertion  of  i as  in  the  case  of  the  infinitive.  Thus,  the  feminine  of  maid 
is  maitl  or  maitl,  and  of  khatd,  kliaitl. 

vot..  IX,  HAUT  IV. 


.)  N 


826 


WESTERN  PAHA  III. 


The  following  present  participles  are  slightly  irregular  : — 
gdhnhd,  to  go,  present  part,  gathd. 

aind,  to  come,  » •*  eita  or 

raihnhu,  to  remain,  „ „ rehntd. 

bulnfi,  to  speak,  „ » bdttd. 

bhdnu  or  bhfitiu,  to  become,  „ bhdntd  or  bhutd. 

In  the  case  of  bolnu,  (as  in  the  case  of  a linal  r)  the  l lias  been  dropped  before  the 
consonantal  termination,  and  the  t doubled  in  compensation. 

The  masculine  plural  of  the  present  participle  ends  in  e;  and  the  feminine  singular 
and  the  feminine  plural  end  in  Thus,  rna to,  pi.  mate  ; fern.  sing,  and  pi.  mditl. 

The  Past  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  .id  or  yd  to  the  root.  Thus,  mured  or 
mdryd,  struck.  These  are  really  two  different  ways  of  spelling  the  same  sound,  and 
tndreCi  is  the  more  correct.  Sometimes  only  a is  added,  so  that  we  also  have  mar  a. 
Again,  the  Kului  form  in  •/?,  instead  of  A is  also  common,  as  mar  ft. 

The  following  past  participles  are  irregular  : — 

Past  I’aitii-iple. 


bhdnu  or  bliimu , to  become 

aind  or  i unit,  to  come 

gdhnliu,  to  go 

puna,  to  fall 

pend,  to  drink 

kd/nid  or  hand,  to  do 

laind,  to  take 

(lend  or  d/nd,  to  give 

raihnhu,  to  remain, 

nasnd,  to  run 

be  in  d,  to  sit 

khdnu  to  eat 


bit  da,  blind,  or  hhu. 

d,  yd  or  yd  It  ; pi.  die,  yde  ; f.  at,  yd}. 

ged,  god  or  gyd  ; pi.  gee  or  ge  ; f.  gel. 

pea , pen. 

petd. 

kcd  or  kid  (f.  hi)  or  kit  to. 
ted,  Id.  (f.  li). 
ditto,  ditto . 
re  hd. 
nat hd. 
bit  fid. 

khau  (pi.  khde ; f.  khdi). 


Note  that  there  is  another  verb  kdhnd,  meaning  ‘ to  say  ’ which  is  regular. 


As  in  other  Chamba  dialects  and  in  Mandi  there  is  a Static  Participle  formed 
by  changing  the  id  or  yd  of  tlm  past  participle  into  bed.  Thus,  wared,  struck,  mar  dr  a, 
in  the  state  of  having  been  struck. 

The  following  are  irregular : — 

fust  Participle.  Stntic  Participle. 


blind  or  blind,  become 

d or  yd,  come 

ged,  ged,  or  gyd,  gone 

pea,  fallen 

petu,  drunk 

kid,  kea  or  kittd,  done 

led  or  id,  taken 

ditto,  given 

rehd.  remained 


bhdrd  or  bhiird. 

ddrci,  ydftrd. 

gedrd,  gedrd  or  gyora 

peord. 

pilot'd. 

keorfi  or  kit  tor  a. 

I earn, 
dh  ford, 
rehord. 


ouuuAni. 


827 


Pa!<t  Participle. 

nathd,  run 
bethd,  seated 
kluiu,  eaten 


Static  Participle. 

nathord. 
be  (hat'd, 
khdord. 


The  Future  Passive  Participle  is,  no  doubt,  the  same  in  form  as  the  Infinitive. 
No  examples  have  been  noted. 

The  Conjunctive  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  /,  to  the  root,  to  which  karl  is 
usually  added  except  in  the  ease  of  Intensive  compound  verbs.  Thus,  mdri-karl,  having 
struck.  The  verb  aipu  or  elnFi,  to  come,  has  aichhi-kari  or  aclilil-karl. 

The  Noun  of  Agency  is  formed  by  changing  the  pd(pit)  of  the  Infinitive  to  nebula 
(nebula).  Thus,  j harp  it,  to  fall,  jliurnebdld,  a faller,  one  who  is  about  to  fall ; mdnu, 
to  strike,  mdtiebdld,  a striker,  one  who  is  about  to  strike. 

The  second  person  singular  of  the  Imperative  is  the  same  in  form  as  the  root,  the 
plural  is  formed  by  adding  d.  Thus,  mar , strike  thou  ; mdrd,  strike  ye.  The  following 
are  irregular : — 


ulna  or  dip  Ft,  to  come 
tjdhnhFi,  to  go 
raihphu,  to  remain 


1 inperalivo. 

2nd  Ring.  2nd  plur. 

a,  aeh  < uclthft , jchlin. 

yah  (jdlid,  ydd  or  jd. 

rehl  rehl. 


Mr.  Bailey  gives  no  forms  for  the  Old  Present  and  Present  Conditional,  equi- 
valent to  the  Hindi  marif,  1 may  strike.  In  the  Parable  we  have  khdE,  I may  eat 
(husks),  and  in  the  List  of  words  (Nos.  17g  and  19  f)  we  have  blwd,  I may  he;  and 
mdrd , I may  strike.  Possibly  khan  is  borrowed  from  Hindi. 

The  Present  Definite  is  formed  by  adding  the  verb  substantive  to  the  present 
participle,  as  in  nindi,  but  the  verb  substantive  may  either  precede  or  follow  the 
participle.  Tims,  murid  or  mdtd,  striking  ; ad  maid  a or  on  d mold,  I am  striking.  Any 
form  of  the  verb  substantive  may  be  used.  Thus,  in  the  Parable,  we  have  on  mart  a at, 
1 am  dying  (of  hunger).  The  participle  changes  for  gender  and  number.  Thus, 
d mold  ; muse.  plur.  d mate  ; fern.  sing,  and  plur.  d mailt. 

When  d or  die  follows  the  participle,  the  two  sometimes  coalesce.  Thus,  a it  uidtd 
(for  mold  + d),  I am  striking,  and  dstte  mdfdte  (for  mole  + die),  we  are  striking. 


The  Imperfect  is  formed  as  usual,  by  adding  the  past  tense  of  the  verb  substantive 
to  the  present  participle.  Thus,  on  mold  thed , I was  striking.  There  are  the  usual 
changes  for  gender  and  number. 

The  Past  Conditional,  as  usual,  is  the  present  participle  used  alone.  Thus,  mdtd , 
(if)  I had  struck,  etc.  It,  as  usual,  changes  for  gender  and  number,  but  not  for 
person. 

For  jharpd , to  fall,  Mr.  Bailey  gives  jharitd , instead  ot  jhartd  as  we  might 
expect. 

The  Future  m most  Palmri  Dialects  is  formed  by  adding  Id  (le,  It)  to  tlie  Boot  or 
to  the  old  Present.  Thus,  in  Standard  Chamfall  we  have  hou  murid,  I shall  strike 
Churaln  uses  the  same  suffix,  added  to  the  root,  and  also  employs  another  suffix  -md, 
which  wo  have  already  met  in  lvinthali  and  other  connected  dialects  of  the  8imla  Hill 
VOL.  IX,  part  iv. 


.)  n a 


823 


WBSTEKN  PAllXRi. 


States.  In  Kiflthali  tlic  -md  is  reserved  for  the  first  person,  hut  in  Churaln  this  dis* 
tinction  is  very  loosely  kept.  Md  is  generally  u&d  for  the  first  person  and  -Id  for  the 
second  and  third,  hut  we  occasionally  find  Id  for  the  first  person  and  md  for  the 
third.  Both  -md  and  -Id  change  for  gender  and  number  as  usual,  hut  not  for  person. 

When  the  root  ends  in  a consonant,  a junction  voavoI  is  usually  inserted  between 
the  root  and  the  termination.  This  is  usually  l or  e,  but  in  one  place,  in  the  Parable, 
we  have  boldmd,  I will  say,  in  Avhioli  the  u is  probably  a relic  of  the  old  present.  Md 
is  sometimes  added  to  the  root  direct  without  any  junction-vowel,  and  when  the  root 
ends  in  r,  this  is  as  usual  elided  and  the  m doubled  as  compensation.  Thus,  ‘ I shall 
strike  * is  marina,  which  becomes  mamma. 

The  full  form  of  the  masculine  future  of  jharnit,  to  fall,  with  i as  a junction-vowel 
is  thus  given  by  Mr.  Bailey — 


1.  jharlmd 

2.  j ft  a rt  Id- 
'S. jharild 


j ha  rime. 

jhaflle. 

jharile. 


It  must  bo  remembered,  hoAvcver,  that  the  -md  forms  may  also  be  usod  for  the  2nd 
and  3rd  persons,  and  the  -Id  forms  for  the  first  person.  Thus  in  the  second  specimen 
we  have  elle,  we  will  come  (in  ten  or  fifteen  days),  and  demd,  he  will  give  (the 
rupees). 

As  a specimen  of  the  e junction-vowel  we  may  quote,  for  mdnu,  to  strike. 

Sing.  Plur. 


1.  mamma  (or  mdftmd)  mdrnme  (or  tndhme). 

2.  mareld  mdrele 


3.  mareld 


mdrele 


Several  verbs  form  their  futures  irregularly.  . In  the  following  examples,  the 
singular  -md  and  the  singular  -Id  forms  are  given  without  reference  to  person  : — 

-md  forms.  ’ -Id  forms. 


bhfmit  or  bhunu,  to  become 

bhomd  or  bliurnd 

bhbld  or  bhuld. 

dinn  or  eind,  to  conic 

alma  or  einul 

alia  or  elld. 

gdhnhu,  to  go 

* 

gammhd  or  gamma 

galhd. 

kdhtiu,  to  do 

kdhmd 

kahld. 

lainu,  to  take 

lemd 

leld. 

den  it  or  dinu,  to  give 

demd 

deld. 

raihnhd,  to  remain 

remit  d 

relhd. 

na6nu,  to  run 

namid 

natela. 

be  find,  to  sit 

beimd 

beSeld. 

khdnu,  to  eat 

khama 

Maid. 

The  tenses  formed  from  the  Past  Participle  (the  Past,  Perfect,  and  Pluperfect) 
call  for  few  remarks.  They  arc  made  on  the  same  lines  as  in  Hindi.  Thus 

an,  j hared,  I fell. 
mt  nwrd,  I struck  him. 


CHURAHt. 


829 


aujhafid  d,  I have  fallen. 
m%  mdrd  a , I have  struck  him. 
au  jhared  thed,  I had  fallen, 
mi  mdrd  thed,  I had  struck  him. 

The  Passive  Voice  is  formed,  as  usual,  by  conjugating  the  past  participle  with 
gdhfthii.  Thus,  au  mdred  gathd,  I am  being  struck ; au  mdred  gammhd , I shall  bo 
struck ; au  mdred  ged,  I was  struck. 

Compound  Verbs  call  for  no  remarks.  Intensive  Compounds  formed  with  the 
conjunctive  participle  are  common.  Thus,  bdndl  denu,  to  divide  out ; gudl  chhmlnv, 
to  lose  completely,  to  squander.  . 

As  specimens  of  inceptive  compounds,  we  have  : — 

8§  bhrukkhnd  mar  an  laggd,  he  began  to  die  hungry  (i.e.  of  hunger). 
rdji  blmnd  lagge,  they  began  to  become  happy. 

Note  that  in  the  first  example  the  short  form,  and  in  the  second  example,  the 
nominative  (not  the  oblique)  of  the  full  form  of  the  infinitive  is  employed. 

The  usual  Negative  is  na.  In  prohibitions  we  have  mat,  as  in  mu-pran  arjl - 
parclid  mat  kar,  do  not  make  a charge  against  me  (Specimen  II). 


830 


[No.  5.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  J’ANARl  (OHAMEALl). 

ChukAhI  Dialect.  (State,  Ohamba.) 

Specimen  I. 

£.**?  >7j?  J k>  y?  $11  fi  >?i  ti 

If  3 3 t f 3 >f  j>r?f  f?  v If  3?  *rvV 

3i  in  ft?  yj?  fv  yp  y?v  v 

yo  rrtf  y)vy?  37  x>n)  rff  <53 

7 ifrf  If  *n?  >ib  }<)}  }f  > ? f 9^^ 

\*  J1  rj  ?i  <5 in ? V(f  J if  >?><! 

/ . ^ x ■*  — 

3>r>  3 S)v*r>?  ; f; y ) y{j}  }d  311} 

GYy  Y*l  3~>  *>  f d-h  3 Jlf?}]  *j}jA  m»f 

$>  ¥ -3  <?  (f  3>]  bf  '6  £}J  Jli? nC  j S33  yH 


churAhI. 


831 


j f 3 f t * r?J  ><>7  i)  y? J) 

Tft  7 37  5)3  >73 J 7^-  Go)  yrf 

??  y*  n*  3 ml  5y  * 5 t"  %(j 


yir>  { to  J j)i  ft  hh  z?j  <zj  g y j>/  y £ 
3,4  %*>  *'  5jf  fjj?  S?}  S3  Sr*  45  j?i?  £7 
3 60}  rrfl  yy  wft  <53  G(T; 


<3??  >fl  £ J 31*11  3 S fj  J?  +J  z C: 
<50  w?  J?>0?  Wqr)  y c,j  *3  DJ 

J J?«3?  J / jf  j?/  # 


/ •' 


• r 


vv^jj  3 313  yy  yv  44  ITS  y y 4?v^ 


/ — 


nr?  ft  fy  ^3  40  „)>,$  v-W  p,(Tc  tfy  <53 


832 


"WESTERN  PAHARf. 


Sml  J$'  4l 1*}  $5~ £1  <5J  ^3; 


VYl  sjzy  n **1*1  f V>7  Ml  fftl  h 23 

>h)  v)  y?yf  yn&'wtf  Jt  k\S 4?  yvf'WR 


^ >7?*1  j\  j ?!  ft'1  ~k^  *w 


(ftj{  ho  y)  iff)  yfj  Stfif  h 7 > Ji  £ J 


»h  Yh  J &X)  >i  r?  TfXC.  >tyf  Vi{  £3 

SfJ  Ji  3>1  V??  fiJ  *9  i?/ 3><T;  ? /-W 


H ?#*?.?/>?  #>?  *7;  4 3 2$  33 1 

•v 

rr>}  3 j;  f/j? 5?Y  Jj<>  *{ j'  *f  W4 


j?*?  f # J ? z?  J; 

Jjo  yrj  $c:  3 Sli  riiyy  ?J>  ) *£  j *l> 


CHURAHl. 


833 


j 6*  tM)  { yg.  v K!i  ^ 

^ «•/  *??  K !Jj?f  y? 

/”'7  JW  V’f7?  ?i  >r»  >7i,  5^*  j (j-jT , 

J<r;  *>*  *V>  Jy  ;>sy  3 y?3  $ w? 

^ -6  ??7i  ¥ >?  y yy  xf  &S  ft>l 

f/p  >?j?  /,  T3i>i'  j f:  nn  »]!»' 

m' f 4?'  h J>" « a „?*,  ,( 


▼01.  IX,  r^RT  IT. 


[ No.  6.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY 


884 


Central  Group, 


WESTERN  PAHAeE  (CHAMEALl). 

CnuRAiii  Dialect.  (State,  Chamba.) 

Specimen  I. 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 

# 

Ikki-meknii-re  do  puttar  thld,  unbfwnaujha  mathrd 

One-man-of  two  sons  were,  them-f rom-in  by-the-younger 

babbe-sete  bolu,  ‘bo  bn,  gharbari-ra  hesa  je  minda 

the-father-to  it-tcas-said,  ‘ O father,  property -of  share  what  mine 

a inB  de.’  Uni  gharbarl  tinha-nt  band!  dlttl. 

is  me  give’  By-him  property  them-fo  having-divided  toas-given. 

There  dihe  pichcha  mathra  puttar  sab  kichehh  kittha  kart 

A-fexr  days  after  the-yonnger  son  all  everything  together  having-made 
pardesa-ni  chall-gea,  atd  apnl  gharbarl  aire  kainina-maftjli 

a-foreign-connlry-to  iccnt-away,  and  his-own  property  ugly  deeds-in 

gual-clikadi.  ji  sab  gual  bet  ha , tis-desa  badda 

was-lost.  When  all  having-lost  lie-sat , t hat-country  (-in)  a- great 

ankal  pdu ; tS  sc  bhrukkhna  niaran  lagga.  Ta  tis-desh-rd 

famine  fell;  then  he  hungry  to-die  began.  Then  t hat-count  ry-of 

ikki  sabukare-re  gab!  bdtlia.  Tin!  apnl  patl  stir 

one  banker-to  having-gone  he-sat.  By-him  his-own  field  {-in)  swine 

ebiina  blieja.  T5  tisni  mand  bolu,  ‘jo  sikre 

to-feed  he-icas-sent.  Then  by-him  mind-in  il-icas-said,  ‘ what  husks 


sur 

kbate, 

au  bhl  kbau,’  atd 

lis-nl 

kol 

na 

deta-tbla. 

t he- s wine 

eat, 

I too  rnay-eat'  and 

him- to 

any-one 

not 

giving-was. 

Ta 

sudbl 

al-kari  hdlu, 

* mindd 

babbe-rd 

mate 

kame-m 

Then  sense- {into ) 

come-h  a v i n g i t-was-sa  id, 

‘ nty 

father-of 

many 

servants-to 

mat! 

rot!  aitl,  ate  au  bhrukkh 

na  marta-ai. 

_ f\i 

au 

uthl-knri 

much  bread  is,  and  I hungry  dying-am,  I ariscn-having 

apnd-babbe-kind  gamma  ate  tis-ni  bolumu,  “ he  ba,  au 

my-own-fatlier-to  wilt-go  and  hirn-lo  I will-say , “ O father,  by-me 

surge-ra  ate  tinda  1)1  pap  kltta,  ate  abe  tinda  puttar 

heaven-of  and  of -thee  also  sin  was-eommitted,  and  now  thy  son 

bhuna  jdga  na  relm;  jihT  timid  hor  kame  atd,  tiki 

to-become  worthy  not  I- remained ; as  thy  other  servants  are,  so 


ClIUitAUI. 


835 


mu  bi 
me(-to)  also 


rakh  ” * 
keep”  * 


Ta 

Then 


uthi-kari 
arisen-! 


apne 

his-own 


babbe-kgni 
father-to  he- went. 


gea. 


Oh  ai-tia 

dux*  tliia  ta 

tis-ni 

lieri-kari 

babbe-ni  dalx  ai, 

ate 

He  yet 

far  was  then  he  (acc.) 

seen-having 

thc-f ather-to  pity  came 

',  and 

dauri-kari 

tis-ni 

piax*i 

ki, 

ate  mate 

phoku  ditto. 

'la 

run-having 

him-to 

love  teas- made, 

and  many 

kisses  were-gicen. 

Then 

puttre 

tis-ni 

bold, 

‘lie 

bii,  au 

surge-ra  bi  ta 

tinda 

by-the-son 

him-to 

il-tcas-said, 

* 0 

father,  by-me  heaven-of  also  and 

of -thee 

bi  pap 

kitta, 

tS 

tinda  puttai*  banna  joga 

na 

also  sin 

was-committed, 

and 

thy  son  to-become  worthy  not 

rcha.’ 

Babbe 

apne 

karno-ni 

bolu,  ‘ kharo 

kliare 

I-rcmained By-the-falher  his-qwn  servanls-to 
likre  kadlii  lel-ichlia,  ate  us-nl 

clothes  having -brought -out  bring,  and  him-to 

aiiguthi,  pera  jute ; ate  haddi  dlium  dliutii 
ring,  on-feet  shoes;  and  a-great  feast  preparing 


it- was- said,  * good  good 

lua ; use-rc  liattha 

put-on;  his  on-hand 


la, 

bring, 


ki 

that 


sab 

all 


kliainO, 

ate 

raji 

bhume ; 

kiti 

31‘ 

Ob  minda 

puttar 

wc-may-eat, 

and 

happy 

tce-may-be ; 

why 

that 

this  uiy 

son 

mavi-geora-tbia,  sO 

jit  a 

bbiia ; hirora-thia, 

abe 

niili-gya.’ 

-v 

Ta 

dead-gone-was 

; he 

alive 

became ; lost- 

was, 

now 

found- ice  nt .* 

Then 

sO  raji 

bbvina 

lagge. 

they  happy 

to-be 

began. 

Use-ra 

jOtba 

puttar 

pati-inah 

tbia. 

J5  ghare 

nor 

His 

elder 

son 

the-Jield-in 

was. 

It" hen  the- ho  use 

near 

ya,  tS 

gaja-baja 

suna. 

TS 

ikki 

kama  sadai-kari 

he-camc,  then 

music- -etcetera 

was-lieard. 

Then 

one 

servant  having-called 

pucbchbya, 

* ell 

kutfi 

blifi  r ’ 

TOui 

tis-sete 

balu, 

‘ tinda 

it-was-asked, 

‘ this 

what 

is  t * By-him 

him-to 

it-was-said. 

‘ thy 

bliai  ya, 

t5 

tinde* 

bah be  badbai 

thati, 

ki  raji-baji 

brother  came,  and  by-thy-fatlier  a-feast  was-pre pared,  because  safe-{8f)-sound 

gkar  ya.’ 

house(-to)  hc-came.’ 

Tisc-ra  bau  bhehar 

His  father  out 
ba-sete  balii, 

father-to  it-icas-said, 

bhul,  tS 

became  (i.c.  passed),  and 

tai  kadi  ikk  bakri- 
by-thee  ever  one  goat-of 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


Ta 

airu 

mull 

kari 

bhehar 

baitlia. 

Then 

ugly 

face 

having-made 

outside 

he -sat. 

y«> 

ta 

so 

patoa. 

Tin! 

apne 

came 

, then 

he 

entreated. 

By-him 

his-oicn 

1 her, 

Otri 

barlie 

mfi  tindi 

teh  a 1 

kate 

look. 

so-many 

years 

/ thy 

serricc 

a-doing 

tinda 

sikkhro-bahar 

na  gya ; 

."V 

ta 

minde 

thy 

instructions-out 

not  I- went 

; and 

uie-to 

:a  ehhelu 

bi 

na  dittu, 

ki 

apne 

young-one 


even  not  was- given,  that 


my-own 
5o  i 


836 


WE3TEBN  PAHARl. 


yar  sajija-sete  khusi  kata ; pan  jS  Sh  tinda 

friends  fellowmen-with  happiness  I-might- have-made ; but  when  this  thy 

puttar  ya,  jini  tindi  ghar-bari  airu  kamma-mafijh  guai,  tai 
son  came,  by-wham  thy  property  ugly  deeds-in  was- lost,  by-thee 

use-re-taf  dhain  lai.’  TSni  tis-ni  balu,  'hS  puttar, 


him-of-for  a-feast  was-pre pared*  JBy-him  him-to  it-was-said,  * O son, 

tu  sada  mO-kane  bhSta,  36  minda  a,  se  tinda  a;  pan 

thou  always  me-with  art,  * what  mine  is,  that  thine  is  s but 

khusi  kana  ate  raji  bhuna  jarur  thia,  kShl  je  Sh  tinda 

happiness  to-make  and  happy  to-be  necessary  was,  why  that  this  thy 

bhai  mari-gSora-thia,  sS  jinda  bhua ; hirora-thia,  se 

brother  dead-gone-was,  he  alive  . became;  lost-ioas,  he 

mili-gya.’ 
fonnd-went •* 


837 


Central  Group. 


[ No.  6.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 

WESTERN  PAHARl  (CHAMEALl). 

ChurahI  Dialect.  (State,  Chamba.) 

Specimen  II. 

5*  ft)  lUfY  rf  i? 

a y<5?  ) 3V1  f(  j Aif: 

^>7  >970  >p 

% 

^7^7  yiyjfyf  Trf  X yYH 

nCl  j h A)<T;  f tyv  <53?  vr/ 

75 <T.  iff)  3^7  <3 Mr?  n 

°yi  v??  w?  ;?5  32  £j3  a^7 

>7  3>j?  l/tf  33  y* 7 <55?/  7; 

^7-J?  3V7  J)^T  7)7)  /T  Jf5?  <57?/ 


€38 


WESTERN  PAHifl. 


7;"  h}  K 'Si W 

*}$  >fo)  Tj?  i7  >??*  7;  j'j)  X 

W1  yfi  A<Ti  j y-?  *?  ^ ^ 

75J)7^  <L./>?  ^ xf(o  y?f\ j Xpi  nV>f 

J)}  3 S\*  Ta  f)}  sort  >y>?  yin 

*?^  ^ 59^ ^ 

}T  *f  n^3  y 7T  y?]  yet  rf  f; 

b\)\  wt  /T  j^V  ^.7  r :>7<r? 

6V  >7Jjc  /7 G?n>l  y?i 

m y $y\  **£  y>£  Tv  a 3 6 

7*C’  b blrf  J)C\  \o  A Vo 7 •j 


CHU&lHl. 


839* 

*?)  *>yT  yC  (fi]  K -? 
v 

W a w /?  ^ V)T  p>rn~  <%5~ 

3rf  biy  wi  /T v~l  <*£  3 

^ ^h\  *$*  *0  S 6 sw  3>rf 

KJW  (fl  ^3  <bjT  ^ *??  6\<£ 

&>¥?  &jf  >i?  fief  & r* 

]f  3 rrf  Vh  finJ’  ^ y^h 

J,  >7?>?  >/??  ^V?  bW  *2^  ^ 
631  jS  J **? 

tfh  *sjf  yT  m y>  ^rn 

^ ^ ^ * 

3 ) *w  yr?  i)  * (jKJ  **j?  v^ 


840 


WESTERN  PAHARl. 


ye  Y>/)'  s>  ¥*1  ^3  />;?/  i l 

3»o  yj^yi  yjn'Z  ) 3 b Y37?  ” ^ 

nfi  ???)  ?f  >?e  /7  Je 

5?*/  <fy  /T y?r  ?r  ^ 

¥«1  3 )lPrf  y?  1 fo  A ¥”1  J TP 

i}Pr[  10  3}  >? if  fw  ?>  bfP  W iP 

*>v  yri  wT  >4  W 

g$  kw  T(  Ifa  /T  w *)  ^ 

jY  yp)  Lop  yrr)  n}Y?  ft  rfj  0\p 

¥?}  p ¥*/)  £3"  A J 

j)7)i  \t*  a j ^ 


CHURiHl. 


841 


fa-S)  jf  3|  yf-^1 

nCi  )i£?  yy'f  j jfj"  * yf  \.\rf  >9 

< \ _ 

3 33^  ) yi)Cl  J))y} 

*7;  ^ ^ J Yr?  *f)]f  w y7 

^ i*  >rS?  *??#  ^3?r  ^ j?v 

37)?  >?7$  frF7  $.£f  5?  3 *?TS 

y)<s  iT  i<7  >yf  *iX 33?  £p~ S 

^7  7*3  /7  <*f  S(f  j?>?~r  ?? 

*)  ^^7  7 5*??  3?3)~  vr  <£Tty  33  j> 

0 >?j?3"  >7  s~~ 33/  7 Y3/r 

5?  *)?  W)}  V33  £7)  -i.}?  3/J  1 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IT.  1 5 p 


842 


£ No.  6.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 

WESTERN  PAII.iRt  (CJIAMEALI). 

CnrRAHl  Dialect.  (State,  Chamba.) 

Specimen  II. 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 

Bliakli  ikk  LGhotikrl-re  Ratlil-NarpatO-rl  Oil  jO,  — Kull 

Statement  one  Lbhtikri-of  JR  (t  th  l - Na  rpa  t-of  this  that , — A-daughtcr 

mere-bhai- J uale-rl  lie.  AsO-rl  janel  asse  donhif  bhal  gittlio 

my -brother- Juald-of  is.  Tier  betrothal  by-us  both  brothers  together 

kl.  Tikrlgarha  Parsram-nl  dlttori  till.  Phiri  Parsrame 

t cas-made.  Tikr/garh{-of)  Pars  ram- to  given  she-icas.  Then  by-Parsrdm 

horl  30  karl-lOI.  TS  36  ase-ri  janel-ra,  kharclia 

another  wife  was-taken.  Then  what  hcr-of  bctrothal-of  expenditure 

assu-kana  lel-lea.  Panj  rupayye  ak  so  nagad  10a. 

us-from  was-taken.  Fire  rupees  one  hundred  cash  was-taken. 

• PaSlja-ghat  dial!  rupayye  an-,  goru-,  bliaud-,  pohoru-,  drntl-. 

Five-less  forty  rupees  grain-,  cattle-,  utensils-,  sheep- a nd-g  oats-,  sickle-, 

kudali-mS  bliage.  Phiri  Oh  kull  asre-ghare  rOhl. 

mattock-in  werc-dcducted.  Then  this  daughter  in-our-house  remained. 

Phiri  bhal-JualO  galla  jO,  * kull  asre-ghare  rein. 

Then  by -brother- Jtut hi  it-was-said  that,  ‘ the- daughter  in-our-house  remained. 

JO  kull  lOna  {for  lela),  so  tinda  rupayya  dOmu.’  Pbirl 

Who  the-daughter  will-take,  he  thy  rupee  will-give.'  Then 

kull  reh!.  Se  mincle-ghare  rOlii.  Ja  kull 

the-daughter  remained.  She  " in-my-house  remained.  When  the-daughter 

baddl  mutyar  lifil  {for  bliui),  ta  kull-rl  chill  Parje-karie 

big  grown-up  became,  then  - thc-daughter-of  intrigue  Farjd-icith 

laggl.  Phiri  tro-chour-malilne  chal  laggorl 

began.  Then  ( for-)  three-four-months  the-intrigue  begun 

rehl.  TS.  ikk-roj  rati  chorl-karl 

remained^ (i.e.  continued).  Then  one-day  at-night  theft-doing  (i.o.  stealthily) 

ParjUf  • apne-gharO-nT  lel-gea.  Phiri  nil  apnl-jo-kanO 

Far  jit,  in-his-own-house  took  {her)- away.  Then  by -me  my-own-wife-with 

salaha  ^ kl  je,  .f‘ki.11  kui  gel?’  Phiri  mindl  jo 

consultation  was-mad * that ,*  ‘ the-daughter  where  went?'  Then  my  wife 


CHUKAlll. 


843 


A 

Syale-Parje-r5  r gliarc  gSI.  TJssa  Syale-mahnu-kachcbba  puohchhya 

Syatd-Parjd-of  in-home  went.  By -her  Syd  Id-manfrom  it-icas-asked 

•» 

je,  ‘asri  kali  * idi  ai  ki  nahl  ai?’  Parje  bolu 

that,  * our  daughter  hither  came  or  not  came  ?'  By-Bar jd  it-was-said 

jc,  ‘ hafi  lei-ii,’  Phiri  jbl  bolu  je,  ‘ kuli 

that,  ‘ 1 brought  {-her)'  Then  by-the-wifc  it- teas- Said  that,  * the-da  tighter 

la  lei-ii,  par  asye  rupayye  kui  ? ’ Uni  galla  jo,  ‘ tu 

indeed  bring,  hut  our  rupees  where?'  By -him  it-ioas-said  that,  ‘ thou 
chali-ju.  Rupayye  je  . tumhare  laggore  die,  tinha  bhari-dema.’ 

go-away.  The-rupecs  which  your  spent  are,  those  I-icill-f ally-refund.' 

Phiri.  mind!  jo  ehali-ai.  . * Mn-pran  arji-parcha.  mai  kar. 

Then  my  icife  came-aicay.  ‘ Jle-ou  petition-application  not  make. 

Hau  bhari-dema.’  Ut-prant  atthuo-roz  mi  Uchhba  apnri 

I willfully- refund.*  Then-after  on-the-cighth-day  by-me  Uclihbd  my -own 

gual  bhiri  bhojya.  Mi  Uohhbe-nu  {for  ill)  bolu  je,  ‘ tu 

cowherd  again  was-sent.  By-me  Uchhbd-to  it-ioas-saul  that , 1 thou 

gahft- (./<>?•  gain) -kar I Parje-Jagte-kana  pnchcbh  jo,  “tu  mindi 

gone-having  Burjd{-and)-Jaytdfrom  ask  that,  “ thou  my 

kuli  lei-goii.  Rupayye  dine  ki  nahl  ■ dine?”’ 

daughter  tookest-aicay.  Rupees  are-to-be-given  or  not  are-to-be- given 

Phiri  Par  jo  galla  jo,  * tu  chali-gfth.  Asse  dase- 

Then  by-Parjd  it-was-said  that,  * thou,  go-away.  JPe  in-ten- 


pandre-dilie 

tinde-gliaro  oilo,  toi 

re  {for  tinde) 

rupayye 

doi-deme.8 

fifteen-days 

i n -th  y -house  will-come. 

thy 

rupees 

we-shalt-pay.' 

TithS-uprant 

dase-pandre-dihe  Parja 

.at 

3a 

kuli 

ale  Jagtfv 

Then-after 

in-ten- jif teen-da  ys  Parjd 

as-well-as 

the-daughter 

and  Jagtd 

char  {for  chour)  hue  {for  bhuo)  bhale  mans  Pargane-re  ikk  bhua  bakra 

four  also  respectable  men  fhe-Pargand-of  one  also  goat 

lei-kari  minde-ghare  ae.  Ml  puchchhu  jo,  ‘tube  rat 

taken-having  in-my -house  came.  By-me  it-was-asked  that,  ‘ you  by-night 

keni  to?’  Unha  bolu  jo,  ‘ tinde-gharc-kana  asso  kuli 

i i ■ 

why  came?'  By-them  it-was-said  that , ‘ thy-house-from  by-us  the-daughter 


ta 

niori.’ 

Ml 

bolu 

r> 

* hull 

ta 

certainly  was-taken.' 

By-me 

it-was-said 

that. 

‘ the-daughter  certainly 

tube 

niori- ati. 

Minda 

dodh 

^6 

rupayye 

mindo-muhe 

by-you 

taken-away-is. 

My  one-and-a-half 

hundred 

rupees 

> 

in-my- presence 

agge 

chliad.  Mi 

rupayyo 

sahdkara-kana 

ebuki 

ate-diorc„* 

before  place.  By-me  the-rupecs  a-banker-from  having-borrowed  are-given .* 

Unha  bolu  je,  ‘ bhyaga  rapayye-ri  gall  tou-kane'^  asse 

By-them  it-was-said  that,  . **in-the-movninp . the-rupecs-of  • matter  f th&e-with  we 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV.  5 V 2 


844 

karMgmk’  Rat-mah 

mil-  arrange.1  The-night-in- 


■WESTERN  PAHARl. 


phirl 

then 


kuU 

the-girl 


3S 

as-well-as 


J3  bhyag  bhui. 
When  morning  became, 

■'kuU  i lei-gea.* 

the-daughter  took-away / 

.ku\i  lei-gCa. 

the-daughter  took-away. 
ku|l  : pujai-dgma.* 
toUl-return.* 


t£  'Jagte  bolu 

then  by-Jagtd  it-was-said 

Jagte  bolu  je, 

By-Jagtd  it-icas-said  that. 


Parja 

Parjd 

Phirl 

Then 


kita 

either 

Jagta 

Jagtd 


tuhare  rupayye 
your  rupees 
apne-ghare-ni 
his-own-  house-to 


parja  cban-natng. 

Parjd  ran-uway*. 

je,  . * Parja  tS 

that,  * Parjd  . ..  ittdeed 
‘hau  , apn^-gbarft-nl 
* I my-own-hodse-to 
dSma,  kita  . tuharl 
will-give,  or  yout 
chali*gea.  TjS 

went- away.  Then 


ghare-ni 


jure.’ 

are-got* 

tisS-re 
him- of  house-to 

achhi-rehi. 

having-come-remained. 
rehi.  Ta 

she-remained.  Then 

phdjdari*mah. 
the-criminal-court-in. 


daughter  ^ , 

kuU  Parja  puchcbhu  je,  ‘.tu-ta  m8-ni  ghini-la. 

by-the-daughter  Parjd  icas-asked  that,  * you-indeed  me  (acc.)  brought  {here). 
Tinda  babb  tidi  thia.  Tin!  minde-babbe-rc  rupayye  ditte  * ki 

Thy  father  there  was.  By-him  my-father-of  rupees  werp-given  or 

'na  ditto?’  Ta  Parje  bolu  je,  'bhal,  rupayye  raihjo 

not  were-given  ? ’ Then  by -Parjd  it-ioas-said  that,  * O,  the-rupees  * to-me 

nahi  jure.’  *T3  mi  bolu  je,  “jise-re  rupayye  &6,  * hau 

not  are-got ‘ Then  by-me  it -was- said  that,  “ tohom-of  rupees  are,  I 

chali-gei.”  ’ Ta 

icent-away”  * Then 

T3  koi-maliine 

Then  for-abont-a-month 
Parje  mn-pran 

by-  Parjd  me-npon 


are, 

kuli  minde-ghare 

the-daughter  in-my-house 

b!  mer8(/oJ*  minde)-ghare 
also  in-my-house 

arji  ditti 

petition  was-given 


FREE  TRANSLATION  OF  THE  FOREGOING, 


A statement  of  Narpat,  by  caste  Rathi,  an  inhabitant  of  lidhtikri,  to  the  following 
effect : — 

Juala,  my  brother,  has  a daughter.  We  two  brothers  both  betrothed  her  to  *Parsram 
of  Tikrigarh.  As  Parsram  ultimately  married  another  woman,  he  took  from  us  the 
expenses  incurred  by  him  in  the  betrothal.  This  amounted  to  Rs.  106,  from  which  he 
deduotcd  Rs.  36  on  account  of  grain,  cattle,  utensils,  sheep  and  goats,  a sickle  and  a 
mattock,  that  wc  had  given  him.  So  the  girl  still  remained  in  our  house ; for  my  brother 
Juala  said  to  me,  * as  the  girl  remains  in  our  house,  the  man  who  takes  her  will  repay 
you  these  rupees.*  So  she  went  on  living  there.  When  the  girl  grew  up  she  conceived 
a passion  for  Parja.  The  intrigue  went  on  for  three  or  'four  months,  and  Parja 
carried  her  off  secretly  one  night  to  his  own  house.  I had  a talk  with  my  wife#  As 
to  where  she  could  have  gone,  and  then  my  wife  went  to  the  hgupe  of  Parja,  the 
JiySla  , (i.e.  man  of  the  district  jf  Sahi).  She  asked  the  Syala  if  our  girl* had  come  there 
or  not.  ‘ Yes,*  said  he,  * I have  brought  her  here.*  My  wife  replied, ‘take  the  girl 


CHTTBAHt., 


845 


and  welcome,  but  where  are  oftr  rupees  ? ’ 1 Parja  replied,  ‘ you  can  go  away  with 
jour  tmind  at  ease.  I will  refund  to  you  all  the  money  that  you  have  spent.’  So  my 
wife  oaipe  home  again.  yThat  lie  said  was,  ‘ don’t  bring  a case  against  me,  for  I will 
fully  repay  all  your  expenses.’  Eight  days  afterwards  . I sent  to  him  Ucliliba,  my 
cowherd.  I told  TJchhba  to  say  to  him  and  to  Jagta  (his  father),  * you  took  my  daughter 
awair.  Are  yq(u  going  to  pay  the  money  or  not  ? ' Parja  replied  to  him,  ‘ go  away.  We 
will ^coihe  in  ten  or -fifteen  days,  and  will  then  pay  you  your  money.’  Well,  in  ten  or 
fifteen  days  }?arja  did  come,  with  the  girl  and  Jagta,  as  well  as  four  respectable  men  of 
the  J*argaha,  and  bringing  with  him  a goat.  I asked  them  why  they  had  come  at  that 
time  of  nigljt,  and  they  replied  admitting  that  they  certainly  had  taken  the'  girl  from 
.my  house.  Said  I,  ‘yes,  you  did  take  the  girl.  Now  put  down  before 'me  a hundred 
and  fifty  rupees;  for  I had  to  borrow  them  from  a banker,  in  order  to  give  .them  to 
Parsram.’  They  said  they  would  arrange  about  the  money  next  mqrning,  hut  in  the 
night  the«  girl  again  ran  away  with  Parja.  Whei\  morning  came,  \ye  found  she  had 
gone,  and  Jagta  confessed  that  Parja  had  taken  off  tho  girl  and  that  he  himself  had 
taken  off  the  girl  to  his  own  house,  and  promised  that  Parja  would  either  pay  me  the 
money.  Or  else  send  her  back.  lie  then  himself  went  off  home.  But  the  girl  said  to 
Parja,  ’you  have  brought  me  here.  Your  father  (Jagta)  was  over  there.  Did  he  pay 
my  father  the  money  or  not  ? ’ Then  said  Parja,  ‘ Alack  ! I have  not  been  able  to  get 
the  money.’  (And  this  was  wliat  the  girl  told  me  she  said  to  him)  : — ‘ So  I said  to  him, 
“ I intended  to  go  to  the  house  of  some  one  who  had  money.”  ’ So  she  came  back  and 
remained  with  nn*.  After  she  had  been  about  a month  in  my  house,  Parja  made  this 
petition  against  me  in  the  criminal  court. 


* » > Among  the  Churfthla,  a man  who  elopea  with  a girl  can,  after  a certain  interval,  open  negotiations  with  the  father,  an.l 
if  he  aseante  pay  him  fit*.  7 and  a goat  aa  compensation.  Chamba  Gazetteer,  page  151.  We  shall  eee  that  tho  young  man 
* did  eventually  bring  at  goat,  bnt  tha  girl’ft.  people  wanted  alao,  not  Re.  7,  but  all  tho  expense  they  had  incurred  through  hei 
previous  betrothal. 


646 


PANQWAlT. 


Parigwali  is  the  name  of  the  dialect  of  ChamSali  spoken  in  Pangi. 

The  position  of  Pangi  in  regard  to  the  other  portions  of  the  Ghamba  State  has  been 
described  in  the  introduction  to  Cliameali,  and  need  not  be  further  discussed  here. 

To  the  north  of  Pangi  lies  the  Tibeto-Burman-speaking  province  of  Zanskar.  To 
its  west  lie  Padar,  Kishtwar,  and  Badrawah,  in  which  dialects  allied  to  Kashmiri  are 
spoken.  To  its  south  lies  the  Churah  Wizarat  of  Chamba.  The  dialect  of  Pangi  itself 
is  named  Pa  rig  wall.  It  is  a form  of  Chameali,  and  is  therefore  the  furthest  outpost  of 
Western  Paliari  looking  to  the  north-west. 

It  was  estimated  for  the  purposes  of  this  Survey  that  it  is  spoken  by  3,701  people. 

Pangi  is  a tract  of  great  natural  beauty  but  has  few  chances  of  intercourse  with 
the  outer  world.  It  is  separated  from  the  Chainba  of  the  Ravi  valley  by  the  difficult 
Mid-Himalayan  range,  so  that  even  in  summer  there  is  comparatively  little  intercommuni- 
cation. Por  four  or  five  months  in  winter  it  is  completely  isolated.  So  forbidding  was 
this  Mid-Himalayan  range  regarded  in  former  times,  that  every  State  official  proceeding 
to  Pangi  on  duty  was  granted  a special  allowance,  under  the  head  of  * funeral  expenses,’ 
as  he  was  not  expected  to  return.  For  the  same  reason,  Pangi  was  formerly  made  use 
of  as  a place  of  banishment  for  criminals  and  political  offenders.1 

The  population  of  Pangi  is  rather  mixed.  The  local  traditions  point  to  the 
inhabitants  having  immigrated  from  various  parts  of  the  hills,  some  from  the  lower 
Chenab  and  Ravi  valleys,  and  others  from  Lahul  and  Kulu. 

Our  authorities  for  Parigwali  are  somewhat  scanty.  A brief  sketch  is  given  by 
Mr.  Grahame  Bailey  in  his  Languages  of  the  Northern  Himalayas,  and  for  the 
purposes  of  this  Survey  we  have  a version  of  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son,  and  the 
usual  List  of  Words  and  Sentences,  both  of  which  will  be  found  in  the  following  pages. 

Considering  the  mixed  nature  of  the  population  that  speaks  it,  and  the  isolated  life 
that  its  speakers  yield,  it  will  not  surprise  us  that  Parigwali  has  several  marked  peculia- 
rities of  its  own.  In  several  particulars  it  agrees  with  languages  of  the  Blmdrawah 
group,  and  could  equally  well  be  classed  therein. 

Vocabulary. — To  begin  with,  in  the  vocabulary  some  of  the  commonest  words 
present  a strange  appearance.  Such  are  fir,  the  eye  ; gih  or  gi,  a house  ; kod,  a son  ; 
Sappar,  a bill ; and  so  on.  This  will  bo  evident  from  the  following  short  vocabulary 
taken  partly  from  Mr.  Grahame  Hailey’s  work,  and  partly  from  the  specimen  and 
from  the  List  of  Words. 


d,  da,  come  (past.  part.). 
abe,  now. 
agar,  in  front. 
antar,  in. 

dsi,  mouth  (Kashmiri  ds{). 
bob,  bau,  ban,  a father. 
baddd,  big. 


badhe,  rejoicing. 

bag,  a field. 

bdhar , behar,  outside. 

bath,  up. 

baiju,  seed. 

bard,  barhd,  a year. 

bau,  bau,  bah,  a father. 


1 Chamba  Gazetteer  (1904),  page  3. 


PAN  GW  A LI. 


behar , bdhar , outside. 

bhai,  a buffalo. 

bhdl,  a younger  brother. 

bhain,  a younger -sister. 

bhdrd,  bhaf'otu,  a load. 

bharilh , outside. 

bhait,  an  eldor  brother. 

bhirnd,  blidnd,  to  become. 

bichch,  in. 

bidhnd,  to  send. 

bisund , to  sit. 

bunk,  down. 

but,  a tree. 

chakld,  angry. 

chhdnd,  to  complete. 

chblh , two  days  after  to-morrow  ; 

two  days  before  yesterday. 
ddli,  compassion. 

daklid-je,  towards  the  direction  of. 

dand , dant,  a tooth. 

deddl,  an  elder  sister. 

des,  the  sun. 

dhdm,  a feast. 

dlu’ddh,  the  belly. 

dhesrd,  dancing. 

dh idrd,  a day. 

dli  u kit  d,  1 ningry . 

dt,  to. 

dost},  for. 

dzdrl,  jet'i,  where. 
d zilch  an,  j ikhan,  when. 
dzui,  with. 
djsdlli,  jblli,  a wife. 
ilsbth , jot  It,  a bill. 
ettu,  this  many. 
go,  gone. 
gadrlri,  a stream. 
ghareth,  a husband. 
ghettd,  to  go. 
glut,  a song. 
giclungar,  ignorant. 
gilt,  gi,  a house. 
gira,  a village. 
gord,  a cow. 


guana , to  cause  to  go,  to  lose. 

hachchhd,  white. 

hand,  to  be  defeated. 

hanlhnd,  to  walk. 

liattli,  the  hand. 

hi,  yes. 

he. nn,  to  sec. 

hi,  yesterday. 

ijji,  a mother. 

ind,  to  come. 

iri,  here. 

irid,  from  here. 

it. thi,  here. 

j a rati,  debauchery. 

jd,  to. 

jet hdnii,  a woman. 
jeri,  dzerl,  where. 
j ikhan,  dzikhan,  when. 
ji/dd,  alive. 
jbehnd,  to  yoke. 
jdlll,  dzblli , a wife. 
josan,  the  moon. 
jot  It,  (izbth,  a stream. 
jttgfi,  well. 

kamd.  I d aid,  a servant. 
hand,  from. 
hand,  together  with. 
kanu,  to  do. 

hat  lit,  how  much  ? how  manv  ? 
kattrd,  how  much  ? how  many 
ke/tri  dend,  to  divide. 

Ice nl,  along  with. 
kitin',  kh it r,  the  foot. 
kia,  from. 

kikhan,  when?  ‘ -'v 

kis,  why  ? 
kid,  how? 
kbit,  a son,  a hoy. 

Icon,  where? 

kill,  hit  el,  a daughter,  a girl. 

kiqidl,  the  head. 

led  it,  kill,  a daughter,  a girl. 


848 


WESTERN  PAHAJtl. 


land,  to  prepare. 
likre,  garments. 
lind,  an  ox. 
magar,  the  head. 
mdhnu,  a man. 
tnaUd,  to  heat. 
manjd,  a bed. 
mat'd,  a man. 
maid,  much. 
mathar,  mathrd,  small. 
uak/t,  the  nose. 
naSnd,  to  run. 
neh%,  no. 
tt end,  to  take. 
nir,  near. 
paddhar,  a plain. 
par,  beneath. 


pare,  the  day  before  yesterday. 

pasiir,  the  day  after  to-morrow. 

paid,  behind. 

pat y or,  after. 

pur,  to-morrow. 

pntth,  upon. 

saga l,  a fox. 

saihr,  a city. 

kippar,  a hill. 

hind,  far. 

takrd,  wise. 

thuthnd,  to  conciliate. 

tikar,  up  to. 

tikhan,  then. 

ure,  down. 

tin,  there. 


Several  of  the  above  words  suggest  connexion  with  Kashmiri.  Thus  bunk,  down, 
may  be  compared  with  the  Kashmiri  bon  ; kuri,  a girl,  with  kill'" ; pntth,  upon,  with 
peth  ; and  paid,  behind,  with  pat  a. 

Pronunciation. — As  in  Churahl  the  vowel  scale  is  indefinite.  We  have  a becom- 
ing ai  in  saihr  (Urdu  shalir),  a city,  and  l becoming  at  in  baijfi  (Hindi  lij),  a seed.  As 
in  Churahl  u becomes  i in  likre,  clothes. 


In  Kashmiri,  epenthesis  is  a common  feature  of  (lie  language.  Thus  the  base  kdr~, 
a girl,  becomes  kill’",  when  the  nominative  termination  " is  added.  The  same~oc6urs  in 
regard  to  the  same  word  in  Pahgwall.  Here  we  have  the  word  kod  (i.e.  kora),  a boy. 
But  when  the  word  is  made  feminine  by  changing  the  final  d to  7,  we  get  kui  or  kuri,  a 
girl.  In  the  same  way  in  the  future  tense  of  the  verb  the  termination  i of  the  feminine 
is  thrown  back  into  the  preceding  syllable.  Thus,  ‘ I shall  strike  ’ is  mdral.  Its  femi- 
nine would  be  expected  to  be  mdrali,  but  the  final  l is  thrown  back  before  the  l,  and 
we  actually  have  mdril. 

We  are  reminded  of  Kulul  in  the  pronunciation  of  j as  ds,  of  which  there  are 
numerous  examples,  such  mjblli-ov  (Jgdlli,  a wife ; jikhan  or  dzikhan,  where,  and  many 
others.  Similarly,  we  are  reminded  of  the  Simla  dialeets  by  the  occasional  change  of  t 
to  cli,  as  mjdchnd,  for  jotnd,  to  yoke. 

The  curious  change  of  r to  r in  mafd,  a man,  which  we  have  npticed  in  Churahl, 
also  occurs  in  Paiigwall,  and  also  the  dropping  of  r before  another  consonant,  as  in  hern, 
for  hernd,  to  see ; mdnd,  for  murnd,  to  strike ; kand,  for  karnd,  to  do ; and  hand,  for  hdrnd, 
to  bo  defeated.  It  may  be  noted  that  in  Siridlii  the  word  for  “ man  ” is  also  mardu. 

In  just  the  same  way  l is  dropped  before  another  consonant,  as  in  dotd,  for  bOltd,  I 
am  saying. 

In  the  Pitacha  languages  of  the  north-west  frontier  r or  r between  two  vowels  is 
often  dropped,  and  the  same  is  the  ca-  e here.  Thus,  kill  or  kiifl,  a girl ; kod  (for  kord),  a 
boy  ; (hoi  (for  jori),  with.  So,  the  word  gih,  a house,  represents  the  Sanskrit  griha,  in 


PANGWAT.I.  819 

which  however  there  is  not  the  consonant  r,  but  the  vowel  el.  Very  similarly,  an  l is 
dropped  in  mel  for  me  fa  having  been  found.  In  the  word  tint , three,  r has  become  l. 

• Occasionally,  in  borrowed  words,  we  flnd  soft  consonants  hardened.  Thus  anlar, 
in,  is  borrowed  from  the  Persian  andnr  ; and  the  Persian  (lam/,  a tooth,  is  represented  by 
both  (land  and  dan/,  while  zinda,  alive,  becomes  jin/d. 

An  initial  g is  aspirated  in  the  words  glut,  a song,  and  g he  tin,  to  go  ; a change  which 
is  common  in  all  East  Eranian  languages,  and  which  occurs  also  in  the  Maiva  form  of 
the  Pisacha  languages,  in  the  word  ghadd,  an  ass.1 

In  the  PiSacha  languages  a final  s is  often  weakened  to  h and  then  dropped.  Eor 
instance,  while  the  Bashgal!  word' for  ‘sister’  is  suit,  in  Shina  it  is  salt,  and  in  Pashai  it 
is  sdi.  Similarly,  in  PahgwaU  the  word  for  ‘ buffalo  ’ is  not  b ft  a is,  but  bhai. 

NOTINS  . — The  declension  of  nouns  presents  some  variations  from  Standard 
Chameall. 

Masculine  /adbhara  nouns  in  d like  glided,  a horse,  can  ;dso  end  in  d,  so  that  we 
have  chheld,  a kid  ; hakrh , a lie-goat  ; and  herd,  an  egg ; attrd,  so  many  ; mdnd  or  mdnd, 
to  strike;  ditto  or  ditto,  given. 

Such  nouns,  as  usual,  form  their  nominative  plurals  by  changing  d to  e,  as  in  glided, 
horses.  But  in  the  Parable  we  have  hod,  not  hoe,  for  sons. 

Similarly,  the  oblique  form  singular  and  plural  is  ghore.  Thus,  glidre-ili,  to  a horse 
or  to  horses. 

Note  that  the  word  gdrd,  a cow,  is  treated  as  if  it  were  masculine,  and  its  nomina- 
tive plural  and  oblique  singular  and  plural  is  gore.  So  also  hard  or  Itarhd , a year,  which 
is  feminine,  has  its  oblique  singular  and  nominative  plural  hare  or  bar  he. 

Othor  masculine  nouns  do  not  change  in  the  oblique  form.  Thus,  bag,  a field,  has 
its  nominative  plural,  and  oblique  form  singular  and  plural  also  bag. 

' The  above  remarks  do  not  apply  to  the  Agent,  Genitive  and  Locative  cases  of 
masculine  nouns.  ‘Whether  singular  or  plural  these  are  all  formed  by  adding 
e.  Thus,  gih,  a house,  gihe,  by  a house  or  houses,  of  a house  or  houses,  or  in  a house 
or  houses.2  Nouns  like  glided  drop  tins  d before  adding  the  e,  so  that  we  get  ghore , 
identical  with  the  oblique  form. 

Feminine  nouns  are  differently  declined.  The  genitive  singular  and  plural  option- 
ally adds  a.  Nouns  ending  in  l do  not  otherwise  change,  but  those  ending  in  a consonant 
add  * in  every  case  except  the  genitive,  and  the  nominative  singular.  Thus  kdi,  a girl 
or  girls;  kdi  or  kdid,  of  a girl  or  girls  ; oblique  singularand  plural,  kdi : pitth,  the  back  ; 
pit  tht , hacks;  pitth  or  pitthd,  of  a back  or  hacks;  oblique  singular  and  plural,  pit  (hi. 

The  feminine  words  gdrd,  a cow,  and  bard  or  barhd , a year,  are  declined  like  glided. 
Thus,  mS  etli  bare-td  tehal  kt,  I did  thy  service  for  so  many  years. 

Besides  the  locative  in  e,  other  locatives  can  be  made  in  the  usual  way,  by  adding 
postpositions  to  the  oblique  form. 

The  usual  postpositions  are  : — 

Accusative- Dative,  di,  je,  to;  ddstl,  for. 

Ablative,  hand,  kia,  from ; ke,  kane,  with,  together  with  ; Id 7,  with,  by  means  of. 

Locative,  bichch , in  ; pufth , on ; anlar,  in. 

1 Possibly,  however,  this  word  is  an  instance  of  tran>fer  cf  aspiration  \<//nula  l’or  /eJ/.  / . 

The  genitive  termination  was  originally  re,  but  the  r was  dropped  as  explained  un  lor  the  head  of  pronunciatiuv. 

VOf..  IX,  PAKT  IV.  3 (1 


9 


850 


WESTERN  PAHARI. 


The  genitivo  in  e is  immutable.  It  does  not  change  for  gender  or  number.  More* 
over,  the  final  e is  often  dropped.  Thus,  saholfdre  gl  gd,  he  went  to  the  house  of  a 
banker ; and  mS  ban  (for  bane)  gl,  (in)  my  father’s  house. 

Similarly,  the  e of  tlie  locative  is  often  dropped.  Thus,  in  the  above  two  sentences 
we  have  gl  instead  of  gle  or  gihe,  and  again  wo  have  jet  ha  kod  bag  (for  bdge)  thyd , the 
elder  son  was  in  the  field,  while  on  the  other  hand  we  have  tes  mulkhe  kdl  bhoi  gd,  a 
famine  took  place  in  that  count, ry. 

The  case  of  the  agent  is  employed  as  usual  for  the  subject  of  a transitive  verb  in 
the  past  tense,  but  this  rule  is  very  carelessly  followed. , The  nominative  is  equally  often 
employed  in  such  cases.  Thus,  the  son  says  to  the  father  both  (agent)  pap  kid  and 
au  (nominative)  pap  kid  for  ‘I  did  sin,’  and  we  have  mathar  kbd  (for  koe)  apu  mdl 
ikitth  hi,  the  younger  son  collected  his  property. . 

Adjectives  follow  the  usual  rule.  Those  in  d or  u change  to  e and  i exactly  as  in 
the  other  dialects,  and  call  for  no  remarks.  Others  are  immutable. 

Comparison  is  also  made  as  usual.  Thus,  daddi-kia  lammd,  taller  than  the  sister ; 
sain -kid  khard,  best  of  all,  best ; or  we  may  have  khard  khard,  best. 

Pronouns.— The  first  two  Personal  Pronouns  are  thus  declined  : — 

I.  Thou. 


Sing. 


Nominative 

ait. 

tu 

Agent 

me,  mat. 

le,  tat. 

Oblique 

mo. 

tan. 

Genitive 

me,  man. 

tS,  lay,. 

Plur. 

Nominative 

as,  as,  asl. 

t ns , tuh. 

Agent 

ase,  as. 

luse,  tus, 

Oblique 

as. 

tits. 

Genitive 

he,  hen. 

tuh,  tdhtt. 

The  genitives,  as  in  the  case  of  substantives,  are  immutable. 

The  Demonstrative  Pronouns,  which  are  also  used  as  Pri 

Person,  are  thus  declined 

This’. 

That. 

Sing. 

Norn. 

eh. 

oh. 

Ag. 

ini. 

uni. 

Obi. 

is,  08. 

us,  as. 

Gen, 

ise,  ese. 

use , ase. 

Plur. 

Nom. 

eh,  in. 

oh,  un. 

Ag. 

inh,  inhl. 

v unh,  unhi , 

Obi. 

in. 

un. 

Gen, 

inked. 

unked. 

PANGWALI. 


851 


Instead  of  the  genitives  singular  dse  and  asd,  the  Parable  sometimes  gives  esd  and 

asd. 

The  Relative  and  Correlative  are  thus  declined.  The  latter  is  also  used  as  a 

Pronoun  of  the  Third  Person 


Sing. 


Plur 


Who,  which. 

That. 

Norn. 

Jf- 

sd. 

Ag. 

jint,  jdrii,  jcn. 

lent,  ten. 

Obi. 

jis. 

ids. 

Gen. 

jise. 

tdsd. 

Nom. 

if- 

sd. 

Ag- 

jinh , jinhif 

tdnh,  fenht. 

Ohl. 

jin. 

ten. 

Gen. 

jinked. 

f caked. 

The  Interrogative  Pronouns  are  kas,  who  ? ag.  sing,  kin/,  obi.  sing.  kas,  gen. 
sing,  lease  or  kasd,  and  so  on ; and  ki,  what  ? obi.  sing.  kit. 

The  Indefinite  Pronouns  are  kui,  anyone,  someone,  and  kichchh,  anything,  some- 
thing. The  other  forms  of  kul  have  not  been  noted.  Kichchli  is  immutable.  Jd  koi, 
whoever  ; je  kichchh,  whatever. 


VERBS.— A.— Auxiliary  Verbs  and  Verbs  Substantive. 

The  foundation  of  the  present  tense  is  asd  or  asd,  am,  art,  is.  This  is  not  conjugated 
for  person,  but  changes  for  gender  anil  number,  exactly  like  the  Hindi  thd,  was.  Its 
masculine  plural  is  ase,  and  its  feminine  singular  and  plural  is  as/. 

Tho  initial  a may  bo  dropped,  so  that  we  also  have  sd,  sc  and  s/ ; or,  again,  the  final 
vowel  may  he  dropped,  so  that  we  can  have  as,  immutable,  for  both  genders  and  both 
numbers. 

Another  form  of  this  present  tense  is  hand  or  hand  which  is  treated  exactly  like  asd, 
bavin"  a masculine  plural  hand,  anil  a feminine  singular  and  plural  haul,  Cf.  Shina 
(Pi&ioha)  hand,  lie  is. 

Finally  for  the  third  person  singular  or  plural,  we  can  have  alii,  is,  or  are.  This 
does  not  change  for  gender. 

The  past  tense  is  thiyd  or  thyd,  was.  This  is  treated  exactly  like  the  Hindi  thd, 
having  a masculine  plural  thiye  or  the,  and  feminine  singular  and  plural  tin.  It  does 
not  change  for  person. 


B.— The  Active  Verb. 

The  Infinitive  is  formed  by  adding  nd  or  nu  to  the  root.  Thus,  bisnd  or  bi£nu,  to 
sit.  If  the  root  ends  in  r or  n,  the  nd  or  tin  generally  becomes  nd  or  nu,  and  the  r is 
usually  omitted.  Thus,  iunna,  to  hear,  while  from  the  root  mar,  strike,  we  have  for  the 
infinitive  mama  or  mdrnn,  or,  more  usually,  mam  or  mdnd,  to  strike ; so  karna  or  karnu, 
or,  more  usually,  kam  or  hand,  to  do. 

5 o 1 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


852 


WESTERN  PAHARI. 


A weak  form  ol‘  the  infinitive  is  also  found,  made  by  dropping  the  final  a or  u. 
Thus,  bikin,  to  sit;  maran,  to  strike;  karan , to  do.  Note  that  here  the  r is  not 
dropped. 

This  form  of  the  verb  is  used  in  inceptive  compounds  and  as  an  infinitive  of 
purpose.  Thus : — 

se  maran  (for  maran)  lagd,  lie  began  to  die  (of  hunger). 
badhe  karan  (for  karan ) lage,  they  began  to  do  rejoicing. 
ten/  sftr  chdran  bklhd,  lie  sent  (him)  to  feed  swine. 

Note  the  two  verbs  ind,  to  come,  and  ghend,  to  go,  the  forms  of  which  are  unusual. 

The  Present  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  Id  (masc.  plural  le ; fern.  sing, 
and  plur.  it)  to  the  root,  before  which  r is  usually  elided.  Thus,  bUtd,  sitting ; mdrtd, 
or,  more  usually,  mdtd,  striking ; kartd , or,  more  usually  kata,  doing.  In  the  word  botd 
for  bbltd,  saying,  an  l lias  been  dropped  in  the  same  way. 

If  the  root  ends  in  a vowel,  this  is  nasalized  before  the  Id  of  the  present  participle. 

Thus  : — 


bhtind, 

to  become. 

pres.  part. 

bhiUd. 

?nd, 

to  come. 

9» 

91 

ild. 

ghend , 

to  go. 

5) 

99 

ghdtd. 

dend, 

to  give. 

»» 

99 

detd. 

uenb. 

to  take. 

5J 

99 

t/Std. 

The  Past  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  d or  u to  the  root.  Thus,  mdrd  or 
mdr a,  struck  ; Mad,  eaten  ; pin,  drunk.  As  usual,  a good  many  verbs  have  irregular 
past  participles,  as  follows.  Only  the  forms  in  d are  given,  but  those  in  u also 
occur. 


bhund,, 

to  become. 

past  part. 

bhiid  or  bhbd. 

ind. 

to  come. 

99 

99 

d or  du. 

yhend, 

to  go. 

99 

99 

gd,  pi.  gbe,  f.  gel 

maud, 

to  die. 

9) 

99 

mb  ( mbe , moi). 

dend, 

to  give. 

91 

99 

ditto. 

nen>d , 

to  take. 

9 » 

99 

nib  (also  niu). 

kan  a, 

to  do. 

99 

kid  (also  kffi). 

bnjnd, 

to  know. 

99 

99 

btiddhd. 

bisnd, 

to  sit. 

* 99 

99 

bitthd. 

Once  or  twice  we  come  across  Standard  Chameali  past  participles  in  ed.  Thus, 
mdred,  struck.  These  arc  evidently  borrowed. 

As  in  other  Chameali  dialects,  there  is  a Static  Past  Participle  formed  by 
changing  the  final  d of  the  past  participle  to  or  or  ora.  Thus,  mdror  or  marorat  in  the 
state  of  having  been  struok. 

Some  are  irregular. 

Thus,  d,  come,  makes  ybr  or  yord. 

gd,  gone,  „ gay  or  (a), 

ditto-,  given,  „ difbr(d). 

bitthd , seated,  ,.  bithlra. 


PANGWl^l. 


853 


The  Conjunctive  Participle  is  formed  by  addin"  i to  the  root.  Thus,  marl, 
having  struok.  To  this  kal  (for  kari)  or  km  is  generally  added.  Thus,  mdrl-kal  or  mdrl- 
kal.  The  form  without  leal  is  mainly  confined  to  intensive  compound  verbs,  such  as 
bdpti  (lend,  to  divide  out ; ghinl  ghend,  to  take  away. 

The  verb  ind,  to  come,  is  irregular,  making  yal-kat,  having  come. 

The  Noun  of  Agoncy  is  formed  by  changing  the  nd  (or  ad)  of  the  infinitive  to 
fiSwdld  (or  newdld).  Thus  : — 

IMnd,  to  sit ; bUnSwdld,  one  who  sits  or  is  about  to  sit. 

mdnd,  to  strike ; mdnciudld,  one  who  strikes,  or  is  about  to  strike. 

The  Imporative  socond  person  singular  is  the  same  in  form  as  the  root.  The 
second  person  plural  adds  d.  Thus,  bis,  sit  there  ; bikl,  sit  yo.  Verbs  whose  roots  end  in 
r,  preserve  tin;  r in  the  imperative.  Thus,  from  mdnd,  to  strike,  the  Imperative  is  mar, 
pi.  mdrd. 

Some  verbs  form  their  imperatives  irregularly. 

Thus  : — 

Imper.  -2  sing. 

bhund,  to  become.  bhb. 

Ind,  to  come. 

ghend,  to  go.  gd  or  ghe. 

The  Old  Present  and  Present  Subjunctive  has  only  been  noted  in  the  first 
porsou  singular.  We  have  bhba,  I may  be,  and  kut/a,  I may  beat,  both  in  the  List  of 
Words  (Xos.  172  and  191).  Probably  blibu,  and  kuflU  may  also  be  used,  though 
Mr.  Bailey  {him,  I shall  sit)  and  the  Parable  (khdff,  I will  eat)  employ  this  form  for 
the  future.  In  the  Parable  kliiiu  may  equally  well  he  translated  ‘I  may  eat.’  In 
Kashmiri  this  tense  is  used  with  the  meaning  of  the  future. 

The  Present,  both  Definite  and  Indefinite,  is  simply  the  present  participle, 
changing  for  gender  and  number,  but  not  for  person.  Thus,  ad  bittd,  I sit,  or  am 
sittin",  feminine  ad  bistl,  and  so  for  all  persons  of  the  singular.  The  plural  is  as  biste 
(fern,  bis  ft),  we  sit  or  are  sitting.  Similarly  ad  maid,  I strike,  or  am  striking  ; ad  bold,  I 

say,  or  am  saying. 

The  Imperfect  is  formed  from  the  present  participle  by  changing  -id  to  -lath 
(plural  -teth  ; fem.  sing,  and  plnr.  tilli).  It  does  not  change  for  person.  Thus,  ad  bis- 
tath,  I was  sitting  ; as  bWeth,  we  were  sitting ; so  bikith,  she  was  sitting,  or  they  (fem.) 
were  sitting.  Similarly  ad  rndtaih,  I was  striking,  and  so  on. 

The  Future  is  formed  by  adding  al  to  the  root.  Thus,  bikd,  1,  thou,  or  he  will 
sit.  It  does  not  change  for  person,  hut  does  change  for  gender  and  number.  The 
masculine  plural  is  bikd,  and  the  feminine  for  both  numbers  is  bisil.  Similarly  from 
mdnd,  to  strike,  mdral,  tnarel,  mdril. 

If  the  root  ends  in  a vowel,  the  termination  is  l simply.  Thus,  from  ghend,  to  go, 
we  have  ghel  ; from  khdnd,  to  drink,  klidl  ; from  (lend,  to  give,  del ; and  from  aend,  to 
take,  net.  These  forms  arc  the  same  for  both  masculine  and  feminine,  and  for  both 
singular  and  plural. 


854 


WESTERN  PAIIArI. 


Irregular  are 

bhuftti,  to  become,  future  bhol. 
tftd,  to  come,  „ ydl. 

Besides  this  form,  the  present  may  be  used  in  the  sense  of  the  future.  Thus,  in  the 
Parable,  we  have  ghita,  I will  go  (properly,  I am  going),  and  bdta,  I will  say  (properly, 
I am  saying). 

Again,  in  the  first  person,  the  old  present  may  be  used.  Thus,  the  Parable  has 
khdu,  I will  eat,  and  Mr.  Bailey  gives  bisft,  I will  sit. 

There  arc  two  forms  of  the  Fast  Conditional.  The  first,  as  usual,  is  simply  the 
present  participle,  and  is  lienee  identical  in  form  with  the  present.  Thus,  au  bUta , 
(if)  I had  sat,  I should  have  sat  (if),  or  I might  have  sat. 

The  second  is  identical  in  form  with  tho  Imperfect.  Thus,  biStath,  (if)  I had  sat, 
etc.  We  have  an  example  of  it  in  the  Parable,  au  katath,  I might  have  made  (rejoic- 
ing with  my  friends). 

The  tenses  formed  from  the  Past  Participle  call  for  few  remarks.  They  are  formed 
as  iu  Cbameall  and  Hindi.  Thus  : — 
au  bittha,  I sat. 
mi  mard,  I struck  him. 
au  bittha  sd,  I have  sat. 
mi  mdrd  sd,  I have  struck  him. 
au  bittha  tidy  a,  I had  sat. 
mi mdrd  thiyd,  I had  struck  him. 

The  participles  and  the  auxiliary  verbs  (including  sd)  change  for  gender  and  num- 
ber as  usual. 

At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  remembered,  as  stated  under  the  head  of  nouns,  that 
the  nominative  case  is  frequently  used  instead  of  the  agent,  for  the  subject  of  transi- 
tive verbs.  Thus,  in  the  Parable  we  have  both  me  pdp  kid  and  au  pap  kid  for  ‘ I 
committed  sin.’ 

Also  the  genders  are  carelessly  observed.  Thus,  in  the  Parable  we  have  correctly 
dham  (fern.)  bit,  (thou)  preparedst  a feast,  and  also  ti  bau  (for  baud)  dlidm  Idii'St , thy 
father  has  prepared  a feast,  in  which  not  only  is  the  nominative  bau  used  instead  of  the 
agent  baud,  but  also  wo  have  Ida,  wheu  we  should  expect  Idi,  although  the  si  is  quite 
correctly  feminine. 

The  Passive  Voice  is  formed  with  the  past  participle,  and  phend,  to  go.  Thus : — 
au  mdrd  ghita,  I am  being  struck. 
au  mdrd  ghel,  I shall  be  struck. 
au  mdrd  gd,  I was  struck. 

Causal  Verbs  call  for  few  remarks.  It  will  be  sufficient  to  quote  the  following 
examples,  mostly  taken  from  Mr.  Bailey’s  work  : — 

fchdnd,  to  eat.  khaldnd,  to  give  to  eat. 

pitta,  to  drink.  piwdnd,  to  give  to  drink. 

iunna,  to  hear.  hindnd,  to  cause  to  hear. 

charnd,  to  graze  (intrans,).  clidrnd  or  chardna,  to  graze  (trails.). 

Regarding  the  character  in  which  the  following  specimen  is  recorded,  see  the 
remarks  on  p.  771. 


C No.  7.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


855 


Central  Group. 


WESTERN  I’AllARl  (CIIAMEALI). 

Pa^gwAtA  Dialect.  (Stale,  Ciiamba.) 

G vr  ^6  i vrcj ' S 1 >ft?f  cfti 

^ Si  ? « 3 

V \ 3®  c[U  Zj' l7  rwi)| 

qy,  y(cr)  fi&b 

x*)  JJi  >?  CD  * ’iTtf  i/') 

R^7  CfU  yfro  3)3 17  3)^  ^ I >[<?  713 
^•cf^  ^7  3‘S1  f377-  x%  Sf 

^ l s'G  7T  Vt^a.  c 5>/  1 ^ 

'7[5x/'$  jfl  jf  1 fi*/)  ^JT  g\} 

j/agL  ) 3^7  XTM  Vl^  V?  *i  ?fW 

"Sp  2^3  <f}7  ^3^  tyG  ^7  } 3'(T 

xtf  ^ 1 37  <3  Jn  ^ @t(7 


856 


WEST  I'.  UN  VAI1AKI. 


Yj  2f<S  jf)  >r§  >cyi  1 3^ 

b(k  y,  yj  3}  J&l  3^1  3X  Sjiy  ^ k" 

YU2L  1 Vi  Q 77TH  ^<3  jj  3Toj? 

•^■T  ? 3y\  § ^ 3 ^3vf  vj  ?p?r 

i/m  Qri^  Sf3  i>ir ~v\  \ VfZf  3 

'Zcvf&ZL  $ljf  if  i3  i f)?if  3i  >07 

3^  Hjia'  ri  if)  £b(  1 3(3  2^/"  3^ 

2f’<3  J-y  JJ  } 3(?3^  XU  ^ j? 

X^'ZfCT  >7  X1G  co*fl  X&  3>(?  3J  (^V 

ftj  £}  JTcp  >/)  | 

>rT?f  3 *,<3^  JJi*/"  i(7 
T><  W"  if  3 £1  iA(  Cfrvf'  1 ^ i“ 
cf®  f^F  t <^  V\M  >07 
^1  ^ ^ ^ <)  l^co  <3  ^7 


pa*gwIjJ.  867 

f 'f  37[  ji  | 3^ 

<5vf  H}  $fi  3&f  \ r 2^/1  u'ri 


f 2,  V >tT<P  Vlrtr  Yl  -rCTfC 


<VX  f _ 

n % v 

vf  sf  i 


{ rf 


3 & ^ V >0  2L  co  ff  U 


y\  b'  >n^f  fn  sf } sfls 

f'  1/  ^ 

f*vf  3^  ^3  £TTi  *rf  1 

I'Q'  <T*r  -yc-tC  \ 3V 


23  >^  5 J 1 ^ 37T  >» 
2jS5  3 vft  rf  f S 

2Tv?  55^  rcl  rrf  V 

r^)  2^,-)  v ^ ? 3^  *t  %~H  °° 

77fX  j"  2^  \ jf  \ & 


VOL.  IX,  PAST  IV. 


5 R 


868  WESTERN  PAHARl. 

^ m 

q-^SL  5?JT  } Vfy  ^ (T  > A <*2- 
cfpi''  yl  2 3^1  *,}  t 1 x"? 

5 Rcvf  fa  ^ 3^  t >7  >7 

$ f&i  x7  ZfdP  TfJ 

^0^  X\3^  ) 1 

vruf  jj-j  3 >$2,?  ^ 

3^  3^7?  3^37  ^T 
| CS^f]  ®fT  y 3 

I r)j  >7  -H-  27^"  1 J?  n ><~ 

vfYc  ft  5"  zt^t  1 3^ 

1^|  2,^  <$  < HTfl  ^ 

3'X  tkzT  x7  3 v3^"  v? 

%V-Sr  r>?3x  o?J 

j/  i| 


I No.  7.J 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


Central  Group. 


WESTERN  PAHA)*!  (CHAMfiAE!). 


PangwAlI  Dialect. 


-ect.  (State,  Chamba.) 

TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION. 

liau  do  koa  the'*.  Mathar  koa  anti  bau-ie 


Ik  hau  do  koa  the'*.  Mathar  koa  apu  bau-jo 

( Of ) one  father  turn  sons  were.  The-younger  son  his-own  father-to 

bolu,  * he  baua,  me  ghar-bari  hfsxii  kehrl-de.’  Tau 

said,  ‘ O father,  my  properly(-of ) share  hacing-divuled-gioe .’  Then 

apli  ghar-bari  banti-ditti.  Tliorhe  dhiare  patyOr  mathar 

It  is- ot 'in  property  a:  us- divided- out.  A -Jew  days  after  {by)  the- younger 

koa  apfi  mal  ikitth  ki,  phirl  dur-mulkhe  nasi-ga. 

son  h is- own  property  together  was -made,  again  in- a -fa  r -country  ran- away . 


Phiri 

apu 

mal 

jaroti 

nuai-chh 

al.  Jau  sabli 

Again 

his-own  properly  (in 

-)debauchery  was-squandered.  When  all 

nual-bat 

1. 

tau 

tes-mulkhe 

kal 

bbol-ga  ; tau  se 

was-squa  ndered-complet  ely , 

then 

in-that-conntry 

a-famine 

became ; then  he 

dhukha 

maran 

laga. 

Tail 

sahokare  "l 

ga; 

teni  apd 

hungry 

to-die 

began. 

Then 

a-bauker's  house 

he- went  s 

; by-him  (to-)his-own 

bag 

stir 

charan. 

bidha.  Tent 

apS- 

■mane  ki, 

field 

swine 

to-feed 

he- was - 

•sent.  By-him 

i n-liis- own- mind  it- was- made. 

‘ju 

sakre 

sur 

kliate 

inl-bicha 

au 

bi  khafi.’  '.rail 

• what 

husks 

the-swine 

eat 

those-from-among  l 

too  will- eat.'  Then 

koi 

na 

ddta. 

dau 

test*  dhyiin 

a, 

uni  bolu. 

any-one 

not 

gives. 

When 

his  thought 

came. 

by-him  it-was-said , 

katte 


kame 


* my-father  in-house  liow-many  labourers 
rotl  hanl,  ta  nu  dhukha  maran 

bread  is,  and  I hungry  to- die 

chali-ghBta,  ta  tes-je  bota, 

am-going-away,  and  liim-to  I-atn-say  lug. 


chali-gheta, 


bane ; tone  khan-je  inatl 

are;  to-them  eating- for  much 

laga.  Au  apd  bau-jo 

began.  T my-own  father-to 

“ he  baua,  m§  surge  pap 
“ O father , by-me  of -heaven  sin 


kia  ate  te  bl  pap  kia ; ab 

was-commUted  and  thy  ecen  sin  was-committed ; now 

joga  na  reha ; jin  hor  kame  bane,  tiu 

■ worthy  not  I-remained ; as  other  labourers  are,  so 

Tau  khara  bhoi-kal  apt!  bail  dakhe-je 


jbga 

na  reha ; jiu 

hdr 

kame 

worthy 

not  I-remained ; as 

other 

labourers 

Tau 

khara  bhoi-kal 

apt! 

bail 

Then 

erect  become-having 

his-own 

father 

YOU 

IX,  P ART  IV. 

te  koa.  bhuue 

thy  son  to-be 

mo  bi  rakkh.”  * 
me  too  keep."  ’ 
ga.  TaO-ta 

lie-went  Still 

A R 2 


860 


WESTERN  PAHARI. 

diir  thy  a,  s6  kai-kai  bau-je  dah  lagl-k&i  bhoi ; 

far  he- ions,  him  seen -haring  father-to  compassion  begun-having  became ; 

dour  ditti,  gal  kyari  ki,  phaclii  ditti. 

running  was-given,  yon-)  neck  embracing  was-made , kisses  were-given. 

Koa,  bolu,  ‘ he  baud,  au  ( for  me)  surga  bi  pap  kia 

The- non  said,  * O father , by-me  (of-)heaven  even  sin  was-commilted 

tS  ti  bx  pap  kia,  ts  koa  au  kiu  banu  ? ’ 

and  thy  even  sin  mas-committed , and  thy  son  I how  rnay-be-tnade  ? * 


Bau 

apu 

kame-je 

bolu, 

‘ kliare  khare 

The- fat  he 

r his-own 

labourer- to 

said. 

* good  good 

likre 

kaddlu-ghina. 

■v 

ta 

tes-je 

lua ; 

hatthe  aiiguthi 

clothes 

bring- ye-forth, 

and 

him-lo 

put-ye-on  ; 

on -hand  a-ring 

lua. 

khure  jute 

iua. 

t^  baddi 

dham  la, 

tS  lmdhe 

put-ye,  on-feet  shoes  put-ye-on , 

and  a-great 

feast  prepay  e-ye,  and  happiness 

kara, 

yuka  eh 

r%j 

me 

koa  mu- thya. 

se  jinta 

sa  ; herau-thya,  se 

make-ye, 

because  this 

my 

son  dead- was 

, he  living 

is;  lost -teas,  he 

mci-ga.’ 

Tau 

bad  hi 

5 karan 

lage. 

found-went.'  Then 

merriments  to-make 

they-began. 

Jetba  koa  bag  thya.  Jou  gibe  ulr  ft, 

The-elder  son  ( in-)the-Jield  was.  When  of-thc-house  near  he-camc , 

tau  ghit  dhesrii  rowa  suna.  Tau  ik  kama  bliya ; 

then  singing  dancing  noise  was-heard.  Then  one  labourer  was-called ; 

tes  puchchhan  laga,  ‘eh  ki  bliO-su  ? ’ Uni  tas-je 

him  to-ask  he-began , ‘ this  what  becoming-is  ? ’ By-hint  him-to 

bolu,  * bhai  au-ssi,  t5  t<^  ' bau  dham 

it-was-said,  ‘ thy  younger-brother  come-is,  and  ( by-)thy  father  a-feast 

lau-sl,  ki  se  raj-baj  pujjea.’  Tau  so  chakhlo-a ; tS 

prepared-is,  that  he  safe-sound  arrived .’  Then  he  angry-came ; then 

antar  na  ga.  Tau  bau  beliar  ai-kai  thuthau 

inside  not  he-went.  Then  the-father  outside  come-having  to-conciliale 

laga.  Apu  bau-je  * bolan  laga,  * her,  me  ettl  bare 

began.  His-own  father-to  to-say  lie-began,  ‘ see,  by-me  so-many  years 

te  tehal  ki,  t,S  bok-kiS  bahar  na  bhoa ; ti?  mfi-je 

thy  service  was-done,  thy  sayings-from  out  not  I-became ; by-thee  me-to 

ik  chlielu  bi  na  dittu  ki  aii  apu  bachhbbci-kane 

one  kid  even  not  was-given  that  1 my-own  friends-with 

moj  katatb.  Jou  ie  koa  a,  jen  te 

happiness  might-have-made.  When  thy  son  came,  by-whom  thy 

mal  jaroti-me  guai-ehbai,  tau  tasi-dostl  dham  la,i.’ 

property  prostitutes-in  was -wasted- away,  then  him-for  a-feast  was-prepared 


PANGWAI,!. 


861 


Uni  us- je  bolu,  ‘ he  koa,  tu  roj  mo-ke  asu ; 

By -him  him-to  it -was- said,  * 0 son,  thou  daily  ( always ) me- with  art ; 

je  mB-ke  _ asu,  se  sabli  t.6  asu ; tail  as!  badhe  1)1 

whatever  me-with  is,  that  all  thine  is ; then  we  happiness  also 

karan  ta  kbusl  bi  bhun  tkia,  ki  te  blial 

to-enjoy  and  happy  also  to-become  was  {proper ),  that  thy  younger-br other 

mo-tbia,  se  jinta  sa ; blrau-tbya,  ab  mei-ga.’ 

dead-was,  he  living  is;  lost-was,  now  Jbund-icenl 


LIST  OF  STANDARD  WORDS  AND 


English. 

ChamSa{l. 

GadI  or  Bharmuurl. 

1. 

One 

• 

Ikk 

• 

• 

Ak 

• 

• 

o 

Two 

• 

Do 

• 

• 

Dfll 

• 

• 

n 

o. 

Three 

• 

Trai 

• 

• 

Trai 

• 

• 

4. 

Four 

• 

Chaur 

• 

• 

Chaur,  chour 

• 

• 

5. 

Five  • 

• 

raSj 

• 

• 

Tanj 

a 

• 

6. 

Six 

• 

Chlii 

• 

• 

China 

a 

• 

7. 

Seven  • 

• 

Satt  •. 

• 

• 

Satt 

• 

• 

8. 

Eiv;  lit 

• 

At  th 

• 

• 

Afth 

a 

• 

9. 

Nine 

• 

Nail 

Nan 

a 

• 

10. 

Ten 

• 

Das 

• 

Dakli 

a 

• 

11. 

Twenty 

• 

Bill 

• 

• 

Bill,  bllil 

a 

• 

12. 

Fifty 

• 

Punjab . 

• 

a 

Pan  j all  . 

a 

• 

13. 

Hundred 

- 

1 

Sau 

• 

i 

Khau 

a 

a 

14. 

I . 

» 

Hau 

• 

• 

k <V  fV  <\,/V 

Au,  mu,  au 

1 

a 

a 

15. 

Of  me 

• 

M era 

• 

• 

! 

! Mera 

i 

a 

a 

16. 

Minc3  , 

• 

i 

Mera 

• 

•) 

i 

I 

■ Mera  • 

a 

• 

17. 

We 

• 

A si 

a 

• 

Asse,  assu 

a 

- 

18. 

Of  ns 

• 

llamara  . 

• 

• 

| Indha  • 

a 

a 

19. 

Our 

• 

Haraara  . 

• 

lmlha 

a 

a 

20. 

Thou 

• 

• 

Ti> 

• 

a 

Tu 

• 

• 

21. 

Of  thco 

• 

Tera 

a 

• | 

1 Tera 

• 

a 

22. 

Thine 

a 

Tfcrii 

a 

1 

i 

1 

I T5r5 

i 

» 

a 

23. 

You 

• 

Til  81 

a 

• 

Tusae,  tnasS 

a 

• 

24. 

Of  you 

- 

Tumhari 

• 

Tundha  • 

• 

a 

25. 

Your 

• 

Tu  tnhara 

i 

• 

• 

Tundha  » 

r 

862 — CbamSall. 


PHRASES  IN  THE  CHAMfeAlJ  DIALECTS. 


Churahf. 

i 

1 

1 

Pang  will. 

English. 

Ak,  ikk  . 

• 

• 

• 

Yak,  ik  • 

• 

• 

1.  One. 

Do,  doi  . 

• 

• 

Dill,  do  • 

• 

• 

• 

2.  Two. 

Tre,  trfti 

•! 

Tlal 

• 

• 

3.  Tbreo. 

CliOflr  . 

• 

^ i 

i 

Chaur 

• 

4.  Four. 

Panj 

• 

i 

i 

J *»nj 

• 

5.  Five. 

Chha,  child, 

• 

• 

ChhOa,  chho 

• 

« 

0.  Six. 

Sait  • 

Sati  . 

• 

• 

7.  Seven. 

Atth 

• 

» 

Atth  « 

• 

• 

• 

8.  Bight. 

i 

NaO 

• 

• 

1 

Nao 

• 

• 

a 

9.  Nine. 

Dad 

• 

• 

Das 

• 

• 

• 

1U.  Ten. 

t 

Bih 

• 

Bih 

• 

• 

11.  Twenty. 

Punjab 

• 

Panjah  . 

• 

12.  Fifty. 

So 

• 

SaO 

• 

• 

13.  Hundred. 

Aw 

• 

• 

Au 

• 

• 

14.  I. 

Min  da 

• 

• 

Me,  mS  . 

• 

• 

15.  Of  me. 

Minima 

• 

• 

Me,  mi  . 

• 

m 

16.  Mine. 

Alifi 

• 

• 

As,  as 

• 

• 

17.  We. 

Asgya 

• 

• 

He 

• 

• 

18.  Of  us. 

AsO|u 

• 

• 

He 

» 

• 

• 

• 

19.  Our. 

Ta 

• 

• 

! Tft 

• 

• 

• 

20.  Thou 

Ticuja 

• 

• 

1 

T?,  tS  . 

• 

• 

• 

21.  Of  thee. 

Tindft  * 

• 

• 

T?,  tS  . 

• 

• 

• 

22.  Thine. 

Toha,  tflS 

• 

• 

Tub,  tuh 

« 

• 

• 

23.  You. 

Tuhftft,  ta&fA 

• 

« 

j Tuh 

1 

# 

• 

24.  Of  you. 

Tuh&yft, 

• 

• 

1 

! Tub 

i 

• 

• 

• 

25.  Your. 

803—  Chameall. 


English. 

Chamilp. 

Gad!  or  Bharmanrl* 

26.  He 

• 

• 

• 

0,  Bft 

• 

• 

e 

0h,  oh,  sO  w 

• 

27.  Of  him 

• 

• 

• 

Usfl-ra  . 

• 

• 

• 

UsfirS  • • 

• 

28.  His 

• 

• 

• 

UsS-r5  . 

• 

• 

• 

UeSrS  . . . 

e 

29.  They 

• 

• 

• 

0.  at 

• 

• 

• 

Oh,  so 

• 

30.  Of  them 

• 

1 

• 

Unh£-ra 

• 

• 

• 

UuhflrS,  unhfirS,  fiSrS 

• 

I 

31.  Their 

• 

• 

• 

Unhe-rfi  . 

• 

e 

9 

, Unhf'rS,  nnhSrS,  Mr  a 

1 

I 

•! 

32.  Hand 

• 

« 

• 

Hatth 

• 

• 

• 

^ Hatth 

.i 

i 

S3.  Foot 

s 

• 

• 

Pair 

. 

• 

• 

• 

Paray 

I 

1 

34.  Nose 

• 

• 

• 

Nakk 

• 

• 

• 

Nakk 

• 

35.  Eye 

• 

• 

• 

Hakh  . 

• 

• 

• 

Hakkhrl,  hakhar 

• 

36.  Month 

• 

• 

• 

MSh 

• 

• 

• 

Milh 

• • 

37.  Tooth 

• 

e 

• 

Dand  • 

e 

• 

• 

Dand  . . 

• | 

38.  Ear 

• 

• 

• 

Kami 

• 

• 

• 

Kann 

b i 

39.  Hair 

• 

• 

Bal 

• 

• 

Ehara}  . 

• 

40.  Head 

e 

• 

Sar 

1 

• 

e 

Sir  ... 

• i 

41.  Tongne 

• 

• 

• 

: Jibbh 

i 

• 

• 

• 

Jibbh  ... 

i 

*i 

42.  Belly 

• 

• 

i 

. j 

1 

I 

l 

j Pet 

1 

• 

e 

“ 

Pet 

j 

l 

i 

• ! 

43.  Back 

e 

■ 

! 

Pitth 

• 

• 

1 

Pitth  . . 

i 

i 

i 

44.  Iron 

e 

• 

• 

I Loha 

• 

e 

• 

Loha  . , , 

. 

45.  Gold 

a 

a 

• 

Sunna  • 

• 

e 

• 

Snnna  • • 

• i 

i 

46.  Silver 

e 

• 

• 

Ch&ndl  . 

m 

e 

• 

Chandl  . 

1 

i 

•| 

47.  Father 

• 

• 

• 

Bab,  babb 

m 

e 

1 

• | 

Bab 

• i 

i 

48.  Mother 

» 

• 

• 

Mu 

• 

e 

1 

*1 

MS,  iji,  ijai 

• 

49.  Brother 

• 

• 

• 

Bhfil 

• 

• 

• 

Bhal  • • 

• 

50.  Sister 

• 

• 

• 

BhSp,  baibp 

• 

• 

• 

Bhfip 

- 

51.  Man 

• 

• 

• 

Manhll,  adml 

• 

• 

• 

Mahpfl  . . 

• 

52.  Woman 

• 

• 

1 

’! 

Trimat  • 

• 

• 

• 

! 

Trlmat  • • 

• 

864 — Chani85]l 


Chnrihl. 

PiigwaJI. 

English. 

0 

So,  oh  . 

2G.  He. 

Us8r&  .... 

fisa  • • • • 

27.  Of  him. 

Us8rn  • • . . 

fiaa  .... 

28.  His. 

o 

Un  .... 

20.  They. 

UnliSri  .... 

Un-kea  .... 

30.  Of  them. 

UnliSfa  .... 

Un-k8a  . 

31.  Their. 

Hatth,  liatt 

Hatth  .... 

32.  Hand. 

Pair,  p«r 

Khfir,  khfir 

33.  Foot. 

Nak  .... 

Nak,  nakk 

34.  Nose. 

Tir,  akhrl 

Tir  .... 

35.  Eye. 

M Sh 

Ssi  .... 

3G.  Mouth. 

Dant  .... 

Daut,  dand 

! 37.  Tooth. 

i 

Kann  .... 

Kann  .... 

38.  Ear. 

Kcs,  Sima} 

K*'s  .... 

39.  Hair. 

Sir  .... 

Mngar,  kupai  . 

1 

40.  Head. 

1 

Jibh  .... 

i 

! Jihli  .... 

1 

1 

\ 41.  Tongue. 

I 

P ai  t . . . . 

1 Pet  .... 

! 42.  Belly. 

Pitth  .... 

j 

' Pitth  .... 

43.  Back. 

Loha  .... 

Loll  a .... 

44.  Iron. 

Sunna  • • • . | 

Sunna  „ 

45.  Gold. 

ChSdl  .... 

Ruppa  .... 

40.  Silver. 

Babb,  babb  . 

Ban,  babb,  bau 

47.  Father. 

Yahd,  ma  . • . . J 

1 i 

i 

I.  ijjl 

1 

48.  Mother. 

Bhal,  bhan 

i 

Bhafi  (elder),  blmf 

4H.  Brother. 

Bhln  ( younger ) 

(younger). 

Daddl,  deddi  (elder),  bhaip 

50.  Sister. 

maj-dfl  . 

(younger). 

Mailed,  mah$fi,  mapd 

1 

, 51.  Man. 

1 

Trimat  .... 

! 

| Jhalfigfi,  ]$lka*ifi  . . j 

52.  Woman. 

VOL.  IX,  PA11T  IV. 

805 — Cham&ali, 

5 & 

English. 

CliamB&li. 

G5di  or  Bharmfturf. 

58.  Wife 

Lari  . . 

. 

Lari,  nabi,  bS^apI 

• 

• 

54.  Child 

Haclioha,  jiigat,  kupl  ( ayirl ) 

Nikka,  bachcha 

• 

• 

55.  Son 

Putr,  puttar 

• 

Putr  . • 

• 

• 

56.  Daughter 

Dhlfi 

Dhifi  . • 

• 

• 

57.  Slavo 

Kamma  • 

Kama 

• 

m 

58.  Cultivator . 

Karsan  • . 

KarsSn  • • 

• 

a 

59.  Shepherd 

Pulial,  puhalfi  . 

Paid,  puhal 

• 

• 

60.  God 

• 

ParmCsur 

Prameeur  . 

• 

• 

61.  Devil  . 

Blmt,  pasach  . 

Rakis,  bhut 

• 

• 

62.  Sun 

Suraj 

Sfimj,  dliyaja  . 

• 

• 

63.  Moon 

Chan  dramS 

Chandarmil 

• 

• 

64.  Star 

Tara 

Tarn 

• 

• 

65.  Fire 

Agg 

! Ag 

• 

• 

66.  Water 

Pa  pi 

• 

Pa^I 

a 

* 

67.  Houso 

• ! 

Gliar 

• 

! Ghar  . • 

i 

• 

i 

* j 

CS.  IIoi'BO  . 

Ghora 

• 

Ghflra  . . 

• 

i 

69.  Cow  . 

G ; i 

• 

Ga  . . 

• 

• : 

70.  Dog  . 

i 

1 

1 Kutta 

| 

• 

Kutr,  k u tar  . 

• 

i 

71.  Cat 

i 

„ i 

1 

Bill! 

j Billl,  bilarT 

i 

1 

• 

• 1 

i 

72.  Cock 

Kukkap  . 

, Kukap 

! 

• 

73.  Duck 

. 

Batak 

j Batak  . 

1 

• 

• 

74.  Ass 

■ 

Khota,  gadha  . 

^ * 

Klifita,  gadha  • 

• 

• 

75.  Camel 

Ut 

• 

Ut  • * * 

• 

• 

76.  Bird 

. 

•Chipl,  chip! 

• 

Cliirl 

• 

• 

77.  Go 

Ja  . • • 

• 

Gah 

• 

78.  Eat 

1 Kha 

• 

Kha 

• 

• 

79.  Sit 

V 

Baih 

• 

Befeh 

• 

866— C hamCSJi. 


Chur&hl. 

Pungwap, 

Eugli-h 

J<5  • • • 

• 

Jfllll,  dzfllll 

• 

• \ 

53.  Wife. 

Bachcha,  • 

• 

Bachcha  . 

• 

m 

51.  Child. 

Puttar 

• 

Kfiil  • 

1 

• j 

1 

55.  Son. 

Dhiu,  dhSft  • 

♦ 

Kill,  kurl 

• 

56.  Daughter. 

Kama 

• 

Kama,  kama 

• 

• 

57.  Slave. 

Kirsiln 

• 

Jimdar  • 

• 

58.  Cultivator. 

Pual 

• 

Pulial 

• 

• 

56.  Shepherd. 

ParmSSur 

• 

Pramesur 

* . 

• 

60.  God. 

Bhfit  . • 

• 

Bhiit 

• 

61.  Devil. 

i 

Siil'j,  dlh 

• 

Dos 

• 

62.  Sun. 

j 

j Cliandrarafi,  sukll 

| 

* 

Jrtsan 

• 

05.  Moon. 

1 

Tara 

Tara 

• 

• 

6 1.  Srnr, 

! 

, Agg 

1 

Ay 

• 

• 

Co.  Fiio. 

i Paul 

j 

• 

Pan! 

• 

• 

66.  Water. 

' G liar 

• 

Gill,  gl  . 

• 

67.  House. 

pliOra 

• 

Glifira 

• 

68.  Boise. 

j Ga 

• 

Cflra,  ga 

• 

66.  Cow. 

Kutta 

• 

Knttar  . 

• 

70.  Dug. 

Bill!,  bSrall 

• 

Bala,  balaj* 

• 

• 

71.  Cat. 

Kukklia? 

• 

Kukkar  . 

• 

■ 

72.  Cock. 

Baiak  • • 

• 

Batak 

• 

• 

75.  Duck. 

Khota,  gadha  • 

Khftta,  gadha 

• 

• 

, 7k  Ass. 

ft. 

• 

ft 

• 

• 

75.  Camel. 

ChifI,  pakhrfi  • 

• 

Cliapl,  pakhrii 

• 

• 

7G.  Bird. 

Gah  • • 

• 

Ga 

• 

• 

i 

j 77.  Go. 

Kha 

• 

Kha 

• 

• 

78.  Eat. 

B8e  . - 

• 

Bis 

t 

• 

• 

70.  Sit. 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV, 


867 — CliamSa] 


English. 

Ch&mB&lf. 

1 * 

| Gad!  or  BharmaurL  . 

80.  Como 

• 

• 

A,  (in/.) 

• 

Ai  . 

• 

• 

• 

81.  Beat 

• 

Mar 

• 

Mar 

• 

• 

• 

82.  Stand 

• 

• 

Khar  a ho 

• 

KharS  bho 

• 

• 

• 

83.  Die 

• 

• 

Mar 

• 

Mar 

• 

• 

• 

84.  Give 

• 

DC 

• 

Dos 

• 

• 

• 

85.  Run 

Dor 

• 

Daur 

• 

• 

a 

86.  Up 

Uppar 

• 

U par 

• 

• 

• 

87.  Near 

Nets,  nlr 

• 

NPr« 

• 

• 

• 

88  Down 

• 

Jhik 

• 

Bunli 

• 

• 

• 

89.  Far 

• 

Dnr 

• 

Dnr 

• 

• 

• 

130.  Before 

• 

• 

AggC 

• 

Aguh  . 

• 

• 

• 

131.  Behind 

• 

Pichcho 

• 

• 

Pichuh  . 

• 

• 

• 

92.  Who 

• 

Ku*i 

• 

Kun 

• 

• 

• 

98.  What 

• 

Kai 

• 

Kia,  kya  . 

• 

• 

• 

94.  Why 

• 

Kinjfi 

• 

• 

KajO 

• 

■ 

• 

95.  And 

• 

• 

llOr,  a to  . 

• 

1 

, Ate,  liOr 

1 

m 

• 

• i 

96.  But 

* 

Par 

• 

Par  . 

• 

• 

l 

• i 

97.  If  . 

• 

• 

Jo 

• 

Jo 

• 

• 

• 

98.  Yes 

H5 

• 

H5 

• 

• 

• 

99.  No 

• 

N a • • 

• 

. 1 

1 

i 

I N"  a • 

1 

1 

• 

• 

• 

100.  Alns 

■ 

• 

He 

• 

1 

i 

! 

II 58  • 

t 

• 

• 

101.  A father 

• 

» 

Bab  . • 

• 

i 

i 

i Bab  • 

i 

• 

• 

• 

102.  Of  a father 

• 

BabbC-ra 

• 

Baba-ra,  babS-ra 

• 

• 

108.  Tc  a father 

• 

B abba-jo 

t 

Baba-jO  . 

• 

• 

• 

104.  From  a father 

• 

• 

Babua-kachha  . 

• 

Baba-thau 

• 

• 

• 

105.  Two  fathers 

• 

• 

DO  babb . 

• 

Dili  bab  • 

• 

• 

• 1 

! 

106.  Fathers 

- 

• 

i 

Babb 

i 

• 

Bab  • 

• 

m 

i 

| 

80S — Chameajl. 


Chnrttil.  ' 

English. 

A.  | * * • * 

Al 

• 

• 

80.  Come. 

Mar  .... 

Kutt 

• 

• 

81.  Beat. 

Khaffi  utli  . . . ; 

i 

Khajra  bho 

• 

• 

S2.  Stand. 

! 

Mar  . . . * . 1 

i 

Mar 

• 

• 

83.  Die. 

Dft  . . . . ! 

i 

D5 

• 

• 

84.  Give. 

i 

Dauf,  khitd£,  na£  . . ■ 

i 

Dor,  nas 

• 

• 

85.  Run. 

i 

IJpar,  ubrft  . . . : 

i 

BaTh 

• 

• 

SO.  Up. 

i 

Nl|*j  ladh5  . • 

| 

Nir 

• 

• 

87.  Near. 

Hetli,  IndS  . • 

Bunh,  uj*0 

• 

• 

88.  Down. 

Dilr  . . . . I 

| 

Dfir 

• 

• 

89.  Far.. 

j 

AggS,  aggar,  h&gr«,  agrliS  . , 

i 

Agar 

• 

• 

90.  Before. 

Pichchn,  pichchS  • 

PatS,  pata 

• 

• 

91.  Behind. 

Kanfl  .... 

Kan 

• 

• 

92.  Who. 

Kutii,  kitu 

Ki 

• 

• 

| 93.  What. 

Kainl,  kgml  • 

i 

Kis 

• 

• 

! 

! 91.  Why. 

| 

Hat  • • • ■ 

HOra  • 

• 

• 

1 

95.  And. 

Par  • • • • 

1 

i 

i 

Tar 

1 

• 

• 

! 90.  But. 

J(j  • • • • 

| 

Yin 

1 

• 

• 

1 97.  If. 

t 

Ha  • • • « • 

A . 

• 

• 

1 98.  Yes. 

Nji  • • • • • 

Na 

• 

• 

: 99.  No. 

lias  . 

IlaO 

• 

• 

100.  AlaH. 

Babb  . . , 

Bau  • 

• 

• 

101.  A father. 

Babbd-ra 

BauO 

• 

• 

102.  Of  a father. 

Babba-nl,  babbd-n!  . 

Bau-jO  . 

• 

• 

i 

103.  To  a father. 

Babba-knna,  babb8-kana 

Bau-kiS  . 

• 

• 

104.  From  a father. 

i 

i 

Do  babb  • 

Dnlbau  • 

• 

• 

1 

U)5.  Two  fathers. 

Babb  . 

i Bau 

1 

• 

• 

• 100.  Fathers. 

i 

Su9  — Cham£a]i, 


English. 


Chain8a)I. 


Gfidi  or  Bk&rmaurT, 


107.  Of  fathers 

108.  To  fathers 

109.  From  fathers 

110.  A daughter 

111.  Of  a daughter 

112.  To  a daughter  . 

113.  From  a daughter 

114.  Two  daughters  . 

115.  Daughters 
110.  Of  daughters 

117.  To  daughters 

118.  From  daughters 

119.  A good  man 

120.  Of  a good  man  . 

121.  To  a good  man  . 

122.  From  a good  man 

123.  Two  good  men  . 

124.  Good  men 

125.  Of  good  men 
120.  To  good  men 
127.  From  good  men 
12S.  A good  woman  . 

129.  A had  hoy 

130.  Good  women 

131.  A bad  girl 

132.  Good 

133.  Better  . . 


. Babba-rii 
. BabbS-jrt 
. Babba-kacliha 
. Dliifi  . . 

. DhlfiS-rn, 

. | Dliliia-jrt 

t 

. DhlQa-kachha  . 

. T)d  dhifla 

J « 

| 

. j Dhiiiii 

. | Dhlfia-rfi 

i 

I m 

. i Dhiiia-irt  . 

i 

i 

j 

. | Dhlua-kackhu. 

. Bhulu  admi 
. i Bhale  adini-ia  . 

j 

. ; Bhale  adml-jfi  . 

. 1 Blialo  adml-kachhii 
. : Dr>  bhale  admi 

i 

, j Bhale  admi 

i 

j 

. 1 llhale  admlya-rfi 

I 

I m 

. | Bliald  admlri-jfi 

. j Bhale  admla-kacliha 

i 

! 

. DL all  trlraat 
. Bura  jSgat  . 

. Bliall  trlmata  . 

. Bun  kurl 
. Bhala,  k liar  a • 

. (Us-kaoliha)  khara 


. Baba- r a • 

. Baba-jo  . 

. Baba- than 
. Dliifi,  kul!  • 

, Dhifia-ra,  kuli-ra 
. Dhliia-jfl,  kujl-jrt 
. Dhifia-thau,  kull-thau 
. Dili  dhiua,  dfli  kuli  • 
. D hlii a,  kill! 

. Dhiiia-ra,  kuli-ra 
. i Dhiua- ja,  kull-jfl  • 

I 

. j Dlilfia-thau,  kull-thau 

! 

. ' lvhara  mail  nil 

. | Khare  mahnil-ra 

i 

i 

. i Khare  mahnu- jrt 

! 

! 

. KharC  mail nvi-th au  . 

. Dfil  khare  mah^iu 
. Khare  mahnu 
. Khare  mahnu-ra 
. Khare  mahnu -j^ 

. K hare  mahnu-tliau  • 

. Khari  trimat 
. Bura  gabhrfi  . 

. Khari  trimat  • 

. Buri  kuli 

. Khara,  bhala  • • 

• Mata  khara 


870 — Cham&Ui. 


Cliuralri. 

• 

Pangwalu 

j 

English. 

Babbe-ra 

• 

• Baufl 

. . j 107.  Of  fathers. 

1 

Babba-nl,  babbe-nl 

. Bafi-j<5  . 

i 

. . j 108.  To  fathers. 

Babba-kana,  babb<5-kana 

. Bafi-kia  . 

i 

. . '•  109.  From  fathers. 

| 

Dhm 

• 

\ KM 

1 

. . : 1 10.  A daughter. 

DhSiia-ra 

• 

. Kul-a 

i 

. . j 111.  Of  a daughter. 

DhSiia-nl 

• 

. Kfil-jC 

1 

1 

. . 112.  To  a daughter. 

Dh$fla-kana  • 

4 

, Kiil-kiQ  . 

i 

. . i 113.  From  a daughter. 

j 

Dfl  dheuo 

• 

, Dfil  km  . 

• 

. . ! 114.  Two  daughters. 

1 

Dh8iIo  . • 

. Kfil 

! 

. . ; 115.  Daughters 

DhSfia-ra  • 

• 

. Kfiia 

. . j 110.  Of  daughters. 

i 

Dlieua-m 

• 

. Kul-jS  . 

. . j 117.  To  daughters. 

Dheua-kana  . 

• 

. Kfn-kia  . 

. . 118.  From  daughters. 

Bhala  inehi^fi  . 

i 

i 

• 

. Bhala  mahnn  . 

. .1  119.  A good  man. 

j Bhale  rnehnfi-rfi 

• 

. Bhale  mahnu-a 

i 

. . ; 120.  Of  a good  man. 

Bhale  Tnebi.iQ.-nI 

| 

. Bhale  mahnu-je 

. . ! 121.  To  a good  man. 

, Bhale  mghnu-kana 

i 

i 

• 

. Bhale  mahnn-kia 

! 

. . j 122.  From  a good  man. 

| Da  bhalG  mehnu 

i 

. Dni  bhale  mahnfi 

. . ; 123.  Two  good  men. 

Bhale  meli  nil  . 

! 

• 

. Bhale  inahnu  . 

. . j 124.  Good  men. 

! 

i BhalQ  mchnu-ra 

• 

. BhalC*  raahiiu-a 

\ 

. . , 125.  Of  good  men. 

j 

j Bhale  niAbnu-nl 

i 

• 

. Bhale  mahnn-je 

. . ! 120.  To  good  men. 

1 

i 

{ BhalS  mOhnu-kana 

• 

. BhalQ  mahnu-kiil 

i 

i 

1 

. . 127.  From  good  men. 

j 

i 

Bhali  trimat 

• 

. Bliall  jhalanfi  . 

I 

. . j 12S.  A good  woman. 

Bura  gabhru 

• 

. Bura  kfia 

. . j 129.  A bad  boy. 

Bhall  trimate  . 

• 

. Bhall  jhalanu  . 

1 

. . 130.  Good  women. 

Burl  ku}i 

• 

• Burl  kui 

. . 131.  A bad  girl. 

Bhala,  kliara  . 

• 

. Bhala,  khaia  • 

. 132.  Good. 

(fis-kana)  kbara 

• 

. (T&s-kiS)  kharS 

. . 133.  Better. 

871— Cham$alT. 

English. 

ChunK)!. 

or  Bharmaurt. 

134.  Best 

• 

• 

Sabhni-kachhft  kkarS 

• 

Sabhi-ikau  kharS 

• 

4 

135.  High 

• 

• 

Ucboha  • 

• • 

• 

UthfS 

a 

m 

136.  Higher 

• 

(Us-kaohh)  uohcki  . 

• 

Mata  utlifa  • 

• 

4 

137.  Highest  . 

• 

Sabhni-kaohha  uchckS 

• 

Sabhi-thau  uthjft 

• 

4 

138.  A horse  . 

• 

Ghopi  • 

• • 

ChopS  . 

• 

139.  A mare 

GhOfl 

• • 

Ghoji 

• 

4 

340.  Horses 

• 

Ghapa  . 

• • 

• 

Ghflpfl  • • 

• 

4 

141.  Mares 

• 

Ghoji  . 

• • 

• 

Ghopi 

• 

4 

142.  A bull 

• 

Sank 

• • 

• 

Sank  . . 

• 

• 

143.  A cow 

• 

• 

Ga  • 

• • 

Ga 

• 

• 

144.  Bulla 

* 

• 

SSnh 

• • 

• 

SSnh  • . 

• 

m 

145.  Cows 

• 

■ 

Gal 

• • 

• 

Gal  . . 

• 

- 

146.  A dog 

• 

• 

Kutta 

• • 

• 

Kutr 

• 

• 

147.  A bitcli  . 

• 

• 

Kuttl  . 

• • 

• 

Kutri 

• 

• 

148.  Dogs 

• 

• 

Kutte 

• 

Kutr  • 

• 

• 

149.  Bitches 

• 

• 

Kuttl  • 

• • 

• 

Kutri 

• 

• 

150.  A ke-goat 

• 

• 

BakrS 

• • 

• 

Bakra  • • 

• 

• 

151.  A female  goat 

• 

• 

Bakrl 

• • 

• 

Bnkii  . • 

• 

• 

152.  Goats 

• 

• 

Bakr<5  . 

• • 

• 

Bakr3 

• 

• 

153.  A male  deer 

• 

• 

Ham  9.  . 

• • 

• 

Hara^  • • 

• 

• 

154.  A female  deer 

• 

• 

Harm 

• • 

• 

Harnl  . • 

• 

• 

155.  Deer 

• 

• 

Haraj* 

• • 

• 

Har$  . • 

4 

• 

156.  I am 

• 

• 

Hau  kai  . 

• • 

• 

Au  h3,  ha 

• 

• 

157.  Thou  art  . 

• 

• 

Tfi  kai  • 

• • 

• 

Tu  haT,  ha 

• 

• 

153.  He  is 

• 

0 kai 

• • 

• 

Oh  ha  • 

• 

4 

159.  We  are 

• 

• 

Asl  kin  • 

• • 

• 

Abbs  h3,  ban  . 

• 

t 

160.  You  aie  . 

• 

• 

Tusl  bin 

• • 

• 

Tussd  hill,  han 

• 

«72 — CkamSSlL 


Churahl. 

SabhnA-kana  kharS 
Uthfft 

fts-kana  uthffl 
Sabhna-kana  uthyf i 
Ghflfa 
Ghflrl  , 

GhajS  . . 

GhOfl 

Dant 

Ga  . ■ • 

Dant  • • 

Gal  • • 

Kutta  . • 

Kuttl  • 

Kutts 
KuttI 
Bakra  • 

Bakrt 

Bakrd 

Haran 

Harni 

Haran  • • 

Au  a 
Tft  n,  at* 

0 a,  at?  . 

Aha  sta  . 

Tuba  &ta  • 


Paigrwait 

. Sabi-ki5  khara 
. UthSa  . 

. (TSa-kia)  uthaa 
. Sabl-kiS  uthSa 
. Gbara 

. Gbayl 

• Gha^e 

. Gharl 

• Ck3r  • • 

• Gfijra  . 

. Chur 

• Gar?,  chflrl 

. Kuttar  . 

. Kuttrl 

. Kuttr?  . 

• Kuttrl  • . 

. Bakrn 

. Bakrl 

. Bakr?  • • 

• Haran 

• Harni 

. Haran 

. Au  asa,  sa,  ns 

• Tfl  asa,  sS,  as  • 

• S?  asa,  sa,  as,  ahi 
. As  as?,  s?,  as  • 

• Tus  as?,  s5,  as 


Engliab. 

, 

. 134.  Best. 

. 135.  High. 

• 136.  Higher. 

. 137.  Highest. 

. 138.  A horse. 

• 139.  A mare. 

• 140.  Horses. 

. 141.  Marcs. 

. 142.  A bull. 

. 143.  A cow. 

. 144.  Bulls. 

. 145.  Cows. 

. 146.  A dog. 

. 147.  A bitch. 

. 148.  Dogs. 

. 149.  Bitches. 

. 150.  A ho-goat. 

. 151.  A female  goat. 

. 152.  Goats. 

. 153.  A male  deer. 

. 154.  A female  deer. 

. 155.  Deer. 

. 156.  I am. 

. 157.  Thou  art. 

. 158.  He  is. 

. 159.  We  are. 

. 160.  You  are, 


VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


873— ChameSll. 

6 T 


English. 

, * Cbam*i|J. 

GAdi  or  Bharmauil. 

161.  They  are  , 

- # 

0 hill 

• • 

• 

Oh  hin,  han 

162.  I was  . 

«j;Han  t hiy& 

• • 

• 

Au  thU  .... 

163.  Thou  wftst 

Tfl  thiya 

• • 

Tft  thfi  . 

164.  He  was 

. 0 thiya  . 

• • 

Oh  thfi  .... 

165.  Wo  wore  . 

Asl  thiyS 

• • 

■ 

Abso  this 

166.  You  wore 

T u si  thiyS 

• • 

• 

TussS  this 

167.  They  wore 

i 

0 thiyS 

• • 

• 

Oh  this  .... 

168.  Be  . 

Hrt 

• • 

Bhn  .... 

1 

160.  To  l>e 

H fin  a . 

Bhs$a  .... 

170.  Being 

Hunda 

, Bhfinda  .... 

1 

171.  Having  been 

i 

; Ilm-kaii  . 

• • 

i 

Bhiiehh-karl 

172.  I may  hi*  . 

! ^ 

Hau  hoa  . 

• • 

Au  bhuchhS  . . 

173.  I shall  be  . 

Han  hohi 

• • 

Au  bhsla,  bhuchhala 

174.  I should  l*o 

Haii  hunda 

• 

j 

j 

175.  Beat 

Mar 

• • 

1 

; Mar  .... 

176.  To  W 

Marini 

Mama  .... 

j 

177.  Beating 

Msinla 

• • 

1 

j Marda  . . . . . j 

‘ • I 

17S.  Having  b.  at  en  . 

M :in-karl 

• • 

i 

i i 

Maii-karl  . . . j 

170.  I beat 

Hafi  marda 

• • 

1 

] 

Au  marda,  maranda,  marnSj 

! 

180.  Thou  beatest 

i 

i Tfi  mania 

i 

Tfi  marda,  maranda,  marnfi 

181.  He  beats 

! _ 

O marda 

• • 

l 

I _ 

Oh  marda,  marauds  . 

182.  Wo  boat  . 

1 Asl  mardo 

i 

i 

• • 

i 

i 

Ass§  ^ mards,  marande,  | 
marnU . 1 

183.  You  beat  . 

I Tub!  mards 

r • 

.! 

Tubs?  mards,  marandS, 

marnU. 

184.  They  l)cat 

0 mard5 

• • 

Oh  mards,  marandS  . 

185.  1 beat  (/'  isl  Tense)  • 

Mai  raarSa 

• • 

Mol  raarfi 

186.  Thou  beatest  (Vast 
Tense) . 

TaT  marSa 

• • 

• 

Tai  raarii 

187.  lie  beat  (Past  Tense)  . 

i 

Uni  mar£5 

• • 

• 

Uni  marfi 

874—  Chamea]!. 


Chur  AM, 


Pnigwgji, 


tihfrli'sn. 


715T 


Oats  . . 

S3  ase,  s3,  as, 

ali^ 

• 

1 161,  They  art*.  . 

1 •'** 

Au  th8&  .... 

AS  thya  . 

• 

• 

I 

102.  1 was. 

Tn  tliSa  .... 

Tn  thya  • 

• 

• 

103.  I h ou  wast. 

0 thfta  .... 

Se  tliya  . 

• 

• 

104.  lie  was. 

Aba  ting . 

As  thycl  . 

• 

• 

163.  We  wei’Q, 

Tuba  thia 

Tus  thyo 

• 

106.  You  were. 

0 tin©  .... 

Se  thyo  . 

• 

• 

107.  They  were. 

Blwi  .... 

Bhrt 

• 

• 

lt;8.  Be.-. 

Bhrttjfi  .... 

• 

libfina 

• 

103.  To  be. 

Bhunda,  bhflnta 

Bhuiit 

• 

* 

170.  Being. 

Bhfli-kari 

Bi.m-karl,  bhoi-kal 

171.  Having  been. 

AS  bhoii  .... 

AS  bhfiii  . 

• 

• 

172.  1 may  be. 

AS  bbflmii 

AS  bbol 

173.  1 shall  be. 

AS  bhflnta,  bhunda  . 

AS  bhuta 

i 

• 

174.  T should  l e. 

Mar  .... 

Kutfc 

I 

i 

175.  Beat. 

Marnn, 

Knltna  . 

i 

j 

170.  To  beat. 

Mania,  niarta  . 

Knt  Ida  . 

! 

177.  Boating. 

Mari-karl 

Kutti-kal 

i 

! 

178.  Having  lie  a ten. 

AS  mart  a,  mart  a a,  a mart  a 

AS  kuttta 

! 

t 

173.  1 beat. 

Tfi  niarta,  mart  a a,  a marta 

Tfi  kuttta 

i 

180.  Thou  beatest. 

0 marta,  marta  a,  a marta  . 

So  kuttta 

* 

181.  II - beats. 

Ahg  mart©,  raart&tS,  ate 
marto. 

As  kuttto 

i 

. | 

i 

| 

18*2.  Wo  beat. 

Tuhg  marte,  mart  ate,  ate 
mftrt?. 

Tus  kntite 

i 

i 

183.  You  bout. 

0 m&rtS,  mart&t3,  At3  m&rtd 

S3  kuttt3 

• 

184.  They  beat. 

Ml  n.arSa 

MaT  kutta 

• 

• 

185.  I beat  ( Past  Tens i ). 

Tf  mfuSn 

i 

Tat  kutta 

• 

• 

180.  Tliou  l>eate3t  ( lJa$t 
Tense). 

Uni  mar£&  . . . 1 

1 

! T3nl  kuttS 

i 

• 

• 

• 

187.  Ho  beat  (Tast  Tense), 

873 — ChamSftll. 
5 T 2 


VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


English. 


Chain#  all. 


GIdl  or  Bharmann. 


188. 

Wo  beat  (Tast  Tense ) 

Asft  mftreu, 

• . AssO  ruarn 

• 

• 

180. 

You  beat  ( Past  Tense ) 

TusS  marda 

. . TussS  raarfi  . 

• 

• 

190. 

They  beat  (Past  Tense) 

UnhS  inarSa 

. . Ulye  mar  ft 

• 

• 

191. 

I am  beating 

Hau  mar  da  hai 

i 

i 

. . j Au  marda-h8,  marandS-lm 

192. 

I was  beating 

Hau  maivla-thija 

. . j Au  marda-thft  . 

I 

• 

193. 

I had  beaten 

MaY  rnfuda-thiya 

. . | MaY  marfi-thu  • 

• 

194. 

I may  beat 

^ a# 

Hau  mara 

. . Au  marS,  marS 

• 

195. 

I shall  boat 

Hau  maria 

. . Au  maria,  mar  11  la 

• 

196. 

Thou  wilt  beat  . 

Tu  maria 

. . ■ Til  maria 

• 

197. 

Ho  will  beat 

O maria  . 

. . Oh  raarla 

• 

198. 

Wo  shall  beat 

A si  marie 

. . Assd  marie,  mar 3 Id 

• 

109. 

You  will  boat 

Tusl  marld 

. . | Tusse  marld 

• 

200. 

They  will  beat  . 

O marie 

| 

. . ! Oh  marie 

• 

201. 

I should  beiit 

Ilau  mania 

' 1 

202. 

i 

1 am  beaten  • • 

Iliiu  mruea  jiindft-hai  . ! Au  marya  gahnda 

i 

• 

203. 

i 

I was  ben  ten 

Hail  in  area  janda-thiya  . | Au  marya  gahnda-thu 

l 

201. 

I shall  be  beaten 

Hail  marea-jalla 

. . Au  marya  gahla 

• 

205. 

I go 

Hau  jundii 

. . Au  gahnda,  galinft 

• 

206. 

Thou  goest 

Tfi  janda 

. . Til  gahnda 

• 

207. 

Ho  goes 

0 janda  . 

. . Oh  gahnda 

• 

208. 

Wo  go 

Asl  jaudd 

. . Assd  gahnde  « 

• 

209. 

You  go 

Tuel  jando 

. . Tussd  gahndd  • 

• 

210. 

They  go  . . . 

0 jande  . • 

. . Oh  galindO  • 

• 

211. 

I went 

Hau  gea 

. . Au  go,  guchhii-ra 

• 

2 i 2. 

Thou  wentest 

Tu  gdii  . 

. . Til  go,  guchhft-r5 

• 

213. 

• 

He  went  . . 

0 gea 

. . Oh  g<5,  gnchhfi-rS 

• 

214. 

We  went  . 

Asi  gfi  . 

. . Assd  gS,  guchhft-rG 

• 

• 

876 — 0 hamea  J I 


Chur&faf. 


Paftgwi}! 


English. 


Abe  mnr£& 


As  kutta 


1*8.  Wc  beat  (Part  Ten$e). 


Tabs  mar^  • 


Una  mnrSa  • 


Au  marta-a 


An  m&rta-th&& 


Mi  mar&i-thea 


Au  raara . 


Au  mamma 


Tn  marela 


0 nmrSlft 


Ahe  rnammg  . 


Tube  inarSle 


0 marSle 


Au  mart  a,  mfttii 


Au  nmr&i-gath& 


Au  liuueii-gea  . 


Au  inarea-garamhft 


A 3 gatha 


Tu  gStba 


0 gatba  . • t 


Ah6  gatbe 


Tube  glitbe 


0 gstbe  . • 

Au  ges  . 


Tfi  ges 


0 g5a 


Tus  kuttS 


Tenbl  kutta 


Au  kuttta  asS  • 


An  kuttta  thy  a 


. Mai  kuttn-thy5 


# Au  kutta 


. An  kuttal 


. Tn  kuttal 


. SS  kuttal 


. As  kuttTI 


, Tus  kuttel 


, ,Se  kuttal 


Au  kurtda 


Au  marea-gbSti 


Au  in  a iv  a- ga 


Au  raarea-ghel 


Au  gbfta 


Tfi  gheta 


S6  gheta 


As  ghete 


Tus  ghete 


Se  ghete 


4 /M  — 

An  ga 


Til  ga 


Se  ga 


180.  You  beat  (Part  Tetwe). 


190.  They  beat  (Part 
Tense ) . 

101.  I am  beating. 


192.  I was  boating. 


103.  1 had  beaten. 


104.  1 may  beat. 


19 5.  I shall  beat. 


196.  Thou  wilt  beat. 


197.  He  will  beat. 


198.  Wo  shall  beat. 


109.  You  will  beat. 


200.  They  will  beat. 


201.  I should  beat. 


202.  I am  beaten. 


-03.  I was  beaten. 


204.  I shall  be  beaten. 


205.  1 go. 


200.  Thou  goest. 


207.  lie  goes. 


208.  We  go. 


209.  You  go. 


210.  They  go. 


211.  I went. 


212.  Thou  wentobt. 


213.  He  went. 


Abe  gee 


As  gee 


214.  Wo  went. 


fi77 — Cham£ajl. 


English. 


G'hum8u\i. 


Oat II  or  Bharinaurl. 


215.  You  went 

^ Tusi  ge  . 

1 

j Tusso  ge,  guchhit-rd 

• 

216.  They  went 

0 gd 

Oh  ge,  guohhu-rd 

• • 

217.  Go  . 

Ja  • . . . 

Gab 

• • 

218.  Going 

J auda  .... 

Gahnda  . 

• 

219.  Gone 

GeiVrfi  .... 

Gd,  guohhfira  . 

• 

220.  What  is  your  name  ? . j 

Tdrii  nil  kai  hai  r 

! ; 

TundhS  na  kya  P 

• 

221.  How  old  is  tin’s  horse  P 

Is  gliAfe-ri  kit ni  lunar  hai  ? 

Es  ghdrd-rl  ketri 
hii  ? 

um  bar 

222.  How  far  is  it  from  here  • 

rdlifi-kachhfi  KasmTr  kitne 

Ktliia-thau  Kasinlr 

kdtri 

223.  How  many  song  are 

there  in  your  father’s 
house  p 

224.  1 have  walked  a long 

way  to-day. 

225.  The  son  of  my  uncle  is 

married  to  his  sister. 

i 

226.  In  the  houso  is  the  sad- 

dle of  the  white  horse. 

227.  Put  the  saddle  upon 

his  back. 

228.  I have  beaten  his  son 

with  many  s tripos. 

229.  IIo  is  grazing  cuttle  on 

the  top  of  the  hill. 

230.  ITo  ifl  sitting  on  a horse 

under  that  tree. 

231.  His  brother  is  taller 

than  his  sister. 

232.  The  price  of  that  is 

two  rupees  ami  a 

half. 

233.  My  father  lives  in  that 

small  house. 


dill*  h:ti  ? 

Tu mh are  babbd-ro  ghair 
kitne  puttar  bin  ? 


dur ha  ? 


Tore  babe-re  gliara-raS 
kdtrd  putr  hin  p 

Ajj  ban  dura-tikar  lmnd&x  Ajj  au  mate  dfir  ha$dhfi 


; Mcr«"  chiiclie-io  puttard 
! usr-ri  bhrn  byfilii. 

nuch  chhe  ghflre-rl  kathl 
ghare  amlnr  hai. 

Use-rl  pif.fhl  uppar  kathl 

bah. 

i 


Maf  u.se-iv  pnttra-jfl  mala 
m area. 

So  daiigrli-jrt  dhare-rl  ehdtl- 
par  chfuea  kardfi  hai. 

, So  us  rukkhe-rd  both 
! gliftri-par  bitlnvrii-he. 

. Use-rfi  bhfu  apnl  bhdnl- 
| kacliha  lamina  hai. 

, Tddhe-ra  mnl  dlifil  rupayyg 
liai. 

i 

i , 

. Merit  bab  ns  nikke  gliara  ' 
j andar  i ailmdfi-hai.  i 


Me iv  kakka-rd  p litre  use-rl 
bhdni  sdite  by  ah  karii. 

Haclidihe  ^ ghfiye-ri  kathl 
gliam  mil  ha. 

Use-rl  pit  till -par  kathl  pa  . 


Use-i  d gabhrfi-jfi  jnai  mate 
korre-seite  marti. 

Dhfira-rl  chrtfi  pnthi  gdrfi 
char  fi-kard  a-h  a . 

Oh  us  rukkliii  tale  glidrd- 
par  bithfi-ra  lia. 

Use-ra  bhal  apnl  bhepl- 
tlniu  lamina  ha, 

Usd-rii  mill  dlial  rupayyd 
ha. 

Mera  hab  uslanhkrd  ghara- 
tna  raihuda-ha. 


234.  Give  this  rupee  to  him  j Us-jfl  dh  rupayya  de  . ! Eh  rnpayva  us-jd  de 

i ! 

2:s:>.  Take  those  rupees  from  j Us-kaohlm  be  rupalyyS  le  . | Oh  rupayya  us-tliau  lo 


23t».  Peat  him  well  and  bind 
him  with  ropes. 


Us* jo  juiitl  mar,  -ltd  jfij*] 
kund  jakar. 


2S7.  Draw  water  from  the  ; Khfll.e-kachhfi  panl  kadli  . 
well.  [ 1 ' 

238.  Walk  lief  ore  mo  . J Mere,  ogge  chnl 

i 

239  Whose  hoy  cornea  b..-  Kusf-ru  j’-gatt-ro  piehchho 
hind  you  ? i ? 1 


Indfi-hai  p 


240.  irom  whom  did  you  Ta?  »«l  kus-kacliha  khaiidSS  ? 
buy  that  ? j 

211.  Irom  a shopkeeper  of  , GrSe-re  ikk  hafcwapIS- 
the  villago.  , kachlia. 


Us- jfl  dabl-knrl  mar,  ate 
jdyd-sdltd  bannh. 

Khnhd-thau  panl  ka<jh 

Men  agSh  chal 

Tdrd  pichUh  kasd-ra  gabhrfi 
ha  chain -ra  p 

TaT  dh  kas-thau  kharldfl- 
hS  ? 

Gir5-rd  hnfcwaflid-thau 


3 78— C ham  call. 


ChurahT. 

rajQ^wfcJI. 

Knjrlivh. 

TuhS  g6fl 

Tus  s»w  . 

215.  You  went. 

0 gee 

Se  gflf!  .... 

216.  They  went. 

QSa  .... 

Gii  .... 

I 

217.  Go. 

Giltha  .... 

OhSta  . 

218.  Going. 

Goa  .... 

Ga  . . . . J 

1 

219.  Gone. 

TiV.lii  nfi  kitfl  a ? 

1 

T3  r»ri  kl  ? . . . : 

220.  What  is  your  name  P 

fils  ghOrd-rl  ketrflrl 

umbar  a ? 

fill  ghrtra  katt  bahrabhfia  ? 

' 

221.  How  old  is  this  horse  ? 

Idlm-kana  Kagmlr  ketr^yi 
dnr  a ? 

Triya  Kasmlr  kattrfi  dnr 
a hi  ? * 

222.  How  far  is  it  from 
here  to  Kashmir  ? 

Tinde-babbo-rf>  ghare 

k£tTflre  puttar  a in  ? 

T“  barm  glli  katt  koa  ase  ? 

223.  How  many  sons  are 
there  in  your 

father’s  house  ? 

Ajj  an  barl  diir  liant£a 

Ajj  au  dnr  linnthu 

224.  I ha vo  walked  a long 
way  to-day. 

Mindc  chuche-re  putt  re  n he- 
ll bbuil-kano  jane!  kl. 

Mh  kakkr*  koa  uv‘*  daddl 
dzfll  by  ah. 

225.  The  son  of  my  uncle 
is  married  to  his 
sister. 

Gharf*  haohrhhe  gherC-rl 
k fit  hi  fi. 

Gilio  antar  lmehclilif*  ghflre 
kiitlil  asT. 

226.  Tn  tho  house  is  the 
subtle  of  tlio  whito 
horse. 

Usft-ii  pi t-tli I- par  kfithl  ball. 

A so  pitth-putr.li  kathi 

rakkli. 

227.  Put  tho  saddle  upon 
his  back. 

j Ml  tUc- vo  puttra  pran  mat! 

1 inar  dlttl. 

Me  asa  kAi?  matii  kulta 

228.  I have  beaten  liis  sun 
with  many  stripes. 

} * 

[ O dhara-rl  clirttl  pran I gOrii 
! eliiita-a. 

I 

Oil  iv bi  eh  At  i puttli  gflrfi 
rh arta  lagnra  asa. 

229.  He  is  grazing  cattle 
on  tho  top  of  the 

hill. 

! Sr»  us  butts  hettli  ghfir«"  : 
pi  an!  bethfira-a. 

Oh  glinr~*  put  tb  us  bfito 
par  bitliora  asS. 

230.  lie  is  sitting  on  a 
horse  under  that 
tree. 

Use-ru  bhfio  use-rl  bhlni- 
kana  lamina  a. 

Us*’*  bliai  us'**  daddi-kia 
lamina  as  a. 

231.  His  brother  is  taller 
than  his  sister. 

i Uso-ru  mul  adliSo  rupayye 
i a. 

| ; 

Use  mill I ndbal  rupayya 
as  a. 

232.  The  price  of  that  is 
two  rupees  and  a 
half. 

; Mind  a babb  us  nikko 

j gharil-rnfi  basta-a.  | 

Me  bail  ns  mat  lire  gib 
antar  bista  ahi. 

233.  My  father  lives  in  that 
small  house. 

U s-nl  rapayya  do 

fi)b  rupayya  as-dl  de-de 

231.  Givo  this  rupee  to  him. 

! a i 

j 0 rupayye  us-kana  lai 

As-kifi  All  rupayye  m" 

| 

235.  Take  those  rupees 
from  him. 

Us-ni  jugtl  mari-karl  dojn- : 
la  biinnh. 

Us-dl  jugtl  kutthnr  rajuri 
lai  ban  nil. 

236.  Heat  him  well  and 
bind  him  with 
ropes. 

Khuha-kanii  pan I kacjdh  • 

Klinho-kia  pani  kaddli  . i 

l 

i 

237.  Draw  water  from  the 
well. 

j 

M3  hfigro  cbal  . 

Me  agar  agar  bagfch 

238.  Walk  before  me. 

KusS-ra  gabhrft  ti^ds 

Kasa  koa  te  paio  Tta  ? 

i 

239.  Whoso  boy  conies  be- 

pichcliS Sita  ? 

hind  you  ? 

0 tai  kus-kana  mule  lSa  P • 

I 

Ta7  Ob  kas  kiS  gkina  ? 

240.  From  whom  did  you 
buy  that  ? 

Girniyye-r©  battTwRnl-kana  j 

Girfie  hatwanl-kiS  • 

241.  From  a shopkeeper  of 
the  village. 

A7  0 — r*  l-k  o mXS  ] « 


881 


The  Bhadrawah  Group. 

Pangwfili  lias  been,  for  questions  oi'  geographical  convenience,  classed  as  a dialect 
of  Chameali.  It  is  a mixed  language,  some  of  the  speakers  having  immigrated  from  tlie 
hills  of  Bliadrawah  and  the  neighbourhood,  while  others  came  from  Lalud  and  Kulu- 
It  is,  therefore,  to  he  expected  that  in  many  particulars  Pangwall  should  agree  with  the 
various  dialects  of  the  Bliadrawah  group,  and  this  is  the  fact.  The  latter  croup  consists 
of  tln*ee  different  forms  of  speech  in  which  Western  Pahari  is  merging  into  Kashmiri, 
and  Paiigwali  may,  in  this  sense,  lie  taken  as  also  a member  of  the  same  group.  It 
illustrates  the  first  stage  of  merging,  the  Kashmiri  influence  becoming  stronger  as  we  cet 
into  Bliadrawah.  On  the  other  hand  Pangwall  also  shows  signs  of  CliamealT  influence, 
and  as  it  is  spoken  entirely  within  that  state,  I have*  classed  it  as  a dialect  of  that 
language. 

In  dealing  with  Bliadrawah!  I shall  frequently  repeat  the  statements  already  made 
about  Pangwall,  so  as  to  make  the  information  given  on  the  following  page's  as  complete 
as  it  stands. 

The  Bliadrawah  group  includes  the  three  following  dialects  : — 

Numbcp  of  f-peakers,  1 0 1 > 1 . 

Klmdrawahll 

BljfU.-si  ) >-4< 

Pailnrl 4,5 10 

Total  . . 125.."  17 


No  figures  are  available  for  the  number  of  speakers  in  1S91,  according  to  the  census 
of  which  year  the  figures  of  this  Survey  have  usually  been  calculated.  The  figures  of  the 
census  of  1901  arc,  therefore,  given  instead. 

Blind rawfilii  and  Blialcsi  arc  both  spoken  in  Bliadrawfdi,  a Jagir  of  the  late  Raja  Sir 
Amar  Singh,  lying  within  Kashmir  territory,  immediately  to  the  north-west  of  Cliamha 
gtatc,  and  south  of  the  Clienab  river.  By  Bhadrawfihis  themselves  flu-  district  is  called 
Bhndhla,  with  the  accent  on  the  second  syllable,  while  Kashmiris  call  it  Bodarkfdi. 
Bhalesi  is  a form  of  Bliadrawah!,  spoken  in  B hales,  a valley  a lew  miles  to  the  east  of 
the  town  of  Bliadrawah,  and  between  it  and  the  Cliamha  frontier. 

Padari  is  the  language  of  Padar,  a mountainous  portion  of  the  Kashmir  district  of 
Cdhampur.  Padar,  separated  from  Bhalcs  by  a valley  only  six  or  seven  miles  across, 
lies  north  of  and  contiguous  to  Pangi.1  It  occupies  the  valley  of  the  Clienab  from  the 
Pangi  frontier  for  about  thirty  miles  down  to  the  valley  of  Siri,  where?  K ash  fa  war  (or 
Kislitwar)  begins.  In  Kislitwar  the  language  is  definitely  a dialect  of  Kashmiri.  South 
and  west  of  Bliadrawfdi  lies  tlie  main  portion  of  the  State  of  Jammu,  the  language  of 
which  is  l)ogri.  North  of  Bliadrawah  we  again  have  Kislitwar.  AVe  thus  find  that  the 
languages  of  ilic  Bliadrawfdi  group  have  Pogrl  and  Chameali  to  their  south  and  DOnri  to 
their  west.  North  of  Padar  lies  the  ^anskar  range,  beyond  \\ liicli  ne  have  liheto* 
Burman  languages.  On  the  other  hand,  north  of  Bliadrawah  and  west  of  Padar  we  have 
the  Kashmiri,  of  Kislitwar. 


1 Much  of  the  above  is  tuk*»#rom  Mr.  Gmhame  bailey'*  Lanyuaaes'of  the  Northern  Himalayas. 


VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


i)  V 


882 


WESTERN  PAHARI. 


The  three  dialects  are  separately  described  below.  Here  it  will  suffice  to  draw  atten- 
tion to  those  points  which  they  have  in  common. 

In  the  pronunciation  of  the  vowels  they  all  closely  follow  Kashmiri.  Most  marked 
is  the  tendency  to  epenthetic  change  which  is  a prominent  feature  of  that  language. 
By  epenthesis  is  meant  what  is  called  in  German  Umlaut , i.e.  the  change  in  the  sound  of 
a vowel  owing  to  the  influence  of  a vowel  in  the  next  syllable,  much  as  in  English,  the 
a in  the  word  ‘ man  * has  become  e in  ‘ men  * under  the  influence  of  the  i in  the  old 
Anglo-Saxon  ‘ *manm.’  So,  in  Kashmiri,  the  base  null-  means  ‘father.’  When  the 
letter  * is  added  to  form  the  nominative  singular,  the  long  a becomes  6,  and  wo  get  mol*, 
and  when  the  letter  *’  is  added  the  a becomes  o',  and  we  get  the  nominative  plural  m&V. 

Again,  in  Kashmiri,  the  base  of  the  word  meaning  ‘a  weaver’  is  tedtear-.  If  we 
add  “ to  form  the  nominative  singular,  it  changes  the  preceding  a to  u,  so  that  we  get 
icducur*,  but  this  new  n in  the  second  syllable  again  changes  the  preceding  a to  6,  so 
that  wc  ultimately  get  touiom ,H.  In  Kashmiri  the  rules  under  which  these  changes  occur 
are  now  well  known,  and  there  is  no  difficulty  in  applying  them.  In  the  languages  of 
the  Bhadrawali  group,  the  examples  available  are  too  few  in  number  to  do  more  than 
satisfy  us  that  epenthesis  exists.  They  are  not  sufficiently  numerous  to  enable  us  to 
form  general  rules.  "We  must,  therefore,  content  ourselves  with  quoting  some  typical 
examples. 

The  reader  will  have  noted  in  the  above  Kashmiri  examples  certain  small  letters 
written  above  the  lines.  These  indicate  a scries  of  very  short  vowels  “• e-  '•  "•  and  “ 

much  shorter  than  the  ordinary  short  vowels  of  India.  In  fact,  they  are  so  short  that 
they  arc  often  inaudible  to  a European.  But,  although  they  are  so  slight  in  sound  they 
are  of  the  greatest  importance  as  regards  epenthesis,  as  they  regularly  affect  the  sound  of 
the  preceding  vowel. 

These  very  short  vowels  are  here  mentioned,  as  they  are  also  of  common  occurrence 
in  Padarl. 

We  have  already  drawn  attention  to  instances  of  epenthesis  in  Pahgwall  and  these 
need  not  be  repeated.  For  .Bhadrawah!  we  may  quote  : — 

tshero,  a lie-goat,  t&liailli,  a she-goat. 

Ted,  a boy,  kill,  a girl. 

bats  hi,  a cow,  oblique  form  blitshe. 

ghbri,  a marc,  oblique  form  ghoTire. 

hat  hi,  an  elephant,  oblique  form  haithe. 

bitsliaralb,  ho  will  fall,  bitjsharailai,  she  will  fall. 

Bhalesi  is  very  similar.  Thus  w'e  have  : — 
khirkel,  he  will  fall,  khirkiil,  she  will  fall. 

in,  come  thou,  did,  come  ye. 

The  infinitive  ‘ to  come  ’ is  ainu. 

In  Padarl  epenthesis  is  much  more  prominent.  We  may  quote: — 
geobhur,  a son.  gobhar,  sons. 

hoi,  a daughter,  kuiar , of  a daughter. 


BHAnilAWAll  GROUP. 


SS3 


ghdrl,  a mare, 
gd,  a cow, 
bhen,  a sister, 
han“,  he  is, 

dgliara,  fallen  (rnasc.), 
bho,  he  became, 


ghurer,  of  a mare. 
goi,  cows. 
bhin,  sisters. 
kin*,  she  is. 
dghairi  (fem.). 
bhui,  she  became. 


azna,  he  comes ; aiznt,  she  comes;  dzul,  he  will  come;  azll,  she  will  come; 

asnal,  you  will  come  (masc.) ; eznil,  you  will  come  (fem.). 
btshul,  I shall  sit ; beshal,  thou  wilt  sit. 
kotnl,  he  will  strike ; k&tel,  she  will  strike, 
and  many  others. 


In  Padari  the  vowel  y is  often  inserted  before  i or  e as  in  Kashmiri.  Thus,  /igitth,  the 
hack;  dyittd,  for  dittd,  given ; 1 yd  khan,  to  write.  So  also  the  possessive  pronouns  miiin, 
my;  tiiin,  thy;  hiiln,  our,  are  little  more  than  orthographical  variations  of  myan,  tyfin, 
hylln.  The  optional  forms,  men,  ten  and  hen , show  that  the  yd  is  merely  a variant  of  e. 

There  is  one  striking  peculiarity  of  the  treatment  of  consonants  in  the  Bhadrawah 
group.  In  Giidl  and  Ohurahi  we  come  across  unexpected  instances  of  the  insertion  of  r, 
as  in  bhrnkkhna  (Hindi  bhulchd),  hungry ; bhr add  or  bheddn,  a sheep.  In  Pahgwali 
bhrukkhnd  underwent  a further  change,  becoming  dhnkhd.  Here  we  hate  bh  becoming 
bhr,  and  then  becoming  dh.  In  all  this  we  see  Tibeto-Burman  influence,  la  Western 
Tibetan  hr  is  pronounced  dr  in  Ladakhi  and  d in  the  Laliul  dialect  (see  Yol.  II,  Pt.  i, 
pp.  54  and  70). 

In  the  Bhadrawah  group  there  are  numerous  instances  of  this  change.  Very  often 
bhr  becomes  did  rather  than  dh. 

Thus  dldnkkhb,  hungry  (Bhad.1). 

bhr  a or  did  a,  a brother  (Bhad.). 
blirdbh  (Chained  11),  bhr  ah  be  (Pang.). 
dhlabbn  (Bhad.),  dhUbblin  (Bhal.),  a red  bear. 

bheddu,  bhradd  (Churahi),  bhaidd  (Bhad.),  dhledd  (Bhal.),  a sheep. 
bardg  (Ivului),  dhldhg  (Bhad.),  dldg  (Bhal.),  dldhg  {?  dhldhg ) (Pad.),  a 
leopard. 

Of.  Hhadldd  (Bhad.),  Bhadrawah. 

Sometimes  b alone  becomes  dl,  as  in  Bhad.  banhdnu,  Pad.  dland,  to  bind.  Gr 
becomes  dl  in  Bhad.  and  Bhal.,  dlau,  Sanskrit  grama,  a village. 

Again  we  find  Ir  often  becoming  tl  or  U,  as  in 

tldi  (Pang.),  trai  or  tldi  (Bhad.),  tide  (Pad.),  three. 

tshethl  (Bhad.),  Sanskrit  kshetra,  a field. 

thliggo  Q31md.),  the  back  ; trak-  (Kashmiri),  trika  (Sanskrit),  the  lower  part  of 
the  baok. 

tri  (India  generally),  tldi  (Bhad.),  a woman. 

k$h*'u  or  ketlu,  how  many  ? (Bhad.). 

The  Bliad.  word  for  night,  dlaz,  also  seems  to  belong  to  this  set,  but  its  origin  is 
obscure. 


1 Bhad.=Bhadrawthl.  Bhn|.=Bhal€»i.  Panjf.  = FangwS|i.  P§(1.= Pi^ari. 
VOL.  IX,  PART  IV.  *■ 


5 u 2 


884- 


WESTEBN  PAHAKl. 


The  change  of  bhr  to  did  is  very  interesting,  and  has  not  been  noted  elsewhere.  On 
the  other  hand  there  are  several  cases  of  tr  becoming  (hi  in  the  PiSaclia  languages,  as 
hi  the  Pasliai  pa  title  (Sanskrit  pntra),  a son. 

As  usual  in  the  neighbouring  languages  ch  frequently  becomes  ts  and  j becomes  z 
or  <fc.  Thus  in  131iad.  we  have  tsTidr,  four ; tsar  nil,  to  graze ; etshi , the  eye ; mans,  in ; 
zakhan , when ; ze,  who. 

The  letter  g is  liable  to  be  dropped  between  two  vowels,  as  in  lad  or  lago,  lard  or 
lagdro,  begun. 

The  letter  h is  sometimes  prefixed,  as  in  Blind,  lulj,  a mother,  elsewhere  ijjl.  In 
the  middle  of  a word  it  is  sometimes  dropped,  as  in  cleared,  to  wish. 

As  in  the  neighbouring  dialects  and  also  in  the  PiSacha  languages,  d shows  a ten- 
dency to  become  t,  especially  in  borrowed  words.  Thus,  antdr  (Persian  andar),  within ; 
zintd  (Persian  zinda),  alive ; dant  (Persian  dated),  a tooth;  dant  (Kashmiri  debit),  a 
bull. 

In  the  Chamba  dialects  we  noticed  how  r becomes  r in  mat'd,  a man.  The  same 
change  occurs  in  tho  Bbadrawah  group,  and  wo  also  have  kora  or  kdrl,  where  ? sard  or 
sari,  where ; era  or  eri,  here,  and  so  on.  In  kite,  a girl,  a medial  r has  been  dropped,  as 
in  the  Chamba  dialect. 

In  Churabi  and  Paiigwali  we  noticed  how  the  possessive  pronouns  preferred  cere- 
bral letters.  The  same  is  the  case  in  Padarl,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  following : — 


my 

thy 

our 

your 

Chameall 

merit 

terd 

hamftrd 

tmnliard. 

Bbadrawah! 

merit 

tern 

is  hit 

tishd. 

Bhalesi 

me  it 

ted 

aserd 

tuserd. 

Churabi 

mindd 

tindd 

asrd 

tudrd. 

Paiigwali 

man 

tan 

lien 

tdhn. 

Padarl 

main,  men 

tiini,  ten 

liian,  lien 

tali')},. 

The  close  mutual  relationship  of  the  last  three  sets  of  forms  is  obvious. 

The  peculiar  Bbadrawah!  forms  /slid  and  fish  a may  bo  compared  with  the  Veron 
Kafir  (Pi&ucha)  end-esh,  my,  and  iti-esh,  tliy.  Tho  forms  lien  and  hidn,  our,  may  bo 
compared  with  the  Kashmiri  son ",  cur,  if  we  remember  that  in  these  languages  h and  s 
are  frequently  interchanged. 


The  close  connexion  between  tho  Bhadrawah  group,  Paiigwali  and  Kashmiri  is 
further  illustrated  from  the  following  comparative  vocabulary  of  a few  selected  words:  — 


Koglisli. 

Paiigwali. 

Rliadrawahl. 

i 

I:  hajed. 

j 

Padarl . 

Remarks. 

AES  . 

khota 

khauthau 

khfitrft 

Boar  (Black  bear) 

rikkh 

itak 

1 "itsk 

yatgh 

,>• 

Bear  (Red  bear) 

bbrabbfi 

i 

dhlabbu. 

(lhlibbfi 

i 

, . . 

Bird  . 

pakhvn 

taaiolll 

i 

i 

pftkkliar 

KBh.  pjikhf, 

i 

I 

! 

i 

Ulr 1 

bhadrawah  group. 


885 


English. 


Body 

Boy  . 

Bread 

Brother 

Buffalo 

Cow 

Daughter 
Day 
Egg  • 
Eye  . 

Face 

Father 

Field 


! Ffiritrwftli. 

i 

aarli* 

kfia 

rotl 

bhan,  bhal 


kiipl,  kfil 
din 

a^^jihorn 

tlr 


bab,  ban 


Hhadrawalii. 

jind 

ma{{iiu,  mtitthii  kfl 

ruff  I J 


MbitlesT. 


Padart. 


JU-MARKS. 


fltus,  bhra  kak,  bhd 

bhai 

>'«-Lsbj  ga~ 

kAl  kfir,  knl 

zhez 

thfil 

etghi 

tuttar  ! 

babr>,  bazi,  ban  bab,  baji 

tshethl 


1J  ill 

Husband  • 
Kite  (the  bird) 
Leopard 
Han 

Moon 

Mother  * 

Mouth 

Night 


jflth,  dzeth  dhar 

gharPth  mu^iaS 

ill  i S(?9 

i 

...  | dlihihg 

mard,  m5h$u  | mard 


dliar 

rfin,  mflflas 

dlag 

muttfar 


jflsan 

asl 

rat 


channel 

hftj 

as 

dlaz 


1 g^obhur 


! to  tar 


bag 

1 tiigrl 

... 

1 

baig 1 

Fish 

. . machchl 

J masli 

... 

! 

j machchh1 

Girl 

. . knl 

1 

kill,  kfil 

1 

kui 

j koi 

Coat  (masc.) 

. . ‘ bakrfi 

! ishf-rn 

fshcrrrt 

1 bakra 

Goat  (ftm.) 

i 

• | bakri 

i 

| Ishaill]  ! 

tshMIS 

J bakri 

Good,  clean, 

beautiful  kharfi 

; ehhail 

j 

[ rhhf'r 

Haii- 

• . [ lies 

j 

! sir- a) 

• • • 

j 

! rotth 

Head 

1 

. . j kupa} 

j 

IM 

j mngir 

pliat 

dhaini 

glez 

dlahg 

mauhnfi 

tsainnS 


, Ksli.  fjnbiir 

i 

, Ksh.  hoy11 

| KbIj.  m os 

i 

Ksh.  Q'Zv 

Ksh.  kur* 

Ksh.  tl'h 

Ksh.  t/iul 

Ksh.  ncfih \ 

e^e  y 

tor  , eyelid 

KbIi.  bab,  bdb 


Ksh.  kur “ 
Ksli.  tsdtoul 
I Ksh.  tsdu>*j& 
Ksh.  Ichor* 
Ksh.  wdl 


Ksh.  run* 

t 


Ksh. 

•2 mail  any  uv * 

i Ksh.  sun9 


Ksh.  OS,  08 * 

Ksh.  rat 


886 


western  paharI. 


English. 

i 

Paftgwi|i. 

lJlmdrawahi. 

BhaJeM. 

P&Jarl. 

Ubmabks. 

Ox  . • 

• 

lin<J 

dant 

dant 

badhOl 

Ksh.  dclnd 

Plain,  a 

• 

paddhar 

paddlirfi 

... 

mild  an 

Ksh.  mdd&n 

Bain  (sabot.) 

• 

mSgh 

d<5u 

”* 

inSgh 

Kiver 

darya 

nlrfi 

... 

Cf . Stream 

Run,  to 

liases 

nas^n 

• • • 

, 

nasag. 

Say,  to 

boln& 

zau^u 

dzO^ifi 

bolap 

Ksh.  dapun 

Seed 

. 

baijfi 

bids 

# 

bedza 

Kali,  biz 

Sheep 

• 

bhiM 

bhaidd 

(Ih  led  d 

daihgl 

Sister 

• 

deddl,  bhai$ 

baihg,  balhn 

biny  i 

bliejj. 

Ksh.  be  He 

Sleep,  to  . 

zlmljin 

... 

unhan 

Small 

• 

math^S 

nik|*rt 

ink  pi 

inatliar 

Son  . • 

• 

koa 

| kO 

kua 

Of.  Kangliter 

matthu,  mfttfchu 

Cf.  Small 

bokut 

... 

Ksh.  bilcat* 

Stream  (flubflt.)  . 

ga4<Jn 

j ga'.l 

... 

! paaiy 

! 

Cf.  River  and 
Water. 

Sun  . 

d8s 

i (lihap> 

... 

' dlua 

1 

Thief 

• •• 

J 

! Naur 

1 

i ’1 

j kflr 

Ksh.  tsur 

Tongue 

jibh 

zibbli 

j dzebh 

Ksh.  se.r 

Tooth 

dand 

; daiit 

... 

i daim,  dand 

Ksh.  dand 

Town  . • 

saihr 

; sain* 

... 

■ saihr 

i 

Ksh.  ihehr 

Tree 

• •• 

bfUi? 

... 

bofcfc 

Kumaunl  IdfG 

Village 

■ 

*irS 

dlaii 

dlau 

thafl 

Water 

% 

pani 

! pani 

pan! 

| paai* 

j 

Ksb.  poll*. 

Cf.  Stream 

Wife 

frill,  tfzolli 

j tliji 

zanifT 

| dzail 

Ksh.  triy 

Woman 

• 

• •• 

: til  II 
; • 

i 

iil 

i 

Ksh;  triy 

i 

i 

kuPis 

khihon, 

ghio^ti 

jSlhand 

! 

i 

i 

i 

! 

i 

i • • • 

i 

j 

i 

BH  AD  RAW  AH  GROUP. 


887 


Numerals. 


! 

Paftgwili. 

Hhadraw&hl. 

Pa^arl. 

| K&shmlri 

1 

j 

, i 

yak 

ak 

yak 

j akh 

2 

i 

dfll 

•Ini 

dm 

j zfth 

3 

tlSl 

tliil 

» 

tln.0 

tr8h 

4 

chaur 

ism  fir,  tsflnr 

tsTiar 

i 

1 

' tsOr 

i 

5 

panj 

pants 

i 

i 

! panz 

1 

1 

j pants 

6 

chh$ 

sah 

! 

i tehai 

i 

i 

j sh8h 

7 

satt 

( satt 

1 

1 

! 

satt 

j 

1 

! 

sath 

i 

8 

atth 

i 

| atth 
! 

i atth 

; 

oth 

9 

nafl 

nafi 

i 

i 

l nan 

nav 

i 

10 

tlaa 

1 

! 

(las 

das 

: dal. 

20 

bill 

j 

bib 

: Ink 

i 

ivuh 

i 

1 

100 

sau 

1 

I 

1 

, sail 

i 

! hath 

j 

Authorities.— 'Vhe  only  book  dealing  with  these  languages  is  the  Key.  T.  Gmbame 
Raley’s  Languages  of  the  Northern  Himalayas,  published  by  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society 
in  1908,  and  frequently  referred  to  in  this  volume.  This  oontams  s lor  ^ 

Vocabularies  of  Bhadrawahi,  Bhalesi  and  Padari.  In  tins  account  o t © 1 

nude  toe  greatest  use  of  his  work,  and  again  take  an  opportunity  of  expressmg  my  gran- 
tude  for  the  help  afEorded  by  it. 


888 


BHADRAWAHT  AND  BHALEST. 


These  two  dialects  are  closely  connected  and  may  conveniently  he  considered  to- 
gether. The  principal  difference  between  the  two  is  that  Bhalesi  is  fond  of  dropping  an 
r between  two  vowels.  Thus  the  genitive  singular  of  ghdru,  a horse,  is  ghdfe-ru  in 
Bhadrawahi  and  ghoreu  iu  Bhalesi.  The  materials  available  for  Bhadrawahi  are  a ver- 
sion of  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son  and  a List  of  Words  and  Sentences  which  I owe 
to  the  kindness  of  the  Kashmir  Authorities,  and  the  sketch  of  the  language  in  Mr. 
Grahamo  Bailey’s  Languages  of  the  Northern  Himalayas.  No  specimen  or  list  has  been 
received  for  Bhalesi,  and  as  regards  this  language  my  only  authority  is  Mr.  Bailey’s 
work. 

The  main  peculiarities  of  the  Pronunciation  of  these  two  languages  has  beendoalt 
with  in  the  preceding  pages  and  will  not  be  repeated  here.  In  the  Declension  of  nouns 
tailbhava  nouns  in  u,  like  ghdru,  a horse,  may  optionally  end  in  d,  au,  or  o.  Thus,  ghdrd, 
ghorau,  or  ghdrd.  The  same  is  true  for  adjectives,  and  for  infinitives  and  participles  of 
verbs.  This  is  stated  here  once  for  all,  and  must  be  borne  in  mind  throughout  the 
following  pages  : — 


ghdru,  a horse. 


Bhadrawahi 

Bhalesi 

Nom. 

ghdrd  (-d,  -an,  -d) 

ghdrd. 

Ag. 

ghdre 

ghdre. 

I)  at. 

ghore-jd 

ghdre. 

Abl. 

ghdre-kara 

ghdrd. 

Gen. 

ghgre-ru 

ghoreu. 

Loc. 

ghdre 

ghdre. 

Voc. 

ghdrd 

r. 

Nom. 

ghdre 

ghdre. 

Ag. 

ghorei 

ghdre. 

Bat. 

ghdran-jd 

ghorau. 

Abl. 

ghoran-kara 

ghdrdn. 

Gen. 

ghord-keru 

ghdr-keu. 

Loc. 

ghdran-ma 

ghdran-ma<lg. 

Voc. 

ghdrd u 

For  the  locative  we  may  also  add  ma  (Bhad.)  or  much  (Bhal.)  in  the  singular. 
Thus,  ghore-ma,  ghdre-rnaaz.  For  the  ablative  other  Bhad.  postpositions  are  st  and  seht 
and  Bhal.  may  use  leaned,  as  in  dlaud  hattibdle  leaded,  from  the  village  from  a shop- 
keeper, where  we  have  both  forms  of  the  ablative  in  the  same  sentence. 

For  the  Bhad.  genitive  plural,  we  may  have  kartt  instead  of  keru.  The  genitives 
can  all  end  in  it  (u),  a,  au,  or  d. 


889 


BHADRAWAHI  AND  BHALEsL 

Similarly  are  declined^ other  masculine  nouns,  such  as  : — 

ghar,  a house. 


Bhadrawahi 

Bhalesi 

Sing. 

Nom. 

• gliar  ( glior ) 

ghar. 

Ag.  and  Loc.  ghare 

ghare. 

Gen. 

ghar-rCt,  gliare-rd 

ghare  Ci. 

Abl. 

ghare-kara 

gharri. 

Obi. 

ghare 

glwre. 

Plur. 

Nom. 

ghar 

ghar. 

A*. 

gllarei 

gharan.  ** 

Gen. 

ghar-kerd 

ghar-keu. 

Abl. 

gharan-kara 

gharan. 

Obi. 

ghar  an 

gharan. 

In  these  nouns  in  Bhad.  an  ablative  may  be  formed  bv  adding  6,  as  in  khdho,  from 

the  well.  Compare  the  Bhal.  abl.  in  a. 

hdtlii , an  elephant. 

Bhadrawahi 

Bhalesi 

Sing. 

Nom. 

hat  hi 

hath}. 

Ag.  and  Loc.  lift  it  hO 

hath  7e. 

Gen. 

liaithe-rn 

bathed. 

Abl. 

haithe-kara 

hat  hid. 

Obi. 

hint  he 

hdthe. 

Plur. 

Nom. 

hath} 

hdtlii. 

Ag. 

ha  it  he 

lui  t hie. 

Gen. 

hat  hi -kern 

liathi-keii. 

Abl. 

hdthi-kara 

hdthian. 

Obi. 

hath} 

hdthian. 

In  this  note  the  Bliad.  epenthetic  change  of  the  d 

of  hdt hi  before  e. 

Note  that  the  Bhal.  agent  plural  is  hat  hie,  not  hdthian  as  we  might  expect.  Hat  hie 

is  the  form  given 

by  Mr.  Bailey. 

nau,  a noun,  and  bau  (Bliad.),  a father,  have  the  Bhad.  gen.  sing,  na'ue-ru,  baae-rv 

dat. 

naue-jo,  bane-jo , and  so  on. 

For  feminine 

nouns,  we  have  : — 

kill,  a daughter. 

Bhadrawahi 

Bhalesi 

’ Sing. 

Nom. 

kill 

kui. 

Ag.  and  Loo.  kill  a 

kuie. 

Gen. 

kuie-rd 

kuied. 

Abl. 

knie-kara 

kuid. 

Obi. 

kuie 

kuie. 

vot.  IX,  PART  IV. 


890 


WESTERN  PAH.\Rt. 
kill,  a daughter. 


Bhadrawahi 

Bhalesi 

Nom. 

kill  a 

kn  Id. 

AS'- 

ku7  ilf 

kale. 

Gen. 

kiit-kern 

kui-keu. 

Abl. 

kiti-kara 

k man. 

Ohl. 

kill 

knian. 

Note  the  Bhal.  shortening  of  the  n in  the  plural. 

In  Bliad.  epenthesis  somet  imes  occurs  in  the  declension  of  these  nouns.  Thus, 
batshi,  a cow,  has  bTthhe  in  the  other  cases  of  the  singular,  and  bHUtlfta,  etc.  in  the 
plural. 

baihn,  a sister. 


Bhadrawahi  Bhalesi 

Sing. 

Norn 
Ag. 

Gen. 

Abl. 

Obi. 

Pluv. 


Nom. 

baihn  l 

bhain. 

A rr 

haihnei 

bhainie. 

Gen. 

baihni-keru 

bhainl-keu. 

Abl. 

baihni-kara 

bhainian. 

Obi. 

baihn  i 

bhainin. 

The  genitive  postpositions  (Bliad.)  ru,  keru  ( 'karu ),  Bhal.  eu,  keu,  are  as  usual 
adjectives,  becoming  re,  here,  tie,  kee  when  agreeing  with  a masculine  plural  noun  or 
with  a masculine  noun  in  an  oblique  case  of  the  singular.  They  become  rl,  kari,  ei, 
kel,  when  agreeing  with  a feminine  noun : thus,  (Bliad.)  dlaue-re  lietribale-kara , from 
a shopkeeper  of  the  village ; (Bliad.)  chilte  glibre-ri  kdthl  ; (Bhal.)  chhitte  ghorel  tin,  the 
saddle  of  the  white  horse.  Mr.  Bailey  says  that  ru,  keru  (karu)  are  not  inflected  for  the 
oblique  masculine.  Probably  the  rule  is  very  carelessly  observed  for  the  first  of  these 
examples  (No.  22  of  his  sentences)  is  taken  from  Mr.  Bailey’s  book. 

Adjectives  call  for  no  remarks,  as  they  follow  the  usual  rules.  Those  in  u (d,  au, 
o,  or  u)  are  declined  in  the  same  way  as  genitives.  Comparison  as  usual  is  made  with 
the  help  of  the  ablative  ease. 


baihn 

bhain. 

baihn  it 

bliaine. 

baihne-rti 

bhaineii. 

baihni-kara 

bhaind. 

bath  nl 

bhaine. 

BHADRAlVAHl  AND  BUALEs 

I. 

891 

Pronouns.—' 

riie  first  two  personal  ]>ro nouns 

are  1 

thus  declined 

— 

I 

*> 

i 

Tnoi' 

1 

• HYmdriiwalii. 

I'.lnaK-si. 

lJiia'lraw  uliT. 

Sin". 

! 

Norn. 

/V 

au 

aS 

m 

Ag.  . 

m* 

vif'7 

i 

fa  7 

' tfi] 

Ohl.  . 

- 

| in? 

mp7 

tu'i 

t u? 

Abl.  . . . ! 

j 

j f'~rd 

Gen.  . . ! 

mZrn 

rm’ft 

ttru 

irfi 

PI  ur. 

i 

Norn.  . . ‘ 

ns 

ns 

fits' 

! 

tiff 7 

Ac f.  . . . ! 

n$f~7 

(tsn'ity  alum 

i 

fllS't 

i 

tusauy  tuTuin 

ON.  . 

a s<  in 

asm?,  akan,  abl. 

ns  fin 

1 

tv  SO  It 

i fiisim , inluniy  abl. 

i 

! tusin 

Gin. 

is/i  n 

rfi 

! ti<h »/,  fiishii 

i 

tnsv-m 

In  tlu:  gcnitivi 

15  singular,  note  how  JlhnlosT,  as  usual,  drops  the  r. 

Tlic  Demonstrative  Pronouns  .arc 

i : — 

Tjii 

IS 

That 

j 

Hlmdravvalii.  j 

r»halt*-i. 

i*.lruh’:i\\  a In. 

r>hale>I. 

i 

1 

! 

Sing.  ! 

i 

! 

i 

j 

1 

Nom. . . • 

Jh9  i’li  i 

H 

1 

1 

nh 

! 

1 i.n 

Ag.  . 

' ini 

1 

i in  ? 

1 

| 

V n / 

1 

uni 

Obi.  . 

'l'S»  I'SJlj  t* S i 

j 

! is 

\ 

1 

i 

i vs 

| us 

AH.  . 

isd 

Gen. 

i 

isc-ru,  cseru 

i • ■ - 

. l$PU 

j vs?-  riJ 

nS'~u 

Plur. 

l 

\ 

1 

! 

1 

Nona. 

ia-Jut,  in,  en  ; 

in  a 

f4nh't9  mihd,  un 

und 

Ag.  • 

. -a  w .i 

tneiy  euei 

inhp 

•rtifj 

! unh  7 
j 

Obl.  . „ . | 

inan9  enan 

1 \ 

inan 

i 

nival 

1 

I untin 

i 

Abl.  . . . | 

I 

infill 

i 

vndn 

Gen.  . . . j 

in-AwS,  Sn-kenl 

iifkpu 

! 

! nn-kvrif 

1 

i 

un-kvil 

VOI..  IX,  PA11T  IV. 

5 x £ 

892 


WESTERN  PAHARl 


In  the  Bhadrawahl  forms,  Mr.  Bailey  writes  every  n as  cerebral.  Thus,  ini,  inan. 
The  specimens  give  them  as  shown  above,  and  probably  both  forms  are  used.  The  same 
remark  applies  to  the  remaining  pronouns. 

The  Relative  and  Correlative  are  : — 


Who,  Which 

That 

Bhadrawahl* 

Bh. ileal. 

Blind  rawahl. 

lihaleil. 

Siug. 

Norn. 

• 

zp,  zai 

dss 

t~\  St\  tai 

t(J,  S(~ 

Ag.  . 

• 

zainl 

tjzrni 

faint 

trni 

Obi.  . 

• 

zis 

.his 

tis , trs,  tas9  task 

fas 

Abl.  . 

• 

* 

tjzisa 

fasd 

Gen. 

• 

* 

sise  - nl 

tjzisen 

tisr.-ru 

fasRu 

PI  nr. 

Norn. 

• 

• 

zand9  zt-n 

tjzrild 

trim,  fund 

trnd 

Ag.  . 

• 

• 

yy  . v ■* 

Zi'V/~l3  zanel 

tjzinlif* 

tcnRJy  tunef. 

tinhfi 

Obi.  . 

* 

zPnan,  zainan,  zt~n 

t]zinan9  #7* in 

ft  nan,  fa  nan,  tvn 

ft  nan 

Abl.  . 

• 



ijziiitln 

f l)  tan 

Gen. 

• 

Zf'n-krrR,  Zd m- krr u 

ilznimkeii 

tf’nmkrrSy  tan-keni 

ft ' n-kpu 

The  Interro 

gative  Pronouns  are 

— 

Who  ? 

What  ? 

Jihad  raw  abl. 

Bha|e>i. 

Bhadrawahl. 

Bha]esf. 

Sing. 

Nona. 

• 

Ay  mn 

kanU 

_ - 

kun 

■ 

ki,  U 

Ag.  . 

• 

kaini 

Uni 

not  noted 

not  noted 

OI)I.  . 

• 

• 

kis,  A as 

7ns 

Abl.  . 

• 

• 

liisil 

» 

Gen. 

• 

list*-  ru 

kispu 

kfilhe-ru 

IcureU 

riur. 

X om. 

• 

• 

It  run 

hand 

Ag.  . 

• 

• 

. v/  7 .v. 

hrnf't,  /li in &1 

kunlip 

... 

Oil.  , 

• 

• 

kaiiian,  lair 

hint m,  kin 



Abl.  . 

• 

Jcindn 

Gen. 

% 

1 

Jitiiu-keru 

kin-keu 

... 

BHADRAWAHI  AND  BHALESI. 


893 


The  Indefinite  Pronouns  are  : — 

Bhadrawalu  — kbi,  anyone,  someone;  ag.  ketche ; gen.  ketehe-rfi  ; kichchh,  any- 
thing, something  (immutable)  ; zai  kol,  whoever  ; zai  kichchh  or  zen  kichh, 
whatever. 

Bhalesi — kbi,  anyone,  someone  ; dat.  kvzchii ; gen.  kczcheu ; hie  Itch , anything, 
something  (immutable)  ; (Izc  koi , whoever;  dge  kichchh,  whatever. 

VERBS. —Auxiliary  Verbs  and  Verbs  Substantive. 

Tho  Present.  Tense  is  conjugated  as  follows  : — 


1 Jkulrsuv&hl. 

l i)iale>I. 

Sing. 

1 

<1  tx  I am 

ahiit  hu 

2 

,7* 

alms,  has 

3 . 

filiP,  a it  i /»? 

al id,  hd 

Plur. 

1 . 

! (1  h’nl 

[ 

ahanif  haul 

o 

» • • • 

| alith 

alith,  hath 

3 . 

(1  h a , i T u 

dhan 

The  Past  Tense  is  masc.  thia  (Bhal.  thiii),  pi.  tluc  (Bhal.  thie)  ; (Bhad.)  fem.  sing, 
and  plur.  tin  ; (Bhal.)  fern.  sing,  the,  plur.  thi. 

As  usual,  this  does  not  change  for  person.  'Thi it  may,  as  usual,  also  be  written  thia, 
thiau,  thib.  Similarly  for  Bhalesi. 

The  following  are  the  paradigms  of  the  Active  Verbs : — 

Bhadrawalu  Bhalesi 


Infinitive  kufnu,  to  strike  kutnu. 

Present  participle  kuttu , striking  kuttu. 

Past  participle  kuttu,  struck  kuttu. 

Static  Past  participle  kuftbrb,  in  the  state  of  being  struck  hut  tub. 

Conjunctive  participle  kuttu,  having  struck  kutoi. 

Ditto  in  compound  verbs  kuti,  having  struck  ? 


u 

Noun  of  agency  kutnebdlu,  a striker,  one  about  to  strike  kutnehulu. 


The  doubling  of  the  t in  the  past  participle  is  due  to  accent.  Note  that  the  regular 
conjunctive  participle  in  Bhadrawalu  is  formed  by  changing  the  tu  ( td , tau,  tb,  etc.)  of 
the  present  participle  to  td.  The  usual  form  in  i is,  however,  employed  in  compound 
verbs,  as  in  mdli  gdhnu , to  be  found. 

In  Bhalesi  the  feminines  of  the  present  and  past  participles  are  slightly  irreg- 
ular. In  the  singular  they  change  the  final  u (a,  ait  or  o)  to  e,  not  to  2.  Thus,  kutte, 
kutte.  In  the  plural,  they  take  i,  as  usual.  Thus,  kutti,  kutti. 


891 


WE8TEKN  PAHAKl. 


The  following  verbs  are  noted  l>y  Mr.  Bailey  as  more  or  less  irregular ; — 


Bhadrawah! 

B hales! 

To  be,  become 

b lion  a 

bhonit. 

To  come 

ejnit 

a in  it. 

To  go 

(john  Ft 

githnit. 

To  remain 

rehnit 

• • • 

To  eat 

khan  Ft 

khdnii. 

To  drink 

pi  nu 

plnit. 

To  give 

denit 

denit. 

To  say 

zoo  nil 

tLibnit. 

To  do 

kairnit 

karnit. 

To  know 

zdnnh 

(isdnnii. 

To  bring 

anno 

an  nit. 

To  take  away 

n a i n it 

/tend. 

The  various  irregularities 

will  be  noted 

under  the  particular  tenses  where  thev 

occur.  Here  it  will  be  sufficient  to  note  those  present  and  past  participles  which  are 

irregular. 

Bhadrawah! 

UlialrsT 

To  become 

bhonit 

bhonit . 

Pres.  Part. 

bhonlii 

bho/ft. 

Past  Part. 

bhiio 

blind . 

To  come 

Ojni, 

ninth. 

Pres.  Part. 

Ft  tit 

Phil  a. 

Past.  Part. 

do 

an. 

Static  Past  Part. 

orit 

nub. 

To  go 

Pres.  Part. 

gdhth 

(j  a lta  til. 

Past  Part. 

jod  (pi.  jd) 

geit  (pi.  gd ; tern.  sg.  and  pi. 

gel). 

Static  Past  Part. 

Jbrii 

geitij. 

To  eat 

khdnii 

khdnii. 

Pres.  Part. 

kbit  t it 

k ha  tit. 

Past  Part. 

khdE 

kbit  it. 

To  drink 

~ pin  it 

pin  it  . 

Pres.  Part. 

pi  tit 

■pith. 

Past  Part. 

plE 

peu. 

To  give 

dim  it 

denh. 

Pres.  Part. 

doth 

detii. 

Past  Part. 

dev  or  ditto 

* dittu. 

To  say 

saunu 

dzbnh. 

Pres.  Part. 

zauth 

d zb  th. 

Past  Part. 

SUE 

diSOtt. 

'To  do 

kairnit 

ho  mu. 

Past  Part. 

tiiu 

IctsU. 

JJJIAD11A WAllT  ANT)  BHALJcSl. 


895 


Blmdrawahi 

Bhalesi 

To  know 

zdrtnd 

than  nil. 

Past  Part. 

zdnu 

(hand. 

To  bring 

fra  aa 

anna. 

Past  Part. 

dnu 

on.  u. 

To  take  away 

a a inn 

nenu. 

Pres.  Part. 

no  Hu 

uetd. 

Past  Part. 

urn 

tie  d. 

In  addition  to  these,  in  BhadrawahT,  the  verb  lagnu , to  be  attached,  to  begin,  has 
its  past  participle  lag  A or  lafi,  and  its  static  participle  lard  or  lagbru.  As  usual  this  verb 
makes  an  inceptive  compound,  as  in  t<>  gdltne  lari ) (or  lag  urn)  ai , he  has  begun  to  go,  he 
is  in  the  act  of  going. 

The  Imperative  ill  both  dialects  is  in  the  singular  the  same  as  the  root,  and  in  the 
plural  adds  a.  Tims,  knl,  strike  thou;  knttd  (for  leu  Id),  strike  ye. 


Irregular  Imperatives  are : — 

Blmdrawahi 

Bhalesi 

To  come  t’jnd 

niuii. 

come  thou  id 

ill . 

come  ye  ijd 

eld. 

To  remain  re  find 

• • • 

remain  thou  rah 

• • • 

remain  ye  rdlid 

Ml 

Mr.  Hailey  notes  other  forms  of  the  Bhadrawfdii  Imperative  in  banhd  or  banhdd, 
bind  thou,  and  banhddth  or  bunhdlhdi , bind  ye. 

The  Old  Present  and  Present  Subjunctive  is  conjugated  as  follows.  I n Blndra- 
ivahi  there  is  a special  feminine  form  in  the  singular.  As  elsewhere  when  the  accent 
falls  on  the  first  syllable  the  / of  knf-  is  doubled. 


Bhad  ra  wabi  Bhalesi 

mase.  fern. 

Sing. 

1 kill  taa  or  knfr>  kit  (12  kill  fa. 

2 kill  las  kutfi  kntfas. 

H knife t knit?  knf  lb. 

Vint. 

1 knttam  same  as  mase.  kit  (lam. 

2 knit  nth , kntlat  .,  kntlath. 

3 kill  fan  ,,  kit  If  an. 

The  following  forms  are  irregular : — 

I)  bad  raw  ft  hi  Bhalesi 

To  be,  become  hhbnd  hlibtiu. 

Sing.  1 b bain  bhoi J. 

2 bho  ns  bhbs. 

3 bhade  bho. 


896 


WESTERN  PAHA$t. 

- 

Bliadrawahl 

Bhalesi 

To  be,  become 

bhonii 

bhoyu . 

Plur. 

1 

bhonm 

bhdm. 

2 

bhanth 

bhoth . 

3 

bhaun 

bhon. 

To  come 

/ 

ejnii 

ainii. 

Sing. 

1 

fjj* 

ela. 

2 

ojjas 

els. 

3 

ele. 

Plur. 

1 

Ojjnm 

em. 

2 

ojjnth 

eith. 

3 

cjjan 

eln. 

To  go 

grihnii 

ydhnu. 

Siug. 

1 

get 

yd  ha. 

2 

grin 

ydli  as. 

3 

grille 

yd  lie. 

Plur. 

1 

gri  bin 

yd  ham. 

2 

gritatli 

yd  hath. 

3 

yd  han. 

To  remain 

reh  ii  ri 

• • • 

Sing. 

1 

re  hi 

• • • 

2 

rrihs 

3 

rrihe 

Plur. 

1 

rahm 

• • • 

2 

rah  th 

3 

rrihn 

To  eat 

khriii  ri 

• • • 

Plur. 

1 

h haw 

... 

To  say 

zavna 

Plur. 

2 

zoth 

• • • 

The  Future  changes  for  gender.  Bhalesi  follows  Padari  in  this  tense,  rather  than 
Bliadrawahl . Thus: — 


I>n  abkawAhI. 

IttiALfisT. 

Muse. 

Fpiii. 

i 

Mase.  J 

Friii. 

Sing. 

i . 

1 

r 

1 ! 

kuttzln 

2 . 

1 

ykvtahl.  kii(L) 

i 

fait  ail  a i 

1 

i: 

fall  till 

kutIMl 

3 . 

1 

• 

J 

1 ; 

v. 

fait  tnl 

hut  till 

Plur. 

1 . 

kntmali , k:fnv~ 

fait fin  mini 

fait  utal 

kntmQl 

2 . 

h/t  (alp,  fait  Ip 

fait  ail  ai 

kuital 

Kutt.Ul 

< 

3 . 

1 

; fait  alp,  fat  lip 

i 

kulailai 

kat  tan 

| fait  thin 

imADRAWSlli  and  biialEsI. 
* 


897 


It  will  be  seen  that,  as  in  the  case  of  Padari,  BhalesI  drops  its  terminations. 
The  following  are  irregular : — 


Jihad  rawalu 

Blialesr 

To  become 

bit  on  it 

% bhonfi 

Sing.  1,  2,  3 

bhblb 

(Ito^ular) 

Plur.  1 

bltaumle 

. . . 

2,3 

bliatile 

... 

To  come 

a in  ft 

Sing.  1~) 

f bin 

4 

ejelb 

■j  bgbl 

3 3 

Let/ el 

Plur.  1 

ejmele 

bint  el 

ejelb 

C egbl 

1 bin 

To  go 

go  lentil 

ffflhnu 

^ Sing.  1 

g,Vb 

(Julian 

2 

(j(>U> 

(j  filial 

3 

gain 

(j  filial 

Plur.  1 

ff  ft  m ale 

(jfiln/ial 

gnU‘ 

C (/filial 

1 (jfih  an 

To  remain 

rbh  n ft 

• • • 

Sing.  1,  2,  3 

veil  lb 

• • • 

Plur.  1 

ru  hi  i<  lb 

• • • 

2,3 

rb/tlb 

• • • 

To  eat 

Ich  ft  n ft 

kite  nit 

Sing.  1 

(Uegular) 

kltbn 

To  drink 

pW* 

pine 

Sing.  1 

(Regular) 

plan 

To  give 

db  nil 

den  it 

Sing.  1 

ilelb 

den 

To  do 

knlr  nil 

kornii 

Sins?.  1 

kb  rib 

kaen 

To  know 

zbn  nil 

djbnnii 

Sing.  1 

zb  nib 

the  non 

To  bring 

bn  nil 

a nub 

Sing.  1 

at  nolb 

a nan 

To  take  away 

no  inn 

nbnii 

Sing.  1 

■nelb 

itbn 

VOL.  ix,  part  tv. 


898  WE8TEBN  PAHlRl. 


The  Present  is  formed  by  adding  personal  terminations  to  the  present  partioiple. 
It  changes  for  gender,  and  it  'will  be  observed  that  in  the  Bhadrawahi  feminine  t is 
changed  to  ch,  closely  resembling  the  common  change  of  t to  tg  in  Kashmiri  feminines. 


BHADBAWXhI. 

BHA£fiSl. 

Mast*. 

Fern. 

Masc. 

Fem. 

Sing. 

1 . 

kuttS 

kutcha 

kuftu  ( *tau , -to) 

kuitS 

2 . 

kuft§ 

kutchd 

kuttus  (-toa) 

kutte 

3 • . • 

kutte 

kutch? 

kuitU  (-tau,  -to) 

kuftf 

Plur. 

1 . 

I 

kuttam 

kut  chain 

kuttam 

kuttam 

2 . 

kuttath , kuttat 

kufehath 

kuttath 

kuttath 

3 . • . 

kuttan 

kutchan 

kutte 

kulti 

The  irmgular  forms  of  this  tense  follow  the  irregular  present  participles,  and  need 
not  be  repeated  here. 


The  Imperfect  is  formed  on  the  usual  lines,  the  past  tense  of  the  verb  substantive 
being  added  to  the  present  participle.  The  tense  changes  for  gender  and  number,  but 
not  for  person.  Tims: — • 


lihadrawiilif. 

Bhalfct. 

P — ■'  ' — 

Sing. 

- 

* 

Mftsc*  • • ■ • 

kuftu  thlu 

. kuttwthid 

Fem 

kuttl  thi 

kuftd  th$ 

PJnr. 

Msec.  «... 

kutt*  thie 

kutte  thie 

Fem.  .... 

kuttl  thi 

kuttl  thi 

The  tenses  formed  from  the  Past  Participle  call  for  no  remarks.  They  are  built 
^n  the  usual  lines,  transitive  verbs  being  construed  passively,  agreeing  in,  gender  and 
number  with  the  object,  and  having  the  subject  in^he  case  of  the  agent. 


BHADBAWlHi  AND  BHALfiSt. 


899* 


For  Intransitive  verbs,  we  may  take  the  Bhadrawahi  bilaharnu  and  the  Rhalfisi 
khirkifti,  both  meaning  * to  fall  Thus : — 


IMiadrawtUi!.  | 

Bha|M. 

X fell  • • • • 

i 

au  bitsliaru  j 

au  khirkd 

1 struck  him  .... 

t n?  kutpa  ; 

met  kuttu 

1 have  fallen  . 

! 

au  biUharu  at  j 

au  khirku  hU 

I have  struck  him 

ml  kuttu  dhe 

‘ I 

met  kuttu  hd 

I had  fallen  .... 

au  bitsharu  thin 

au  khirku  thiu 

X had  struck  him 

ml  kult&  thiu 

mei  ku{lO  thiu 

Irregular  forms  follow  the  irregular  past  participles. 

Regarding  the  formation  of  the  Passive  no  information  is  available. 
Mr.  Bailey  gives  the  following* examples  of  Causal  verbs : — 


To  eat 

Bhadrawahi 

khapti. 

To  cause  to  eat 

khudnu. 

To  drink 

pl^u. 

To  give  to  drink 

pianu. 

To  hear 

Sunnit. 

To  cause  to  hear 

Sundnii. 

To  graze 

tsarnu. 

To  cause  to  graze 

t&arnti. 

No  examples,  except  tgan <«,  to  cause  to  graze,  are  available  for  BhaiSsi. 


VOT'.  XX,  Mat  IX* 


5 z & 


900 


r no.  i j 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY* 


Central  Group. 


33  H ADR  AW  AH  GROUP. 

BHAmAWAHf. 


(Kashmir  DarbAr.) 


Aki-zbnb  cli'ii  motthe  thie. 

One-person  {-of)  tico  sons  were. 

apne-baue-sehT  zaS,  4 lie  ba-zl, 

his-own-father-to  it-was-said , * O 

dl-de.*  Phirl  tain!  ten  an 

glee.'  Then  by-hini  to-them 

Thore-diharan-manz  nikre-mbttbe 
A-few-days-in  by-lhe-younger-son 

bhiri  akl  -diir-de£e -man  z jail, 

and  a-far-country-in  he- went, 

luchpone-manz  udal. 

deba  ncliery-i  n was-ca  used-to-Jl y. 

khurch  kin,  tes-mulkhe-manz 

expenditure  was-madc , that -country-in 

lachar  hhone  lago.  13birl  te 

helpless  to-become  began.  And  he 


father-sir , what 
apnl  ghbr-barl 


Tenan-manzra 
Them-f rom-a  mong 
ze  haso 

share 


nekre 

by -the- younger 
mi  malte, 
to-vne  is-got. 


bantl-dittl. 

his-own  property  was-divided  {-and)- given. 

sebbh-kicbclih  akfttthu  kiu, 

everything  together  was-made, 

aur  teri  taini 

and  there  by-him 

J3birl  zakban 
And  when 

boro  kal 

a-great  famine 
tes-mulkhe-mS 

that -co entry -in 


apnl 
h is-own 

taini 
by -him 

peu, 

fell, 


gkor-biiri 

property 

sebbk 

all 

bhiri  te 
and  he 


akl-sfihOrdar-ghore 

a-citizen-in-the-honse 


jail. 

Taini 

te  apnl-bagrl-manz  sfu* 

tsar  no 

hhejo, 

aur  ze 

went. 

Jiy-liim 

he  his-own-Jield-in  swine 

to-feed 

was- sent, 

and  what 

pbak 

siir 

khate-thle,  te  khuSl-sehT 

kbanc 

ehato-tblo, 

chaff 

the-swine 

Cating-were,  that  happiness-wilh 

to-eat  hc-wishing-was. 

ki 

tes 

kol  rieih  deto-thlo. 

331,  irl 

hoSl-ma 

etta. 

because 

to-him 

anyone  not  giving-icas. 

And 

sense- in 

having -come, 

zaune 

lago 

ki,  ‘ merc-baue-re  ketre 

nokar  mast 

rotlbale  ahn, 

to-say 

he-began 

that,  ' my-falher-of  how-many 

servants  much 

breads  are. 

aur  au  dhlukklio  mbrta. 
and  I hungry  am-dying. 

aur  tes-sebi  zolo, 
and  him- to  I-will-say, 

gunabgar  bbub,  aur 

sinner  became,  and 


An  uthta  apne-baue-ka  gelo, 

I having-arisen  my -own- father-near  will-go, 


“ he 

ba-zi,  au 

tusan-ka 

aur 

PramcSure-ka 

“ 0 

father-sir,  I 

yon-near 

and 

God-near 

Imne 

au  is-laik 

ueTh 

ki 

tus 

mi-jo 

now 

I this-worthy 

{am-)  not 

that 

you 

me- to 

uhadrawAh!. 


901 


mbtthu  zoth.  Mt  apne  nbkaran-manzra  aki-ru  zerhu 

son  may-say.  Me  your-oion  servants- from- among  one-of  as 

banaa.”  * Bhirl  uthta  apne-baue-kejb  tsalo.  U6ju  te 

make**  * And.  having-arisen  his-own- father-near  he-went.  Still  he 

dun?  thio  ki  tes  herta  tes-rb  baue  dyaya 

in-distance  was  that  him  having-seen  him-of  to-the-father  compassion 

al,  aur  daurta  te  apne-ga]b-sehT  lao,  aur  bari  phemri 

came,  and  having-run  he  his-ovon-  neck-on  icas-applied,  and  much  kiss 

dittl.  Mbtthe  tes-sekl  zah  ki,  ‘he  ba-zi,  tusan-ka 

teas- given.  By-the-son  him-to  it-icas-said  that,  * O father-sir,  you-near 

aur  Pramb6ure-ka  gunahgar  bhuo,  aur  hum:  au  is-laik 

and  God-near  sinner  ,{l-)hccame,  and  now  I this-icorthy 

neTh  ki  tus  ml- jo  mbtthii  zotli.’  Bhirl  tes-rb  baub 

( am-)not  that  you  me-to  son  may-say And  him-of  by-the-f other 

apnb-nbkaran-jb  zaH  ki,  ‘chhail  barna  kadhi 

his-own-servants-to  it-was-said  that,  * good  garment  haoing-brought-out 


aua,  aur  is  loath;  aur  ese-rb  hatthc*  authl  aur 

bring-ye,  and  this-one  clothe-yC ; and  this-one-of  on-hand  ring  and 


piio 

jutb 

loath, 

aur 

eja,  as  kliam 

aur 

khusi 

kbram, 

(on-)  feet 

shoe 

clot  he- ye, 

and 

come-ye,  we  may-eat 

and 

rejoicing 

we-may-do, 

ki 

ill 

rabrb 

mbtthu 

mbri-jau-tbio, 

bliirT 

zintfi 

bhfu-jau ; 

because 

this 

my 

son 

dead- gone- was, 

and 

living 

became  ; 

barai-jOro  tbio,  bhirl  mali-jau.’  Phirl  tend  sara  klnisi  karnv 

lost-gone  was,  and  was- got*  Then  they  all  rejoicing  fo-do 


lagb. 

began. 

Aur  tes-rii  badu  mfitthn  udarb-manz  tbio.  Zakhan  ghorb-rb 

And  his  great  son  the-f  eld-in  was.  When  the-honse-of 


ncre  au  gitki-ri  aur  natjnb-ri 

near  he-camc  song-of  and  dancing-qf 

nokar  kuja-ta  puchclihu,  cen 

servant  having-called  it-was-asked,  * these 

■ynfi  ki.  * tu4o  blmi  orb  ai 


zau 

ki,  • 

tu4b 

blira 

drd 

it-was-said 

that,  ‘ 

your 

brother 

come 

ki, 

ilhal-rb 

ki 

tea. 

to 

was-made, 

because 

that 

to-liim 

he 

bhuo,  aur  anttir  galmu  na  clmo. 

became,  and  within  to-go  not  lie-wished. 


awaj 

suni. 

Bhirl  ak 

sound 

was-heard. 

Then  a 

kuu 

ai  r ’ 

Taini  tes-jb 

what 

is  ? ’ 

By -him  him-to 

ki 

tusb-baub 

bari  dharn 

0-1  hat 

ly-your-f other  great  feast 

tazi 

malb.’ 

Taini  karbdha 

omul 

was-gotj 

By- him  anger 

Pliiri  tes- 

iv  ha  in' 

Then • of -him  of-lhe-father 


t\J 

ber  etta,  tes-jb  zau. 

outside  having-come  him-to  it-icas-spoken. 


Tairn  apne-baue-jb  zbhab 
By -him  his-own-father-to  answer 


902 


WESTERN  PAHlRl. 


ditto 

ki, 

* her,  aitre-bar 

au 

teri 

tfihftl 

kart  5 

was-given 

that, 

‘ behold,  (for-)so-many -years 

I 

thy 

service 

doing 

reho, 

aur 

kadi  t uSe  - liukume-re 

bahro 

na 

bhuo; 

kdda 

tusC? 

remained. 

and 

ever  thy-order-of 

outside 

not 

became  ; 

ever 

by-you 

mi-jo 

ak  chhele-rii  cklieru 

blii 

11  a 

ditto, 

ki 

au 

me -to 

a 

goat-of  kid 

even 

not 

was-given,  that 

1 

apne-yaran-sehl  kliuSi  knrto ; aur  zakhan  tu6u  eli 

my-own-friends-with  rejoicing  might-have-made ; and  when  your  this 

mOttliu  au,  * zaini  tu$i  jaidad  kaftjran-pati  goal,  tusei 

son  came , by -whom  your  property  harlots- after  was-wasted,  by -you 

tes-re  lai  bar!  dliam  ki.’  Aur  taini  tes-seh1?  zatl, 

him- of  for  a-great  feast  was- made.'  And  by-him  him-to  it-icas-said, 

‘ho  m&ttha,  tu  sada-I  niT-satthi  rehta,  zen-kichchh  merO  ai, 

‘ O son , thou  ever-even  me- with  remainest,  whatever  mine  is, 

te  t§ru  ai.  Hune  kliusi  karni  munasib  thi,  ki  terd 

that  thine  is.  Now  rejoicing  to-be-made  proper  was,  because  thy 

dbla  mari-joro  thlo,  to  zintu  bliiii-jau;  aur  haroro  thio, 

brother  dead-gone  was,  he  living  became;  and  lost  was , 

to  mali-jau.* 
he  was-got* 


903 


PADARI. 

As  already  stated,  Padar  lies  to  the  extreme  north  of  Pangi,  between  it  and 
Kishtwar.  The  language  of  the  latter  tract  is  Kashmiri.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we 
approach  the  Kashmiri  of  Kishtwar  from  Pangi  via  B hales!  and  Bhadrawahi,  we  have 
to  go  first  west,  and  then  north.  While  Padarl  is  on  the  direct  route,  Bhalesi  and 
Bhadrawahi  are,  so  to  speak,  on  a loop-line.  It  thus  follows  that  Padarl  agrees  with 
Kiishmirl  more  closely  than  do  the  two  others  of  the  group. 

The  materials  available  are  a version  of  the  Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son  and  the 
usual  List  of  Words  and  Sentences,  both  received  from  the  Kashmir  Darbar;  and  the 
account  of  the  dialect  contained  in  Mr.  Grahamc  Bailey’s  hook.  Even  with  the  aid  of 
Mr.  Bailey’s  excellent  sketch  of  the  language,  the  materials  are  quite  insufficient  for 
solving  many  doubtful  points. 

Moreover,  the  Specimen  and  List  of  Words  were  supplied  written  in  the  TakrI 
character,  in  which  the  vowels  are  very  imperfectly  indicated,  and  this  was  not  remedied 
by  the  somewhat  inconsistent  transliteration  by  which  they  were  accompaniod.  In 
preparing  them  for  the  press  T have  endeavoured  to  follow  the  system  of  spelling  used 
in  Mr.  Bailey’s  grammar,1  hut  I am  not  certain  that  I have  always  succeeded  in  doing 
this  correctly.  In  fact,  it  will  he  impossible  to  describe  Padarl  fully  and  accurately 
till  we  know  much  more  about  it,  and  have  plenty  of  tested  example^,  written  by  trained 
scholars,  from  which  we  can  frame  the  general  rules  that  govern  epeuthesis  in 
this  interesting  dialect. 

The  following  account;,  therefore,  should  not  he  accepted  as  complete,  and  must  be 
taken  with  considerable  reserve. 

Most  of  the  peculiarities  of  Padarl  Pronunciation  have  been  dealt  with  in  the 
introduction  to  the  group,  and  only  a few  will  be  mentioned  here. 

In  the  first  place  we  must  draw  attention  to  the  frequent  occurrence  of  the  very 
short  vowels  "•  '•  '*  " referred  to  on  p.  882.  These  arc  technically  known  as  nuttm 

vowels,  and  will  he  so  called  in  the  following  pages.  As  already  stated  they  exercise  an 
important  influence  in  epenthesiS. 

Epentliesis  is  very  common — almost  as  common  as  in  Kashmiri — , and  the  whole 
system  of  conjugation  is  full  of  it.  Unfortunately  we  are  not  yet  in  a position  to  lay 
down  any  general  rules  for  these  changes,  and  all  that  we  can  do  is  to  put  down  those 
that  have  been  noted. 

Tadbhava  nouns  in  a may  probably  al>o  end  in  a or  o,  as  in  the  other  languages 
of  the  group.  At  any  rate,  there  are  a number  of  nouns  ending  in  u or  u,  such  as  disft, 
a day,  tnanhnu,  a man,  which  are  declined  like  nouns  in  a.  Mr.  Bailey  often  writes 
nouns  and  participles  as  ending  in  a and  u,  not  a and  u.  This  probably  merely  indicates 
that  the  accent  is  on  the  preceding  syllable.  It  is  almost  unknown  in  Indian  languages 
for  a noun  to  end  in  a short  a or  in  a short  n.  They  end  either  in  a long  vowel,  or  else 
the  final  vowel  is  further  shortened  and  becomes  a nidtrd  vowel,"  or",  or  is  dropped 
altogether.  Mr.  Bailey  certainly  does  not,  in  these  eases,  intend  to  indicate  mdtrd 

1 There  is  one  exception.  Mr.  Bailey’s  cu,  I represent  by  w. 


904 


WESTERN  FAHARi. 


vowels,  and  I shall,  therefore,  follow  the  custom  of  other  Indian  languages,  and  mark 
them  as  long  throughout.  So  far  as  the  specimens  and  List  of  Words  can  be  trusted, 
such  vowels  are  certainly  long. 

Padari  has  a marked  tendency  to  drop  final  vowels  of  terminations.  Thus  the  ru 
of  the  Bhadrawalu  genitive  becomes  a simple  r,  and  l,  the  sign  of  the  ablative,  represents 
an  original  le. 

The  following  are  tables  of  the  Declension  of  nouns  : — 

ghoyd,  a horse. 


Sing. 

Plur. 

Nom. 

gliovri 

ghove. 

Ag- 

ghbve 

ghoyi . 

Dat. 

ghovas 

ghoyi. 

Abl. 

g hovel 

. ghdyi-kal. 

Gen. 

ghovav 

ghoyi- kar. 

The  above  is  the  declension  given  by  Mr.  Bailey.  The  specimens  give  sotno 
additional  forms.  Thus  <lze  ( = Pangwali  je)  may  be  added  to  an  oblique  form 
in  e (which  is  identical  with  the  case  of  the  agent),  to  form  a dative  ; thus, 
ghore-dge.  In  Bhadrawahi,  the  oblique  plural  is  formed  by  adding  an  ( ghovan ), 
and  we  have  a similar  ending,  an,  in  the  Padari  gauay-bich,  among  harlots.  In 
Kashmiri,  the  corresponding  word  is  grin  (dat.  plur.  grinan),  a procurer,  and,  here  too, 
the  word  appears  to  be  masculine.  In  one  case,  clakh  diva  pUittav,  after  a few  days,  the 
specimen  seems  to  make  the  oblique  plural  end  in  ri. 

The  dative  singular  termination  as  is  pure  Kashmiri. 

With  the  genitive  plural  postposition  kar,  we  may  compare  the  Bhalrawahi  kevti. 
The  ablative  kal  is  probably  a contraction  of  kava-le,  with  the  frequent  elision  of  a 
medial  r. 

These  genitives  seem  to  form  a feminine  by  changing  the  final  av  to  $r,  as  in 
ghovar,  fern,  g hover,  equivalent  to  the  Hindi  ghoye-kri,  ghbye-ki.  No  form  has  been 
noted  equivalent  to  the  Hindi  glibye-ke. 

Similarly  is  declined — mauhnu,  a man,  dat.  manhnas. 

Badhel,  an  ox,  is  thus  declined 


Sing. 

Plur. 

Nom. 

badhel 

badhel. 

Ag. 

badhele  . 

badhele. 

Dat. 

bad  he  las 

badhel. 

Abl. 

badhelel 

badliel-kal. 

Gen. 

badhelar 

badhel-kar. 

As  we  sec,  Mr.  Bailey  gives  no  termination  to  the  oblique  plural.  In  the  specimens 
we  always  have  d,  as  in  majurd-bich-t£ge>  to  among  the  servants ; khurd-bich,  on  the 
feet ; ampar  sajnS-samet , with  my  own  friends. 

We  see  epenthesis  occurring  in  geobhur,  a son,  plural  gobhar,  just  as  Kashmiri  has 
wandur,  a monkey,  plural  tcrindar. 

The  word  bah  or  bub,  a father,  has  its  dative  babbas  or  babba-fae,  and  so  on.  Its 
vocative  is  babbd. 


pAdari. 


005 


Haitli *,  an 

elephant,  (note  the  epenthesis) 

is  thus  declined  :■ 

Sing. 

Plnr. 

Nora. 

haitli? 

hill  hi 

Ag. 

. haithi 

half  hi 

Gen. 

so  on. 

haithiar 

haithl-kar 

Kol,  a girl, 

a daughter,  is  thus  declined : — 

Sing. 

Plnr. 

Nom. 

kol  . 

kill. 

Ag. 

kul 

kill. 

Dat. 

kayos 

* 

kai. 

Abl. 

kuyal 

kiil-kal. 

Gen. 

kiiyur 

kul-kar. 

Here  the  kuyas  is  merely  a contraction  of  kuias.  So,  with  similar  epontlietic 
change,  we  have  ghdri,  a mare ; dat.  ghures ; gen.  ghiirir.  Bakri,  a she-goat,  has  its 
nominative  plural  bulker. 

Blien,  a sister,  is  thus  declined : — 


Sin,"-. 

I’lur. 

Nom. 

blien 

hlily,. 

A g. 

bheni 

bhinl. 

Dat. 

b hen  as 

bhinl. 

Abl. 

bhenal 

bhinl- kal. 

Gen. 

blienar 

bhlnl-kar. 

Gd,  a cow,  has  its  nominative  plural  gol. 

The  only  trace  of  declension  which  I have  observed  in  the  case  of  Adjectives  is 
that  adjectives  ending  in  or,  change  the  termination  in  the  feminine  to  or  or  erl.  Thus 
leaf  tar , how  many,  fern,  hatter , or  hail  erl.  See,  for  instance,  sentence  222,  and 
compare  the  remarks  made  above  about  the  genitive.  Tor  the  genitive,  we  have  laser 
blieni-samet,  with  his  sister,  in  sentence  225.  So,  in  the  Parable,  gller  hour  nitisner  hah, 
the  sound  of  singing  and  dancing. 

Comparison  is  effected,  as  usual,  with  the  ablative  case. 

The  first  two  personal  Pronouns  are  thus  declined  : — 

I Thou 

Sing. 


Nom. 

•-v 

an 

Hi. 

Ag. 

nun 

tin. 

Dat. 

min,  mat 

toil,  tail. 

Abl. 

mdl 

Idl. 

Gen. 

mifin,  men 

tiTin,  ten. 

Plur. 

Nom. 

as 

tns. 

Ag. 

dsc 

fuse. 

Dat. 

dse 

fuse. 

Abl. 

as-kitl 

tus-kaf. 

Gen. 

liiitn , hen 

tohn , fun. 

VOL.  XX,  PART  XV. 

5 7. 


906 


WESTERN  PAHARl. 


The  Demonstrative  Pronoun  eh,  this,  is  thus  deolined : — 


Sing. 

Plur. 

Nom. 

eh 

eh,  euhn,  eUhna,  aman. 

Ag. 

elnl 

ainhe,  in  he. 

Dat. 

as 

ainhe,  inhe. 

Abl. 

a sal 

ai-kal. 

Gen. 

asar  (f.  aser) 

ai-kar  (f.  -ker). 

Aman  has  only  been  noted  in  the  Parable 

, — aman  bag,  these  husks. 

There  is  also  a 

pronoun  oh  ; dat.  sing,  us  ; 

plur.  nom.  uhq.  or  uhif ; but  no  other 

forms  have  been 

noted,  or  are  given  by  Mr.  Bailey.  jBr-ddsti  is  ‘ for  this  reason  *, 

* because 

The  Relative  and  Correlative  Pronouns  are  thus  declined.  The  Correlative  is  the 

usual  pronoun  employed  to  indicate  * that  ’. 

Who,  which 

r- 

that 

Sing. 

Nom. 

dize 

se. 

Ag. 

dgeini 

teini,  tin. 

Dat. 

dgas,  dgis 

tas,  tis  (neut.  tath). 

Abl. 

(izasal,  dgisal 

tasal,  tisal. 

Gen. 

digasar  (f.  dgaser ) 

tasar  (f.  taset%). 

Plur. 

Nom. 

dze,  dzdhn ° 

se,  tdhna. 

Ag. 

dzainhe 

tainhe. 

Dat. 

dzaitthe 

tainhe. 

Abl. 

dgai-kal 

tai-kal. 

Gen. 

dsai-kar  (f.  - ker ) 

tat-kar  (f .■•Mr). 

The  neuter  form  tath  also  occurs  iu  Kashmiri.  It  is  used  when  referring  to  inani- 
mate objects,  as  in  tath  kujhi  andar , in  that  house..  The  animate  form  tas  also  occurs 
in  Kashmiri. 

The  Interrogative  Pronouns  are  kdnh,  who?  and  Jet,  what?  The  former  has 
ag.  keirii ; dat.  kas ; abl.  kasal ; gen.  Jcasar  (f.  kaser). 

Mr.  Bailey  gives  fairer  (?  a feminine  form)  as  the  genitive  of  ki.  In  the  Parable  eh 
kayan  hin1,  what  are  these?  apparently  indicates  that  its  nominative  plural  is  kayan. 

Other  Indefinite  Pronominal  forms  are  : — 
har-kane,  anyone,  someone. 
kicJth  or  kijh,  anything,  something. 
dge-kanc,  whoever. 
dge-kichh,  whatever. 

The  word  for  ‘own’,  equivalent  to  the  Hindi  apnd,  is  ampar,  fem.  (wipe f.  Ampar 
occurs  frequently  in  the  Parable.  For  the  feminine  compare  amper  bhdnal  bora,  bigger 
than  his  sister  (sentence  231). 

VERBS.— Auxiliary  Verbs  and  Verbs  Substantive. 

The  present  tense  Is  han“  or  haittd,  plural  han",  hane,  hin',  or  haine.  This  is 
masculine,  the  corresponding  feminine  form  being  hin1  or  haini  for  both  numbers.  This 


pAdakt. 


907 


present  tense  does  not  change  for  person.  We  may  compare  with  it  the  (Pisacha) 
Shina  hand,  he  is. 

The  Past  tense  is — 


Sing. 

Tint. 

Masc. 

thea 

the' 

Pern. 

thl 

thl. 

'It  does  not  change  for  person. 

The  Active  Verb  is  thus  conjugated: — 

Infinitive  — kotan,  to  strike. 

So  dghdran,  to  fall ; bhdn,  to  be,  to  become ; at&san,  to  come ; gheii  or  gen,  to  go ; 
be  San,  to  sit ; khan,  to  eat';  pin,  to  drink ; den  or  din  to  give ; ten,  to  take ; bdlan,  to 
speak ; karan,  to  do. 

Present  Participle — kolna,  pi.  koine  ; fora.  sing,  and  plur.  kd'tnl,  striking. 
So  the  fcm.  of  dgdi'na,  falling,  is  dgairnl,  like  ha  ini,  above. 


Irregular  are : — 

bhdn,  to  bpcoine, 

pres.  part. 

blidnna  ; f.  bhu' tie. 

tutsan,  to  come, 

99 

azna,  pi.  asne  ; f.  aisnl. 

ghen,  to  go, 

99 

ghena. 

den,  to  give, 

99 

dye  tin. 

bolan,  to  speak. 

a 

bdnna. 

The  assimilation  of  l to 

n in  the  case 

of  bdlan  has  parallels  in  other  dialects. 

Cf. 

800,  826,  848,  852. 

Past  Partioiple- 

- kotta , beaten 

, pi.  kotte  ; f.  sing,  and  plur.  koettl.  Here 

the 

t lias  been  doubled  on  account  of  tlie  accent. 

Irregular  are : — 

bhdn,  to  become. 

past  part. 

blid,  pi.  bhde  ; f.  bhiil. 

adsan,  to  come, 

99 

d,  pi.  do  ; f.  sg.  de,  pi.  el. 

ghen  or  gen,  to  go, 

)) 

gd,  pi.  gde,  f.  sg.  and  pi.  gel. 

bemn,  to  sit. 

99 

bethd. 

k/tdn,  to  eat, 

99 

khd  ; f.  khail. 

pin , to  drink,  „ pld  ; f.  pi. 

den , to  give,  „ dyittd ; f.  diltl. 

leu,  to  take,  „ lea. 

karan,  to  do,  „ Iced ; f.  kl. 

In  the  above,  the  feminine  singular  of  d is  probably  borrowed  from  Blialesi.  3dr. 
Graliame  Bailey  marks  the  final  a of  kotta  as  short,  but  in  the  case  of  some  other  past 
participles,  as  shown  above,  he  makes  the  final  d,  long.  Probably  it  should  be  long 
'throughout,  and  the  short  a,  when  shown  by  him,  only  indicates  that  the  accent  is  on  the 
preceding  syllable. 

Static  Past  Participle. —As  in  Chameali,  and  other  western  Pakari  dialects, 
there  is  a static  past  participle  formed  by  changing  the  final  a of  the  past  purticiple  to 
or  or  aur ; thus,  kotor,  in  the  state  of  having  been  struck. 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


5 l Z 


908 


WESTERN  PAHArT. 


Irregular  are : — 


adzan,  to  come, 

static  part. 

or  or  a nr. 

ghen  or  gen,  to  go, 

99 

gor. 

bcGan,  to  sit, 

99 

bit  li  or. 

ten,  to  take. 

99 

leaar,  Ivor. 

bblnn , to  speak, 

99 

bolor. 

karaty,  to  do. 

99 

kebr. 

It  will  be  observed  that  there  is  a tendency  to  shorten  the  vowel  before  the  or. 

The  Conjunctive  Participle — koitf-kar,  having  struck. 

When  used  in  compound  verbs,  the  kar  is  dropped,  and  koit'  becomes  kbit,  or  koitl. 
Thus  from  rakkhan,  to  placo,  wc  have  raikkh  jjthar,  or  raikkhl  tghar  ( = Hindi  rakh 
chhdr),  put  down.  From  khbn,  to  lose,  we  have,  in  the  Parable,  khbl-ghen,  to  lose 
entirely. 

The  Imperative  2nd  sing,  is  the  same  in  form  as  the  root,  the  plural  adding  ai ; 
thus,  kot,  strike  thou ; kofai,  strike  ye. 

Irregular  are  : — 

Imperative. 


Sing. 

Plur. 

a than,  to  come 

nih 

adsai. 

ghen  or  gen , to  go 

gah 

ghe. 

boson,  to  sit 

bes 

besai. 

clen , to  give 

del , de 

• • C 

No  instance  of  the  Old  Present  and  Present  Subjunctive  has  been  noted. 

The  Future  has  the  2nd  and  3rd  persons  identical  and  changes  for  gender.  It  is 
conjugated  as  follows  : — 

* I shall  strike,’  etc. 


1 

i 

*I»G. 

Plur. 

i 

Masc. 

Fem. 

Mnsc. 

Fem. 

i 

kdt  til,  kutal 

i 

kutal 

I 

kdlul , kutal 

kutal 

2 and  3 

kdt  al 

ktfttl 

' kdtnal 

I 

j 

kutneM 1 

Where  the  root  of  the  verb  ends  in  a consonant,  the  first  person  is  generally  based 
on  the  form  kbiul,  with  various  epenthetic  changes,  as  will  be  seen  below. 

If  the  root  ends  in  a vowel,  the  first  person  usually,  but  not  always,  ends  in  a 
nasal  u. 


PADARI.  909 

The  second  and  third  persons  always  end  in  l.  The  following  examples  will  show 
the  important  part  that  epcnthesis  plays  in  this  tense  : — 

dglulran,  to  fall. 


• 

SlNO. 

PlUH. 

Mas<\ 

1 Fem. 

! 

Muse. 

Ftni. 

1 

tlzha  nil 

1 ijzhairel 

j 

tjzhurul 

I 

i 

i 

tjzlntrrl 

2 and 

3 

iteh  dral 

1 'teh'nrtl 

fjzlidrnnl 

i 

<Jzhn  irnZ'l * 

bhun,  to  become. 

i 

j 

mno. 

Flub. 

Mas<\ 

Fcm. 

Muse. 

Kf*m. 

1 

hi l5l 

hhrA 

hhfil 

hhfi'l 

2 and 

3 

lihdl 

! hlttfl 

| hhonal 

hhnne'l* 

adgan,  to  come. 


SlNO. 

Pltta. 

Masc. 

Fern. 

i 

Mase. 

i 

i 

1 

F( 

1 

-?<Z,  uzal 

i 

tizil 

, 

’ZIll 

1 

i 

uzil 

2 and  3 

:>znl,  cznl 

! 

iizil 

usual 

■ 

rznil 

ghen  or  gen , to  go. 

i 

Sing.  j I’-ltth. 


Matte. 

Fem. 

Mil  BO. 

Pfin. 

1 

ghau 

ghau 

ghau 

ghau 

2 and  3 

,jhel 

yhf'l  (?) 

glienal 

yhenen*  (?) 

hesan,  to  sit. 

Sing. 

Pira. 

Mabc. 

Fern. 

Mato. 

Fr-m. 

1 

bis  ul 

betel 

bis  ul 

betel 

2 and  3 

• 

betel 

betel 

bestial 

bfhiiil' 

910 


WESTERN  PAH  All  I. 


deft,  to  give,  makes  dau,  deal , etc. ; len,  to  take,  makes  leS,  leal,  etc. ; karan,  to  ‘do, 
makes  korul,  etc. 

All  the  above  are  taken  from  Mr.  Bailey’s  book. 

The  Present  tense,  which  is  also  used  as  a Past  Conditional)  is  simply  the  present 
participle,  changing  for  gender  and  number,  but  not  for  person.  Thus  au  kotna,  I 
(masc.)  strike,  (if)  I had  struck,  I should  have  struck  (if).  The  masc.  plur.  is  koine,  and 
the  fern.  sing,  and  plur.  koHnl. 

The  irregular  forms  follow  the  irregular  present  participles. 

The  Imperfect  either  adds  the  past  tense  of  the  verb  substantive  to  the  present 
participle,  ns  in  au  kotna  the9, 1 (masc.)  was  striking,  or  else  has  the  following  contracted 
forms,  which  do  not  change  for  person  : — 

Masc.  sing,  kofnath,  plur.  kofneth ; 

Fern.  sing,  and  plur.  kfrtneth*.  ■ 

The  Past  Tense  is  simply  the  Past  Participle. 

In  the  Perfect  and  Pluperfect  the  static  past  participle  is  generally  employed. 

Transitive  verbs,  as  usual,  are  construed  passively. 

Thus  : — 

au  dzhdra,  I fell. 
mat  kotta,  1 struck  him. 
au  d&hardr  hait,  I have  fallen. 
mat  kotor  han",  T have  struck  him. 
au  d&haror  tlie‘,  I had  fallen. 
mat  kotor  the",  I had  struck  him. 


So,  with  a feminine  object,  we  have  tiTin  bdbbe  maid  dhdm  keor  liin ',  thy  father  has 
made  a great  feast. 

Sometimes  the  past  participle  is  used  in  the  perfect,  instead  of  the  static  participle. 
Thus  we  have  mat  pdp  ked  haina,  1 have  done  sin,  and  also  mat  pdp  ked,  I did  sin,  both 
in  the  Parable. 

No  information  is  available  regarding  the  formation  of  the  Passive. 

Mr.  Bailey  gives  the  following  examples  of  Causal  verbs  : — 


khan,  to  eat 
pin,  to  drink 
khunan,  to  hear 
tftaran,  to  graze 


khalan,  to  cause  to  eat. 
pidn,  to  cause  to  drink. 

. khundn,  to  cause  to  hear  (Compare  Gfull). 
tftaran,  to  cause  to  graze. 


As  regards  Compound  Verbs,  Intensive  compounds  have  been  already  dealt  with 
under  the  head  of  the  conjunctive  participle.  The  following  are  examples  of  Inceptive 
Compounds : — 

se  lafihdr  bhbn  laga,  he  began  to  be  helpless. 
se  khutthi  karan  lage,  they  began  to  do  rejoicing. 


911 


[ No.  2.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 

bhadrawAh  group. 


Central  Group. 


Pa  DARI. 


Yak-mauhnns  dul  koe 

To-a-man  two  sons 

b&bba*dic  bola  ki, 

the-father-to  it-was-said  that% 
maf-dae  6aal-hl  mal-dz(! 

me- to  will-conic  tne-to 

band-dyitta.  Haur  dakh 
was-divided-out.  And.  a-feio 

jama-kair'-kar  yak-dur-mulkhar 


the1. 

were. 

1 

‘ bah 

babba, 

‘ 0 

father. 

de.’ 

Tau 

give.’ 

Then 

dira 

pdittar 

days 

afterwards 

(Kashmir  Darbar.) 
Tin-bichal  mathare 


sail 


malar 

of-the- property 

tin  mal 

by-him  llic-property 
mathar-kue 
by -the -you  nger-son 
kea,  haur  tat 


band  dge 
share  which 

inhc-dze 

them-to 

sobh-kijh 

everything 


ampar 

his-own 


collected-made-having  qf-a-far-counlry  journey  was-made,  and  there 

mal  landpana-satln  ura'-dyitta.  Haur  dzapal  sobh  kharch 

property  debauchery -with  was-caused-to-Jly-away.  And  when 
k&jr-ga,  tis-mulkh-bich  mata  kal  pea,  haur  se 
was-made,  that-country-in  a-great  famine  fell,  and  he 
laga.  Tau  tis-mulkhar  yak  bar- maunbu-ka  ra  tat 

began.  Then  of-that-country  a great-man- near  there 

tis  ampar-bagrl-bich  stir  tsaran  lahga.  Haur 

as-for-kim  liis-own-field-in  swine  to-feed  he-was-sent.  And 


all  expenditure 
lachar  bhou. 
helpless  to-become 


ga. 

he-went. 

tas 

to- him 


bag 


the11  ki  ‘ amar 
was  that  ‘ those  barks 

bar-kanc  tas-dze  na 
anyone  him-to  not 
*mifln-babbas  kattar 


sur  klianne  ampar  yad  bhnrn,’ 


Tin 

By-liim 

mansha 

desire 

ki 


giving -was.  Then 

majur  lori,  haur 


dzb 

which  t hc-swine  cat  my -own  belly  I-may-fill because 

dina-tbo‘.  Tau  liosh-bioh  didz'-kar  bola, 

sense-in  come-hacing  il-was-said, 

au  drukkh  maran  lagor. 

* to-my-father  how-many  servants  are  (/),  and  I (of-)  hunger  to-die  (am-)  begun . 
Au  khara-bol  ampar-babbas-lakh  gena,  haur  tas-dze  bolul  ki, 

I erect-becoming  my-own-father-near  am-going , and  him-to  I- will-say  that , 

“bah  babba,  mal  dharmar  haur  tidn-hajur  pap  kca-haina, 

«« o father,  by -me  of-religion  and  (in-)  tliy-presence  sin 

ab  is-jbgar  no!  ki  bhiri  tifm  kua 

now  this- worthy  I-am- not  that  again 


thy 


haur 

done-is,  and 
bolor.  Maf-dzc 

son  {I-may-be-)  called.  Jle  (acc.) 


912 


WESTERN  PAHArL 


ampar  majur8-hich-dze  yakar  ren  bujh.”  ’ Tafl  khara  bo'-kar 
thine-own  servants-amoug-to  of-one  like  consider ’ Then  erect  become-having 

ampar-babbas-lakh  nis-ga.  Haur  se  bazab  dur  tliea  ki  tas 

his-own-f other-near  he-went-away.  And  he  yet  far  was  that  him 

hir'-kar  tasar-babbas  daya  jagl,  haur  dauir’-kar  tas  hlro-pflr 

seen -having  to-his-father  compassion  awoke,  and  run-having  his  neck-on 

rakklui,  haur  mata  pliachi  lei.  Kue  tas-dze  bola 

he-was-placed,  and  much  kiss  was-taken.  By-the-son  him-to  it-was-said 

ki,  ‘ bah  babba,  raal  dbarmar  haur  tiun  agran  pap  kea,  haur  ab 

that,  ‘O  father,  by-me  of-religion  and  of -thee  before  sin  was-done,  and  now 

is-jogar  no!  ki  bhir!  tifin  kua  bolor.’  Babbe 

tlns-worthy  I-am-not  that  again  thy  son  ( 1-may-bc -)  called*  By-the-father 

ampar-naukar-dze  bola,  * chliair  chhair  liokar  kada1  de,  haur 

his-oion-servants-to  it-was-said,  * good  good  garment  bringing-out  give , and 


tis 

daban-de ; 

baur  tasar-bate  anguthi, 

haur 

khuro-bioh 

padior  lan-de ; 

to-him 

put-on  ; 

and  on-his-hand  a-ring. 

and 

the-feet 

- on 

shoes  put -on  ; 

haur 

as  khan 

haur  khusbi  kSrul, 

se-kis 

men 

oh 

kua  raaror-the0. 

and 

we  may -eat 

and  rejoicing  will-make, 

because 

my 

this 

son  dead-was, 

ab 

zina  ban* 

; klioi-gor-tbe“,  ab  mior-hanV 

Tau 

\j 

se 

khusbi  karan 

now 

living  is; 

lost-gone-was,  now  got 

-is? 

Then 

they 

rejoicing  to-do 

la  go. 

began. 

llaur  tasar  inota  kua  bag-bicli 

the“. 

“Ozapal 

gi-dze  nere 

And  his 

big  son  the-ficld-in 

was. 

When 

the-house-to  near 

a, 

giler 

baur  natsner  link 

khuini. 

Tau 

yakas-naukras 

he-came,  of -singing  and  of-dancing  tlie-sound  was-heard. 

Then 

fo-one-servant 

baya’-kar  puchchlia  ki,  ‘oh  kayan  hin*?  * Tin  tas-dze  bola 
called-having  it-was-asked  that,  * these  ' what  are?*  By-him  him-to  it-was-said 

•J 

ki,  * tifin  bliae  aur  ban1,  baur  tifin-bahbe  mata.  dham  keor  bin1, 

that,  4 thy  brother  come  is,  and  by-thy-father  a-great  feast  made  is, 

er-dosti  ki  tas  khara-clihair  ka.’  Tin  karod-sB 

this-because  that  him  safe  (- and)-sound  (?)  he-was-found ? By-him  anger-with 

nahl  ma  ki  andar  gee.  Tau  tasar  bab  baliar 

not  (?)  it-was-wishel  that  within  hc-may-go.  Then  his  father  outside 

aidz'"kar  ~ tas-dze  manawan  laga.  Tin  bahbu-dze  juwab-bich 

come-having  him  (acc.)  to-propitiatc  began.  By-him  the-father-to  answer-in 
bola,  ‘hlr,  ittar-barau  au  (for  mal)  tiun  tahl  keor-hin1,  baur 

it-was-said,  4 see,  for-so-matty-years  by-me  thy  service  done-is,  and 

kapal  tiun  hukm  badan  na  hauda.  Bhirl  tal  kadi  yak  bakrir 
ever  thy  order  against  not  (I  ) walked.  But  by-thee  ever  a of-goat 


pAdarL 


913 


t§haur  mat-dzc  na  dyitta  ki  ampap-saj  no  -samet  khushl  kdrul. 

a-kid  me- to  not  watt-given  that  my -own-friends- with  rejoicing  I-shall-make. 
Haur  jzapal  tifin  6h  kua  a,  dais  tiun  raal  ganan-bich 

And  when  thy  this  son  came,  for -whom  thy  property  harlots-among 

uya1 -dyitta,  tal  us-dosti  mata  dham  ki.’  Tin  tas-dze 

was-cau8ed-to- fly -away,  by -thee  him-for  a-great  feast  was-made?  By -him  him -to 

bola,  * bah  kua,  tu  sada  men-lakh  ban*,  haur  dz*>kichh  miun 

it -was- said,  * 0 son,  thou  always  of-me-with  art,  and  whatever  mine 

haina,  se  tiun  haina.  Bbiri  kliusbl  min,  haur,  khushi  bkdn 

is,  that  thine  is.  But  rejoicing  (?)  to-make,  and  rejoicing  to-become 

laizan  the*,  se-kis  tifln  eh  bhae  maror-the4,  se  zina  ban3 ; khoi-gor-the*, 

proper  was,  because  thy  this  brother  dead-was,  he  alive  is;  lost-gone-was, 

ab  midr-han\’ 
now  got -is? 


▼or..  ix,  part  iv. 


STANDARD  LIST  OF  WORDS  AND  PHRASES 
FOR  THE  BHADRAWAH  GROUP. 


Knglirtli. 

i 

I 

Uhadrawfthf. 

j 

IMduri. 

1.  Oao  . 

! 

J 

1 i 

Ak 

i 

Yak. 

2.  Two  . 

• 

1 

i 

#i 

i 

Dm  I 

DA  i. 

3.  Threo 

• 

m 

i 

Tlai,  tral 

• • 

• 

TIiT.h 

4.  Four  . 

• 

• ; 

TV  Our,  tnfifir 

• 

• 

TVfiur. 

5.  Five  . 

• 

Pants 

• i 

• 

Pa  uz. 

6.  Six 

i 

Sail 

• • 

• 

'iVl.ai. 

7.  Seven 

Sntf 

• • 

• 

S.itt. 

8.  Eight 

A Itli 

Alt  h. 

0.  Nino  . 

Nan 

• • 

N a ;i. 

10.  Ten  . 

i 

Da$,  <383 

• • 

Oai. 

11,  Twonty 

• i 

Bill 

• • 

• 

Bi!,. 

12.  Fifty 

• 

i 

PonjSh  . 

• ■ 

• 

P.iiijah. 

13.  Hundred 

• 

i 

j 

Sami;  srtfl 

• • 

Sau. 

14.  I 

• 

• 

i 

An 

• » 

i 

An. 

15.  Of  me 

• 

• 

.! 

Merfl,  mSrA 

• ■ 

i 

Miiin,  men. 

1(3.  Mine  . 

• 

• 

M?rG,  mSrA 

• • 

. 1 

Mintj,  mcijL. 

17.  We  % 

• 

As 

. i 

As. 

18.  Of  us 

• 

• 

• 

Tin  • 

i 

•j 

Hiuo. 

19.  Our  • 

• 

• 

• 

Is  il 

• 

| Ilifin. 

20.  Thou  . 

• 

• 

- 

Til 

• • 

• 

1 Tn. 
i 

21.  Of  thee 

• 

■ 

• 

TGrA,  tSrfl 

• • 

• 

Tiufl,  t3o,  tau. 

22.  Thine 

■ 

• 

• 

TflrA,  tSrO 

• • 

• 

Tin teg,  tau. 

23.  You  . 

• 

• 

• 

Tus  . 

• • 

• 

Tus. 

24.  Of  you 

• 

• 

• 

TiSu,  tuflA 

• • 

• 

Tfihp,  tug. 

25.  Your  . 

• 

• 

• | 

Tig  A,  tug  A 

• • 

• 

j Tfiliii,  tug. 

BhadrawShi — 915 


English. 

Uh&drawahl. 

1 

i 

1 

P>4&rf. 

26.  Ho 

• 

• 

- 

Oh,  tai  . 

• 

• 

S3,  eh. 

27-  Of  bim 

• 

• 

• 

User  ft,  tiserd  * 

• 

• 

Tasar. 

28.  His  . 

• 

• 

Userfi,  tiserfi  . 

• 

Ta?ar. 

29.  They 

• 

• i 

tJ^hS,  Gplia,  ta$a 

• 

Tah^*,  fSh^*. 

30.  Of  them 

• 

• 

• 

U^karfi,  ta^karfi 

• 

Taf-kar. 

31.  Their 

• 

• 

. 

UnkarH,  tankard 

• 

Tal-kar. 

32.  Hand 

• 

• 

• 

Hatth 

• 

Hat. 

33.  Foot  . 

• 

• 

P5o 

• 

Khur. 

34.  Nose  . 

• 

• 

• 

Nakk 

• 

• 

Nakk. 

35.  Eye  • 

• 

• 

• 

Stahl,  a tab 

• 

• 

Tlr. 

36.  Month 

• 

• 

• 

AS,  a§I  . 

• 

• 

Tfttar. 

37.  Tooth 

• 

• 

• 

Dant 

• 

• 

Dann,  dand. 

38.  Ear  . 

• 

• 

• 

Kanu 

a 

Kann. 

39.  Hair  . 

• 

• 

• 

SirSl 

• 

• 

Rfttth. 

40.  Head  . 

• 

• 

D5g 

• 

• 

! 

Magir. 

41.  Tongue 

• 

• 

Zibbh  . 

• 

Dz&bh. 

42.  Belly  . 

• 

• 

Fait 

• 

P^t. 

43.  Back  . 

• 

• 

Pitth,  $h}igga  • 

• 

Pyifth. 

44.  Iron  • 

. - 

• 

Lahn,  lau 

• 

Lab. 

45.  Gold  . 

• 

Sunnfl 

• 

Sftnna. 

46.  Silver 

• 

Chandl  * 

• 

Chandl. 

47.  Father 

• 

• 

Bau,  babe 

• 

Bab,  bSb. 

i 

48.  Mother 

• 

• 

AramS,  haj 

• 

• 

! 

| Jj.  J1!- 

49.  Brother 

• 

• 

• 

Dhla,  bhra 

• 

• 

Bha6. 

ou  Sister 

• 

• 

• 

Baihp,  balh^  . 

• 

• 

BhSp. 

51.  Man  . 

• 

• 

• 

Manfi,  mayd 

# 

• 

! Manh^fi,  mohap. 

52.  Woman 

• 

• 

• 

ThJI 

• 

• 

Khihttn,  ghio^u. 

9 16 — Bhadraw&hl 


English. 

i 

Bhadraw&hf. 

Pllarl. 

53.  Wife  . 

• 

• 

i 

i 

i 

Th|I 

• 

Dsail.  zo'l1. 

54.  Child  . 

• 

• 

• 

1 

M&$thfl, 

- 

KuS. 

55.  Son  . 

• 

• 

S 

• 

Kft,  mafthft,  mfttthu  . 

• 

KuS. 

56.  Daughter 

• 

• 

• 

1 

K8l,  kfil  . 

• 

Kw. 

57.  Slave 

• 

• 

. , K$ml 

• 

KamA. 

58.  Cultivator 

• 

• 

i 

j 

ZimldSr  • 

• 

JiniMar. 

59.  Shepherd 

• 

• 

i 

i 

Puh&l 

• 

Pah&l. 

60.  God  . 

• 

• 

i 

P6rSmIsh5r  . * 

• 

Narfin. 

61.  Devil 

• 

• 

• 

Saitau 

• 

HarinSn. 

62.  San  . 

• 

a 

• 

Siiraj,  dihSrfl  • 

Dlus. 

63.  Moon. 

• 

« 

i 

i 

ChSnaQl 

X^ainnC. 

64.  Star  . 

• 

• 

! 

TSrfl 

• 

Tar*. 

65.  Fire  . 

• 

• 

m 

Apg 

Ae- 

66.  Water 

• 

• 

P5$l 

• 

PSai^1. 

67.  Houbo 

• 

a 

• 

Ghar,  ghflr 

1 

G'lh,  ghar. 

68.  Horse 

• 

• 

• 

Ghoro 

• 

GkOj*. 

69.  Cow  • 

• 

• 

Batfihl 

• 

Ga. 

70.  Dog  . 

• 

• 

• 

Kutar  . • . 

• 

i 

Kotar,  ( fern .)  kflter. 

71.  Cat  . 

• 

• 

• 

Bill  ( /.),  balSl  ( /.)  . 

• 

BalS,  (/«»!.)  bftlfti. 

72.  Cock  . 

• 

• 

• 

Kukkuy  . 

• 

Kftkkaf,  ( fem .)  kbkaif. 

73.  Duok 

• 

• 

• 

Batak 

• 

Ar. 

74.  A 68  • 

• 

• 

• 

Kh&tho,  khauthau  . 

• 

75.  Camel 

• 

• 

• 

Ot  . • • 

• 

fjtb. 

76.  Bird  . 

• 

• 

• 

Xwif  . • 

• 

1 

' PSkkhar. 

77.  Go  . 

• 

• 

• 

Gah  • • • 

• 

Gah. 

78.  Eat  * 

• 

t 

• 

KhS 

1 

• 

Kha. 

79.  Sit  . 

• 

• 

• 

i 

BiS 

B&S. 

i 

i 

> 

BhadrawShl— 91 7 


I 

English.  | 

! 

lihadrawalu. 

Padarl. 

80.  Come 

t?i  {-root  <5j) 

Aih. 

81.  Beat .... 

Kufc  .... 

K8t. 

82.  Stand 

Uth  .... 

Khar  bhfl. 

83.  Die  . 

; 

Mar  . . . • i 

Mar. 

84.  Give 

Du,  dah  .... 

Dei. 

85.  Hun 

Nn.4,  dauf 

Nas. 

i 

85.  Up  . . . j 

Bah  . . ~ . 

Bill,  baliynr*. 

87.  Near  . . . 1 

i 

No  re  ! 

N<V. 

j 

88.  Down  . . . ' 

i 

j 

Bunli  . . . . j 

Nai^d,  wond*. 

89.  Far  . . . j 

| 

i 

Dflr  .... 

Dflr. 

90.  Before 

i 

j Aggar,  agri 

! Agar. 

i 

91.  Behind 

Pattar,  pattri,  pattl  . 

i 

j Paitfar,  po:tr,  puittar. 

1 

92.  Who 

Kaun  .... 

Kanh. 

93.  What 

Kan  .... 

Kl. 

91.  Why 

Kujfi,  kl  . 

Kytfs. 

95.  And 

1'hiii,  bhirl.  our 

; To. 

90.  But 

Magar  . 

Tt 

97.  If. 

A gar  .... 

Dzai. 

* ^ 

„v 

ps.  Yus  . 

A.  ha  ... 

i 

A. 

; 

9'J.  No  .... 

i 

j Nahf,  n£?li 

1 Na,  nahf. 

10'».  Alas. 

! 

1 A parts  .... 

Hai  hai. 

]01.  A father  . 

j Bau  .... 

i 

i Bab. 

102.  Of  a father 

Baiie-ru  . 

: Babbar. 

j 

103.  Toafatlur 

Baurt-jrt  . 

i 

i 

B&hbas. 

jO  k From  a father  . 

| Baurt-si  . 

Babbal. 

105.  Two  fatherw 

Du l hau  . 

Dm  bab. 

10G.  Fathers 

Ban  . 

Bab. 

918 — Bhadrawalii. 


tinglish. 


Rhadrawabl. 


Padarl. 


i 

107.  Of  fathers 

BauS-keru 

Bab-kar. 

108.  To  fathers 

Bauan-jo 

Bah. 

109.  From  fathors 

Banan-sT 

Bab-kal. 

110.  A daughter 

Kill  .... 

Koi. 

111.  Of  a daughter 

KoI?-rn  .... 

K uiar. 

112.  To  a daughter  . 

K file-jo  .... 

Kfiias. 

113.  From  a daughter 

Kiiie-sl  .... 

Knial. 

114.  Two  daughters  . 

Dill  kiila  . . • 

Dili  kul. 

115.  Daughters 

Kms  .... 

Kill. 

116.  Of  daughters 

Kma-keru 

Kni-kar. 

\ 

117.  To  daughters 

Kula-jo  .... 

Kni. 

118.  From  daughters 

KulS-si  .... 

KOi-kal. 

110.  A good  man 

Ak  kliarfi  menu 

Yak  khara  m?ha^. 

120.  Of  a good  man  . 

Akl  khara  meno-ru  . 

Yak  khara  mOhanar. 

121.  To  a good  man  . . 

i 

j 

Akl  kliara  mene-jo  . 

Yak  kliara  moha^as. 

i 

122.  From  a good  man 

1 

Akl  khara  me  lie -si 

i 

Yak  khara  mfiha^al. 

123.  Two  good  men  • 

i 

i 

i Dni  khare  menu 

s 

; Dill  kliara  moha?. 

124.  Good  men 

i Khare  menu 

Kliara  mOh^i. 

125.  Of  good  men 

j Khare  men?-keru 

j Kliara  moha^-kar. 

i 

126.  To  good  men 

i 

i KliarO  iut*nC-  jfi 

Kliara  infill  an. 

j 

127.  From  good  men 

Khar?  men?- si 

1 

Khara  mfihan-kal. 

128.  A good  woman  . 

Ak  khaii  thli  - 

i 

i 

: Khari  ghifi$u, 

i 

129.  A bad  boy  * . 

Ak  burfl  inatthfl 

! Yatsar  kua. 

130.  Good  women  • 

Khai  i tlillS 

Kliarl  ghifln. 

131.  A bad  girl  • 

Ak  burl  kill 

Y a tsar  koi. 

132.  Good  • • 

Kliaru,  kharfl,  khara  u 

Khara. 

133.  Better  . • 

(Is-kara)  klmrfl 

(Tasal)  khara. 

BhadrawShI— 9 ID 


English. 

Bh&dra  wilii. 

I 

l 

i. 

Pitfart. 

134i  Best  • • 

. 

SObbhan-kara  kharo 

• 

I 

•! 

i 

Sobli-kal  kharS. 

135.  High 

Uchehfl  . 

• 

1 

1 

■ i 

1 

Adham*. 

136.  Higher 

(Is-kara)  uohohfi 

• 

(Tasal)  adham\ 

137.  Highest  • 

Sebbhan-kara  uchchfi 

• 

Sobh-kal  adham*. 

138.  A horse 

G ho  jo 

• 

• 

! 

GhOjS. 

139.  A mare 

Ghfljl 

• 

i 

• 

1 

GhOrl. 

140.  Horses 

GharS  . 

• 

1 

i 

Gbflr» 

141.  Mares  . . 

GhOfii 

• 

! 

• 

Ghflpl. 

142.  A.  bull 

Dint 

m 

) 

• 

| 

BadhOl. 

143.  A cow  • 

Batshl 

• 

1 

• 

Ga. 

144.  Balls 

Dant 

• 

• 1 

BadhOl. 

145.  Cows 

BfltahlS  . 

• 

i 

Gol. 

146.  A dog  • . 

Kutar  • 

• 

• 

Kotar. 

147.  A bitch  . 

Kutrl 

• 

s 

KOtOr. 

143.  Dogs 

Kutar 

• 

• 

Kotar. 

149.  Bitches  • 

1 

i 

Kotrli 

• 

• 

Koter. 

150.  A he  goat  . 

Tsli^rrt  . 

• 

• 

Bakra. 

151.  A female  goat  . 

'JVbailll  . 

• 

• 

Bakrl. 

152.  Goats  •_  • 

IbhOjO  . 

• 

• 

BakrO  (fern,  b(\lk0r). 

153.  A male  deer  • 

Harin 

• 

• 

154.  A female  deer  . 

Harm  . 

• 

• 

... ••• 

155.  Deer 

; 

Harin 

• 

. 



156.  1 am 

Au  SI 

• 

• 

Au  ban*,  fem.  bin1. 

157.  Thou  art  . 

Tn  is,  as 

• 

• 

Tu  hanB,  fem . hin*. 

158.  He  is  . • 

j Oh  ahO,  ai 

• 

• 

SO  ban*,  fem.  hin1. 

159.  We  are 

As  ahm  . 

• 

• 

As  han%  hins,  han%  fem . 
bin*. 

160.  You  are  . • 

• 

Tub  5hth,  ath  . 

• 

• 

Tus  ban1,  hin*,  tan*,  fern. 
hin*. 

920 — Bhadrawfihl. 

English. 

Bhadrnw&hl. 

Pa  dart. 

161.  They  are  . 

• • 

tJ?ha  ah?,  an  . 

• 

T5h?a  ban*,  hin",  han%  fem . 
hin‘. 

162.  I was 

• • 

Au  thw  (fern,  tbl) 

• 

Au  th6®,  fem . thl. 

163.  Thou  wast . 

• • 

Trt  thlfl  . 

Tu  thSa,  fem.  thl. 

164.  He  was 

• a 

Oh  thM  . 

• 

S8  thea,  fem.  thl. 

165.  We  were  • 

• . 

As  this  (fem.  thl) 

• 

As  th5?,  fem.  thl. 

166.  You  were  • 

• • 

Tus  this  . . . 

Tus  th5%  fem . thl. 

167.  They  were 

• . 

trnha  this 

■ 

Tali?a  th  <V,  fem.  till. 

168.  Be  . 

• • 

Bhfl  . . • . 

• 

Bhrt. 

169.  To  bo 

• 

Bhfinfi  . 

Bhfln. 

170.  Being 

• 

Bhauto  . 

Bhrtnua. 

171.  Having  been 

• 

Bhauta  . • 

• 

Bhui-kar. 

172.  1 may  be  . 

• 



; An. 

173.  I shall  be  . 

a • 

Au  bhiYIrt 

• 

AS. 

174.  I should  be 

- 

j 

175.  Beat 

• • 

Kut 

! K5t. 

170.  To  beat  • 

• 

Kut?ii 

i 

Kofcan. 

177.  Beating 

• 

Kuttrt 

Kotna. 

17S.  Having  beaten 

* 

Kutta  . . . 

Koit'-kar. 

179.  I beat 

• 

Au  kuttS 

Au 

l 

180.  Thou  beatest 

• • 

Tu  kuttii 

! 1 

Tii  S-  kotna,  fem.  ko*ml. 

! | 

181 . He  boats  . 

• 

Oh  kuttS  • . 

1 

So  j 

j 

182.  We  beat  . 

• • 

As  kuttam 

' As  1 

: j 

183.  You  beat  : 

• • 

Tus  kuttatb,  knttat  . 

Tus  }-k5tn&,  fem. 

1 

184.  They  beat . 

• 

tJ?ha  kutta?  . • 

j 1 

Tali?*1  J 

185.  I beat  {Past  Tense) 

j 

1 Ml  kuttfS,  kuttfl 

1 Mat 

i 1 

186.  Thou  beatest 
Tense ). 

( Past 

j Tal  kuttfi,  kuttfi 

i 

i ! 

Tai  ^kota,  fem.  ko?tl. 

! 

187.  He  beat  ( Past  Tense ) . 

I Uni  kuttfl 

t 

i 

, ' Tfiinl  J 

i 

1 

1 

VOL.  11»  PART  IV. 


BhadrawShI— 92 1 
6 D 


English. 


Bhadrawahl. 


P&darl. 


188.  We  beat  (Fast  Tense)  . 

189.  You  boat  ( Fast  Tense) 

I 

190.  They  beat  ( Past  Tense)\ 

191.  1 am  beating 

192.  I was  beating 

193.  T had  beaten 

194.  I may  beat 

195.  I shall  beat 
190.  Thou  wilt  beat  . 

197.  He  will  beat 

198.  We  shall  beat 

199.  You  will  beat 

200.  They  will  beat 

201.  I should  beat 

202.  I am  beaten 

203.  I was  beaten 

204.  I shall  be  beaten 

205.  I go  . 

206.  Thou  gocst  _ 

207.  He  £oes 
2QS.  We  go 

209.  You  go 

210.  They  go  . 

211.  I went 

212.  Thou  wen  test 

213.  He  went  . 

214.  We  went  . 


As«3f  kutto  • • 

TusOi  kutto 

Up<’i  kutto  . , • 

An  kuti^O  lagGrO  (or  larO) 
Au  kutto  tli  10  . 

Ml  kut- to  thlO  . 

Au  kuttau  , 

Au  kutalo,  kutlo 
To  kutalo,  kujlo 
Oh  kutalo,  kutlo 
As  kutmO,  kutmalO  . 
Tus  kutalo,  kutlS 
tJ^iha  kutalS,  kutlo  . 


. Au  kutto 
. Ail  kutto  thio 

i 

. Au  kutOlo 
. Au  gahta 

i 

. Tu  gahta 
. Oh  gahtO 
. 1 As  gahtam 

. j Tna  gahtath 

I 

• _ 

. ! Upha  gahtaQ 

A A#  ■ 

a jan  . 

. Tu  jau  . 

; Oh  jafi  . 

. As  j8 


'l 

I 

TusO  ^k5(a,  fem.  k5?tl. 


ai 


TaiflhS  J 
Au  kotna. 

Au  ktttnath,  fem.  kb^tnSth*. 


Au  kutal,  fem.  kfttal. 

Tflt  kfttal,  fem.  k5?t£l. 

S8  kotal,  fem.  k5?t£l. 

As  kutal,  fem.  kutal. 

Tus  k&tnal,  fem.  kutnST. 
T5h*m  kotnal,  fem.  kutafiT. 


Au  1 

T«  if 


Tfl  ^ghSna,  fem.  ghe'ai. 
S8  J 


As  1 


}-gh8n£,  fen t.  gh5'ni. 


Tus 
TSh*»  j 
Au  'j 

Tfl  »gS,  fem.  gil. 
86  J 


Ab,  gS8,  fem.  gSS. 


922 — BbadrawShi . 


English. 


Bhadrawahl. 


PudarT. 


215.  You  wont . . . j Tus  jo 

i 

216.  They  went  . . ! tJijdia  j3  . 

217.  Go  . . . . Gah 

•I 

218.  Going  . . . ; Gahto 


219.  Gouo 


220.  What  is  your  name  ? . 

221.  How  old  is  this  horse  ? 


222.  How  far  is  it  from  here 

to  Kashmir  P 

223.  How  many  sons  are 

there  in  your  father’s 
house  ? 

224.  I have  walked  a long 

way  to-day. 

225.  The  son  of  my  uncle  is 

married  to  liis  sister. 

226.  In  the  honso  is  the  sad- 

die  of  the  wlrto 
horse. 

227.  Put  the  saddle  upon 

his  back. 

22S.  I have  beaten  his  son 
Avith  many  stripes. 

229.  He  is  grazing  cattle  on 

the  top  of  the  hill. 

230.  He  is  sitting  on  a horse 

under  that  tree. 


Jflrrt 


T<3ro  nau  kui?  ai  ? 

fils  gliOre-ri  ketri  (or  ketll) 
u mr  ai  ? 

Kasinir  ittkii  kctrii  (or 
ketlfi)  dur  ai  ? 

Tero  bauc-ro  ghoro  ketio 
matthe  an  ? 

Az  an  dur  dur  haiiitta  aft. 

Merc  ekache-W'  mattko-ro 
bla  user  I baih^i-sehi  blifiO. 

Chit  to  ghfirtM*!  kathi  gliorg 

ahe. 

Tiscre  thligge  pur  kathi 
lath. 

Ml  userft  mottlifi  mast 
kuttfi . 

Oli  gfirti  photri  us  tibbl  pur 
tsarne  lagfirfi  ahe.  i 

Us  bate  both  oh  ghore  pur 
j bisfirrt  ai.  ! 


G a. 


Tau  na  ki  hau*  P 


Eh  gkorar  kat  bark  •ban’*  ? 
Irl  Kasmir  kat  ter i dilr  hainl  ? 


Tiujgi  babbar  kat  gobhar 
hiir*  P 

Adz  ail  barix  dural  aur  ban*. 

Minn  mat  bar  babbar  gei$- 
bhur  laser  bhenl  samet 
buah  kcor  hanft. 

Gih  ckheta  uliorar  kathi 
liin1. 

Taser  piftU  pur  kathi 
t share. 

Mai  tasar  koa  inata  kota. 


Se  pkat  pur  goi  te  bu'ker 
tsarua. 

Se  tas  bottr*  pad  ghure  pftr 
bithflr  kail*. 


231.  His  brother  is  taller 

than  his  sister. 

232.  The  price  of  that  is  two 

rupees  and  a half. 

233.  My  father  lives  in  that 

small  liouso. 

234.  Give  this  rupee  to  him. 

235.  Take  those  rupees  from 

him. 

236.  Beat  him  well  and  bind 

him  with  ropes. 

237.  Draw  water  from  the 

well. 

238.  Walk  before  me  . 


239.  Whose  boy  comes  be- 

hind you  P 

240.  From  whom  did  you 

buy  that  P 

241.  From  a shopkeeper  of 

the  village. 


Userrt  dlilti  apnl  baik^I-kara  Tasar  hhim  aniper  bhei^al 
lommA  ahe.  • bora  ban1. 

Users  mul  dkal  rupayyC  Tasar  mul  tlao  (f/im  ) rnpas 
ftp.  ' I 

Mr>rO  ban  us  nikrii  glibro  ! Minii  bab  tatb  matbay 
mil  l-Pbb5.  ' kuthi  amlar  linn*. 

lh  rupayyA  us-jfl  do  . • Tas  eh  rupaya  do!  bhafij* 

U plia  rupayye  tPs-kara  Tasal  rnpao  lei  adzni. 

this. 

Us  mast  kufc,  aur  s«5li-sl  Tas  maibn  koit'-kar  ralzflri 
banlul.  ‘ kldlaindhe. 

Khdlio  pa 91  kaddh  . . Klifihal  paaiv  kaddh. 


Ml  agrl  taal  . . Mai  agar  agar  h.ind. 


Kisorfi  mfittbu  tQI  pattl  Tiun  puittur  kasar  k.la 
HtS  ? " azna  ? 

Ta?  kas-kara  media  gbinorfi  So  kasal  uiullo  5na  ? 
tlilft  P 

PJau8-r6  hetrl-bSle-kara  . Tliawnr  halt  ottnli  ana. 


VOl.  IX,  VAST  IV. 


Bhadrawahl — 923 

0 u 2 


925. 


Gujuri. 


The  general  question  of  the  Gujars  and  their  language  has  been  dealt  with  at  length 
in  the  General  Introduction  to  the  Pahiirl  languages  (ante,  pp.  8 if.)  and  it  is  unneces- 
sary to  repeat  the  remarks  then  made. 

Suffice  it  to  say  here  that  while  the  Gujars  of  the  Pan  jab  plains  have  lost 
tlicir  language  and  adopted  that  of  their  neighbours,  those  of  the  hills  north  of  the 
Panjab,  who  arc  called  Gujurs — not  Gujars— speak  a language  closely  allied  to 
Rajasthani. 

Specimens  of  Gujuri  have  been  received  from  Hazara,  Swat,  and  Kashmir  and  are 
given  below.  The  usual  List  of  Words  and  Sentences  will  be  found  on  pp.  961  ff.  I 
have  also  given  short  specimens  of  the  mongrel  language  spoken  by  the  Gujars  of  the 
sub-montane  Districts  of  the  Panjab,  where  they  have  not  entirely  adopted  the  local 
language  of  their  neighbours. 

On  former  occasions  l have  drawn  attention  to  the  fact  that  Gujuri  is  little  more 
than  a dialect  of  Rajasthani,  and  I have  more  than  once  stated  that  its  closest  relation 
was  the  Mewarl  dialect  of  that  language.  Further  research  has  induced  me  somewhat 
to  modify  this  opinion.  One  of  two  things  is  quite  certain : — either  Gujuri  is  a form  of 
Rajasthani,  or,  conversely,  Rajasthani  is  a form  of  Gujuri,  and  the  resemblance  of 
Gujuri  to  Mo  way!  is  very  striking.  Rut  still  closer  is  the  resemblance  of  Gujuri  to  the 
Mewfiti  dialect  of  Rajasthani,  spoken  in  Alwar,  some  distance  to  the  north  of  Me  war, 
and  separated  from  that,  state  by  the  territory  of  Jaipur.1 

It  is  curious  that  Gujuri  agrees  with  both  Mewatl  and  with  Mewarl  much  more 
closely  than  with  the  intervening  Jaipuri.2  On  the  whole,  it  follows  Mewatl  very 
systematically,  only  differing  from  it,  and  agreeing  with  Mewarl  in  regard  to  one  or  two 
points  of  detail. 

As  compared  with  Mewatl  it  presents  a more  archaic  appearance,  preserving  many 
words  in  a stage  of  development  older  than  that  which  we  find  in  Mewatl. 

Mewatl  is  the  language  of  the  Meos,  a tribe  the  origin  of  which  has  been  much  dis- 
cussed by  ethnologists,  without  coming  to  any  satisfactory  result.  Possibly,  the  close 
connexion  between  their  language  and  Gujuri  may  offer  a elue  that  has  hitherto  been 
neglected. 

Putting  the  linguistic  position  of  Gujuri  in  its  broadest  terms,  we  may  say  that  it  is 
related  to  the  dialects  of  East  Central  Itajputana,  and  that  its  closest  relative  is  Mewatl. 
This  will  be  evident  from  the  following  more  detailed  analysis. 


As  regards  Vocabulary,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  speakers  of  Mewatl  and  the 


Gujuri  and  MSwatT. 


speakers  of  Gujuri  have  been  separated  for  centuries,  and 
that  each  has  freely  borrowed  words  from  its  respective 


neighbours.  Bxit,  .allowing  for  this  borrowing,  a reference  to  the  List  of  Words  and 


Sentences  will  show  a surprising  number  of  words  identical  in  form. 


1 Mewat  is  called  1 Guzarat,’  or  the  country  of  Gujars,  by  Al-Birfliu  (Sachau’s  translation,  I,  202 u 

2 For  instance,  Gujuri  has  nothin#  resembling  the  Jaipuri  verb  substantive  chhu,  I aui. 


926 


GUJURI. 


It  will  further  bo  noted  that  in  many  cases,  when  a word  is  common  to  the  two 
languages,  Gujuri  always  preserves  it  in  a form  more  archaic  than  that  found  in  Mswati. 
Thus : — 


GUJURl. 

MEWATI. 

tre,  three 

tin 

satt,  seven 

sat 

atth,  eight 

atli 

lw,  I 

mat  (< 

hatth,  a hand 

hat 

nakk,  the  nose 

ndk 

akkh,  the  eye 

akliya 

kann,  the  ear 

kdn 

agg,  fire 

«g 

nominative). 


In  all  these  the  Gujuri  forms  are  more  archaic  than  those  of  Mewati. 

The  Mewati  sat,  dth , hat,  etc.,  must  have  passed  through  the  forms  satt,  atth,  hatth , 
etc.,  before  becoming  fixed  as  wo  have  them  now.  In  the  Gujuri  tre,  an  r lias  been 
preserved  which  has  been  lost  in  Mewatl,  and  in  the  ease  of  the  word  for  *1’,  Mewati 
has  lost  the  old  nominative,  preserved  by  Gujuri,  and  has  substituted  the  oblique  form 
exactly  as  has  occurred  in  Standard  Hindustani. 

In  the  declension  of  nouns,  the  two  languages  closely  resemble  each  other,  as  will 
be  seen  from  the  following  examples.  It  is  only  in  the  feminine  plurals  that  there  are 


any  differences,  and  even  these  are  sli 

ght : — 

GU  I IT  Jtl. 

mEwati. 

Sing.  Nom. 

ghar,  a house 

ghar 

Obi. 

ghar 

ghar 

Plur.  Nom. 

gliar 

ghar 

Obi. 

ghar  a 

ghara 

Sing.  Nom. 

glided,  a horse 

glided 

Obi. 

glided 

glided 

Plur.  Nom. 

glided 

glided. 

Obi. 

glided 

ghdea 

Sing.  Nom. 

behn,  a sister 

bdhdn 

Obi. 

behn 

bah  an 

Plur.  Nom. 

behnS 

bdhdna 

Obi. 

behna 

bah  alia 

Sing.  Nom. 

ghbrt,  a mare 

glid  el 

01)1. 

ghee? 

glide? 

Plur.  Nom. 

ghbfi 

glideya^ 

Obi. 

ghdrla 

ghdryd 

INTRODUCTION. 


927 


The  postpositions  used  to  form  cases  are  practically  identical.  Thus : — 


GUJURI. 

mEwati. 

Agent 

ne 

nai 

Dut.-Acc. 

Ml 

nai 

Abl. 

te 

tat 

Gen. 

kd 

kd 

Loc. 

via 

mat 

In  both  dialects  the  genitive  postposition  is  an  adjectival  kd,  obi.  masc.  kd  ; fem.  Ar?. 
In  both,  when  agreeing  with  a postposition  or  noun  in  the  locative  masculine  it  becomes 
he.  In  Gujuri,  perhaps  under  the  influence  of  Panjabi,  the  feminine  ki  becomes  k% 
when  agreeing  with  a plural  feminine  noun.  This  is  not  the  case  in  M&wati. 

The  Personal  Pronouns  closely  resemble  each  other.  Note  the  form  tarn,  not  turn, 
for  you.  In  the  oblique  singular  of  l)otli  persons  and  in  the  nominative  singular  of  the 
first  person,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  Gujuri  forms  are  preserved  better  by  Mcwari  than 
by  Mewati. 

Personal  Pronouns. 


GUJURI. 

mewati. 

I.  Nom. 

hu 

mat  (Mewayi,  hu) 

Ag- 

me 

mat 

Obi. 

via 

mU  (Mcwari,  via) 

Gen. 

>n  era 

me  ru 

We. 

liam 

ham 

Ag. 

ham-ne 

ham 

Obi. 

ha  vi 

ham 

Gen. 

mhdro 

mhdro 

Thou. 

td 

td 

Ag. 

ti 

tat 

Obi. 

to 

tU  (Mcwari,  ta). 

Gen. 

terd 

tero 

You. 

tain 

tarn 

Ag. 

tam-ne 

tarn 

Old. 

tarn 

tarn 

Gen. 

(hard 

thdrd 

The  remaining  pronouns  are 

identical  in  the  plural,  but  exhibit  divergencies  in  the 

singular  oblique  forms.  Possibly,  the  Gujuri  singular 

oblique  forms  have  been  borrowed 

from  the  neighbouring  dialects  of  the  Indus  Koliistan' 

or  from  Paftjabi.  At  the  same 

time,  note  how,  in  the  nominative  singular,  both  Gujuri  and  Mewati  have  feminine  forms 

for  the  demonstrative  pronouns. 

GUJURI. 

MEWATI. 

This. 

yd  (f.  yd) 

yd  (f.  yd) 

Obi. 

is 

at,  alh 

These. 

ye 

Obi. 

in 

in 

J Cf.  MaiyS  fast,  the  oblique  form  of  $6h,  he. 


928 

OUJURl. 

OUJURl. 

mEwatL 

That. 

o,  oft  (f.  tea) 

wo,  woh  (f.  tea). 

Obi. 

us 

teat,  tcaih 

Those. 

toe 

we 

Obi. 

tin 

tm 

Who.  (sg.) 

jo 

jo 

Obi. 

jis 

jaift 

Who?  (sg.) 

kbit 

katttt 

Obi. 

kis 

hath 

Anyone. 

kbi 

kbi 

Obi. 

kise 

kali 

The  agreement  in  regard  to  the  Verb  Substantive  is  very  striking : — 

OUJURl. 

mEwatL 

I am 

ftU,  holt 

hft 

Thou  art 

ai , ft  at 

hai 

He  is 

at,  Aai 

ftai 

We  are 

fts 

hb 

You  are 

o,  lib 

ho 

They  arc 

at,  ft  at,  he 

hat 

Was  (m.  sg.) 

tftb 

tftb,  ho 

Was  (f.  sg.) 

thi 

thi,  hi 

Were  (m.  pi.) 

tlia 

tftd,  ha 

Were  (f.  pi.) 

thi 

thi,  hi 

Active  Verb. 

As  regards  the  active  verb  the  agreement  is  also 

striking.  Especially  noteworthy 

is  the  agreement  as  to 

the  formation  of  the  future  by  adding  go.  In  most  Rajasthani 

dialects  as  well  as  in  Western  Paharl,  the  typical  sign,  of  the  future  is  usually  Id,  or 

some  related  form,  not  go.  The  latter,  moreover,  does  not  occur  in  the  Western  PaKjab, 

though  Standard  Pafijabl 

has  ga. 

OUJURl. 

MEWATI. 

Strike  tliou 

mar 

mar 

Strike  ye 

video 

mdro 

I strike 

maru 

maru 

Thou  strikest 

mare 

marai 

He  strikes 

mare 

mdrai 

We  strike 

mar  a 

mar  a 

You  strike 

mdro 

mdro 

They  strike 

mar 8 

mdrai 

These  two  tenses  are  much  the  same  in  all  Indo- Aryan  languages,  but  in  both  the 
above  we  have  the  typical  Rajasthani  first  person  plural  in  a. 

In  both  Gujurx  and  Mewat!  the  future  is  formed  as  in  Hindi  by  suffixing  go  (pi. 
ga,  f.  gi)  to  the  present.  Thus,  mdrugb , I shall  strike. 


INTBODUGTION. 


929 


The  other  parts  of  the  verb  are  similarly  parallel.  Thus  : — 


GUJURI. 

MEWATI. 

Infinitive 

marnu 

mar°nu 

Present  Part. 

mar  to 

mar'1  to 

Past  Participle 

mured 

mdryd 

Conjunctive  Part. 

mar 

- mdr 

The  Definite  present  is  formed  in  both  by  adding  the  verb  substantive  to  the  simple 
present,  and  not  to  the  present  participle.  Thus  mdrU-hu,  I am  striking. 

The  Past  tenses  are  as  usual  formed  from  the  Past  Participle,  which,  in  the  case  of 
transitive  verbs,  is  construed  passively. 

From  the  above  it  will  be  seen  that  Gujuri  Grammar  is  practically  the  same  as  that 
of  Mewati.  In  order  to  afford  an  opportunity  for  comparing  the  vocabularies,  in  the 
usual  List  of  Gujuri  Words  and  Sentences  given  below  on  pp.  96i  If.  the  corresponding 
Mewati  words  are  given  in  the  first  column. 

We  now  proceed  to  consider  the  Grammar  of  Gujuri  alone,  in  greater  detail. 


930 


GUJURT  OF  HAZARA. 

The  following  are  specimens  of  the  Gujurl  spoken  in  Hazara  and  in  the  Galis  of  the 
Murrce  Hills.  I am  indebted  for  them  to  the  Rev.  T.  Grahame  Bailey,  and  it  is  hardly 
necessary  to  say  that  coming  from^uch  a source  their  accuracy  may  be  fully  accepted. 

The  accompanying  grammatical  sketch  is  based  partly  on  the  specimens  and  partly 
on  the  Gujuri  Grammar  published  by  Mr.  Bailey  in  his  Studies  in  Noi'them  Himalayan 
Dialects  (Calcutta,  1903),  subsequently  re-issued  by  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  in  his 
Languages  of  the  Northern  Himalayas  (London)  1908. 

DECLENSION.  —The  following  table  shows  the  declension  of  the  various  classes 
of  nouns : — 


Sing. 

Plur. 

Nom. 

Obi. 

i 

Nom. 

Obi. 

ghdrd , a horse  . 

i 

. . j ghora 

(jlidfa 

ghfira 

bapp , a father  . 

\ 

. | bapp 

Lapp 

bdppd 

adml , a man 

. . j adml 

adml 

(1dm  fS 

bakrf , a troafc  j 

. . bakrl 

bakrl 

bakrta 

trhnt,  a woman  . 

, . trimt 

i 

trimtS 

(rtrnfa 

Irregular  are — dhl,  a daughter,  nom.  plur.  dhiS ; and  ga,  a cow,  nom.  plur.  ga. 

The  postpositions  are  : — 

Agent  ne 

Acc.  dat.  na,  ke 

Abl.  te,  (a,  t§ 

Gen.  kd 

.Loc.  rna,  in ; hiclich , in  ; tdrE,  up  to 

There  docs  not  seem  to  be  any  locative  or  agent  case  formed  by  adding  e,  such  as 
we  find  in  Western  Paliarl,  but  on  the  other  hand,  an  ablative  is  formed  by  adding  <?,  as 
in  durd,  from  far. 

The  genitive  postposition  led  (kd,  led;  ki,  kt)  is,  as  usual,  an  adjective.  When 
agreeing  with  a masculine  noun  in  the  oblique  singular,  or  in  the  nominative  plural  it 
becomes  kd,  when  it  agrees  with  a masculine  noun  in  the  oblique  plural  it  becomes  ka, 
when  agreeing  with  a singular  feminine  noun  it  becomes  ki,  and  when  agreeing  with 
a feminine  plural  noun  it  becomes  kt.  When,  however,  it  is  governed  by  certain  post- 
positions, it  becomes  ke,  as  in  ghofa-ke  nd\,  with  the  horse;  ghord-ke  waste , for 
the  horse ; ghord-ke  ujopur,  above  the  horse.  Ke  is  also  used  as  a postposition  of  the 
dative. 

Adjectives  in  O follow  in  their  declension  the  model  of  the  genitive.  Thus,  chango, 
good,  becomes  changd , changa,  changi,  changt ; as  kd  becomes  kd,  ka,  ki  and  kf. 


GUJUKI  OF  HAZARA. 


931 


Comparison  is  made  with  the  ablative,  as  usual.  Tims,  behn-te  bard,  taller  than  the 
sister;  sdra-te  chango,  best  of  all,  bost.  We  have  also  much  chango,  very  good,  i.e. 
more  good,  and  chahga-te  chango,  better  than  good,  the  best. 

The  first  ten  numerals  are  givon  in  the  List  of  Words.  The  word  e/e,  one,  when  used 
as  an  indefinite  article  has  an  oblique  form  ekun. 

PRONOUNS. — The  Pronouns  of  the  First  and  Second  Persons  are  thus 


declined : — 

I 

Thou 

Sing. 

Nom. 

It if 

ts 

Agent 

me 

tS 

Obi. 

ma 

ta 

Gen. 

met'd 

tero 

Plur. 

Nom. 

ham 

lam 

Agent 

ham-ne 

tam-ne 

Obi. 

ham 

turn 

Gen. 

mlt  dr 0 

tharb 

The  Demonstrative  Pronouns  are 

thus  declined : — 

This 

That 

Sing. 

Nom. 

yd  (fern,  yd) 

d,  oh  (fem, 

Ag. 

is-ne 

ns- tie 

Obi. 

is 

vs 

Gen. 

is-ko 

us-ko 

Plur. 

Nom. 

ye 

we 

Ag. 

inhe 

unite 

Obi. 

inha 

tiuha 

Gen. 

in-kd 

tin-kd 

The  only  form  of  the  Reflexive  Pronoun  which  has  been  noted  is  the  genitive 
ajypd,  as  in  mana  apna  mazura  je/id  band , make  me  like  one  of  thy  servants. 

The  Relative  Pronoun  i sjo,  who,  obi.  sing.  jis.  No  instance  of  the  Correlative 
8d  (obi.  tie)  has  been  noted. 

Another  form  of  tho  relative  pronoun,  used  principally  as  an  adjective,  is 
jehfd.  It  is  borrowed  from  Lahnda. 

The  Interrogative  Pronouns  are  kdn  or  kaun,  who?  and  (neuter)  he,  what? 
The  oblique  singular  of  kbit  is  kis.  Corresponding  to  jehro,  there  is  also  the  adjectival 
kehfd. 

‘Anyone’,  ‘someone’,  is  km,  obi.  kise.  No  form  for  ‘anything’,  ‘something’  has 
been  noted. 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


6 0 -1 


932 


GUJURI. 


VERBS. — A-— Auxiliary  Verbs  and  Verbs  Substantive. 

The  Present  is : — 


Sing. 

1.  libit,  lift,  k9 

2.  hoe,  hai,  ai 

3.  hoe,  hai,  ai 


Plur. 

hoa,  ha 

hob,  ho,  o 
hoe,  hat,  at,  he 


The  Past  is  thb,  plur.  ilia  ; fem.  thl,  plur.  thi.  It  does  not  change  for  person. 

B— Active  Verb. 

The  Infinitive  is  formed  by  adding  n§  to  the  root,  as  in  hot. id,  to  become.  If  the 
root  ends  in  r then  nb  is  used  instead  of  nb,  as  in  mdrnb,  to  strike. 

An  oblique  infinitive  is  formed  by  changing  no  ( nb ) to  an  (an),  tin  (un),  or  bn  (bn). 
Thus  chdritn  de-chaldyb,  lie  sent  him  to  feed  (swine)  ; put  kOhon  jogo,  worthy  to  be 
called  a son;  naclichan-kb  wdz,  the  sound  of  dancing;  pakrun-ke  waste,  for  seizing 
(Specimen  III).  If  the  root  ends  in  a vowel,  there  are  slight  irregularities,  as  in  hit-geo 
Ichaun-na,  he  was  accustomed  to  eat  (Specimen  III).  This  oblique  form  is  common  in 
inceptive  compounds,  as  in  lion  laggo,  he  began  to  be  (in  want)  ; kehon  laggo , he  began 
to  say  ; kantn  laggd,  they  began  to  make  (rejoicing). 

Tiie  Present  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  to  to  the  root,  as  in  mar  to,  striking. 
Jdnnb , to  go,  makes  jit  to. 

The  Past  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  Ob  to  the  root,  as  in  nut  re  o , fem.  mart, 
8 truck.  Hoots  ending  in  a,  add  go,  as  in  klidyb,  eaten  ; uddyo , caused  to  fly.  Irregular 
are : — 


anno,  to  come 

Past  Part. 

dyb 

hbno,  to  become 

55 

hub  or  ho 

lend,  to  take 

95 

llyb 

karnb,  to  do 

9 5 

lr,yb 

(lend,  to  give 

JJ 

ditto 

jdnnb,  to  go 

95 

geb,  gOb 

paunb,  to  fall 

95 

peb 

kalinb,  to  say 

55 

keho 

rOhnb,  to  remain 

55 

rehb 

Note  that  kOlib  is  for  lcahib.~  The  i has  been  transferred  to  the  preceding  syllable 
and  kaihb  has  become  keho.  This  is  an  instance  of  the  epenthesis  common  in  the 
Pi£aeha  languages  spoken  in  the  country  north  of  Hazara. 

The  termination  Ob  of  this  participle  is  often  contracted  to  e,  so  that  we  have  mare 
instead  of  mitrOb. 

Also,  marco  is  often  written  mdryo. 

The  Conjunctive  Participle  is  formed  by  adding  ke  to  the  root,  as  in  mdir-ke, 
having  struck  hut  the  ke  is  dropped  in  Intensive  compounds,  as  in  : — 

kar  chhurOb,  he  did  completely 
kbit  chhurOb,  he  slaughtered 
tie  chhurOb,  he  gave 


GUJUBt  OF  HAZARA. 


933 


kltd  chliufi,  he  devoured  (a  goat,  fcm.)  (Sp.  III). 

band  ditto,  he  divided. 

nos  geo,  ho  ran  away.  (Sp.  II). 


The  verb  chhurno  means  to  let  go,  as  in  us- no  na  chhufeo,  he  did  not  let  it  go 
(Sp.  II),  but  in  these  compounds,  it  gives  a slightly  intensive  force. 

Some  verbs  make  their  conjunctive  participles  irregularly.  Thus  from  paund,  to 
fall,  we  have  pai  geo,  (a  famine)  fell. 

The  Noun  of  Agency  is  formed  by  adding  hold  to  the  oblique  infinitive  as  in 
rehon-hdld,  an  inhabitant. 

The  Imperative  has.  its  2nd  person  singular  the  same  in  form  as  the  root,  while 
the  plural  adds  d.  Thus  mar,  strike  thou ; rndrd,  strike  ye. 

The  Old  Present  and  Present  Subjunctive  is  conjugated  as  follows 


Sing. 

1 . mdru 

2.  more 

3.  more 


I strike,  1 may  strike,  etc. 

Plur. 
mar  a 
mdro 

mat'd 


Verbs  whose  roots  end  in  long  d,  drop  the  d in  the  first  person  plural,  as  in  khd 
(for  khda),  let  us  eat ; so  from  jdund,  to  go,  we  have  ja. 

The  Future  is  formed  by  adding  go  to  the  Old  Present.  Thus : — 


Mnsi\ 

1.  ' )iuiruyo 

2.  mareyO 

3.  mdregd 


I shall  strike,  etc. 

I 

Si  NO.  i 1'LFB. 


j 

I'Ym . j 

Masc.  j 

| 

I'Vm 

mdrdgi 

j 

Tidragd 

mdrdgi 

! 

marr-gi 

• mdrdgd 

i 

: 

mdrdgi 

mdrdgi 

i 

j ttidreyd 

•mdrdgi 

It  will  bo  seen  that  the  go  changes  for  gender  and  number. 

The  Present  Definite  is  formed  by  conjugating  the  present  tense  of  the  verb 
Substantive  with  the  Old  Present.  Thus  hu  tndru  hdu,  I am  striking. 

Similarly  the  Imperfect  is  formed  by  conjugating  the  Old  Present  with  the  past 
tense  of  the  Verb  Substantive,  as  in  hu  mdru  thd,  I (masc.)  was  striking;  so,  oh  chdhe 
tho,  he  was  wishing  (to  cat  busks)  ; kdl  tts-tio  nih  dee  thd , no  ono  was  giving  to  him ; 
jehri  Hlri  zanaur  khdd  thd,  tho  husks  which  the  swine  were  eating. 

The  Past  Conditional)  as  usual,  is  simply  the  present  participle,  as  in  hu  mdrtd, 
(if)  I had  struck,  I should  have  struck  (if). 


934 


GUJURl. 


'I  he  tenses  formed  from  the  Past  Participle  are  as  usual,  except  that  intransitive 
verbs  nasalize  the  final  6 of  the  participle  in  the  first  person  singular  only.  Thus : — 
hii  ged,  I went ; oh  geo , he  went. 
mi  mured,  I struck  him. 

hU  ged  hou,  I have  gone ; oh  geo  ai,  he  has  gone. 
mi  mdreo  (or,  contracted,  mare)  ai,  I have  struck  him. 
hfi  ged  tho,  I had  gono ; oh  geo  tho,  he  had  gone. 
mi  mdreo  (or  mare)  tho,  I had  struck  him. 

The  Passive  Voice  is  formed  with  jdund,  to  go,  and  tho  past  participle  as  usual, 
as  in  hu  mdreo  (or  mare)  jaUgd , I shall  he  beaten. 

Causal  Verbs  are  mado  much  as  usual.  We  can  quote  instances  such,  as  chaldnd, 
to  cause  to  go,  and  charnd , to  graze  (animals). 


935 


[ No.  I.] 

INDO ARYAN  FAMILY. 

(iUJURl. 

Specimen  I. 


Central  Group. 


The  Rev.  T.  Grahame  Bailey , 

Ji.D. 

East  Hazara. 

Bkun-admi-ka  dO  put 

tba. 

Te 

nikka-ne  apna-bapp-na 

kOhO, 

One-man-of  two  sons 

were. 

And 

little-by  his-father-to  it- 

wassaid, 

* ai  baji,  tera-mal-kO 

merO 

bissO 

Ob 

mana  do.’  Te 

us-ne 

*0  father,  thy- property -of 

my 

share 

that 

to-me  give*  And 

him-by 

apno  mal  unha-bicbch 

baud-ditto. 

Te 

tbOra-diharE-picheblie 

nikka- 

his  property  them-among  was-dicided.  And  few-days-after 
put-ne  sab  katthO  kar-ditto,  te,  dur-milkh-bichch  chale-geO, 
son-hy  all 


little- 

te 

together  icas-made,  and  far-country-in  he-went-away , and 

us-ja  us-ne  apnO  msil  luohpuuS-mS  kharab  kar-chhureO. 

(in-)  that-place  him-by  his  properly  debaucheries-in  bad  was- made- completely. 

Jis-bele  sarO  kbareb  kar-chhureO,  us-milkh-biehch  dahdo  kaht 

At-ichat-time  all  spent  was-viade-completely,  that-country-in  hard  famine 
Ob  tang  bon  laggo,  te  us-milkh-ka  kise-rehOnhala- 

he  straitened  to-be  began,  and  that-country-of  some-dweller- 


pai-geo, 

fell. 


te 

and 


kol 

rali-geO. 

Us-ne 

us-na 

near 

he-stayed. 

Him-by 

him-as-for 

Jehrl 

SilrT 

zanaur  kliae-tha, 

What 

husks 

the- pigs 

eating-were, 

apno 

dliiddb 

bliaru/ 

te  kol 

my-own  belly 

may-fill,  and  anyone 

hO§-bichch  ayo 
sense-in  he-camc , 

mazur  he  jehra 
labourers  are  who 


apna-dil-na  kehOn  laggo, 

his-hearl-to  to-say  hc-begau, 

raj-kf*  rotl 

become-satisfied-haoing  bread 


is-ja  bbnkkhO  mnrn-he. 

(in-)  this-place  hungry  dying-am. 
te  us-na  kaliSgo,  “ baji, 

and  him-to  1-will-say,  “ O-fathcr,  hy-me 
tero  j tero  put  kehOn.  jogo  nib 

of -thee ; thy  son  to-say  worthy  not 

i§ba  bana”  ’ Te  c-haleo,  te  apna-bapp-kOl  ayo. 

like  make •’*  * And  he-went,  and  his-father-near  came 


apnl  zimi  zanaur  cliarun  de-ehalayo. 

his  laud  pigs  to-graze  he-icas-sent. 

Ob  chabe-thO  ki,  * inbS-nal  h5 
he  wishing -teas  that,  * these-wilh  I 
us-na  nth  dee-tbO.  Jis-bele 

him-to  not  gicing-was.  At-what-time 

‘mera-bapp-ka  kitna 

'‘my -father -of  how-man  y 

kbae,  te  bu  peO 

eat,  and  I fallen 

tin  utli-ke  apna-bapp-kOle  clialugO, 
I rise  n-h  a ring  my-father-near  will-go, 

mO  gbunab  kiO  Kbuda-kO  te 

sin  was-done  God-of  and 
rebo ; mana  apnS-mazura 

I- remained ; me  thy-labonrers 

Iclicbur  Oh  dur 

While  he  far 


936 


GTTJURl. 


0 


tlio,  us-ka  bapp-n5  us-na  lior&j,  te  us-na  rehm  ayo,  t8 

was,  his  father -by  him-as-for  he- whs- seen,  and  him-to  pity  came,  and 

dauf-ke  galh-nal  la-llyo,  te  piyar  ditto.  Put-ne 

run-having  neck-to  he-was-pressed,  and  love  was-given.  The-son-by 

bapp-na  keho,  *baji,  m<5  ghunah  kio  Khuda-ko  te 

the-father-to  it-was-said,  * 0 -father  by -me  sin  was-done  Ood-of  and 

tero ; tero  put  kehon  jogo  nth  reh<l’  Bapp-ne  nokara- 

of-thee ; thy  son  to-say  icorthy  not  I-remained.'  The-father-by  ihe-servants- 

na  keho,  * belo  ohaiigli  to  changft  kapro  le-ao,  te 

to  it-was-said,  ‘ quickly  good  than  good  garment  bring,  and 
us-ka  galk  luao ; te  us-kl  augli-nal  ahguthl  luao,  te  us-ka 

his  (on-)  neck  put ; and  his  finger-on  ring  put,  and  liis 
pair-nal  cbliittur  luao,  te  paleo-ho  baclichlio  loa-ke  kohb,  te 

foot-on  shoe  put,  and  the-kept  calf  brought-having  kill,  and 

khS  te  kbusljl  kava,  ki  mero  yo  put  mar-gco-tho, 

we-may-eat  and  happiness  we-may-make,  for  my  this  son  died-had, 
huu  ji-geo ; te  gum-geo-tko,  huu  tha-geo.’  Te  we  kkushi 

now  lived ; and  lost-was,  now  found -is.'  And  they  happiness 

karun  lagga. 
to-niake  began . * 

Us-ko  baro  put  zimT-biclich  tliO.  Jis-bele  gliar-ke  no  re  ayo 

His  big  son  land-in  was.  At-what-time  housc-of  near  he-camc 

biija-ko  te  nachchan-ko  waz  suneo.  Fir  ekun-nokar- 

musical-instrument-of  and  dancing-of  voice  xcas-heard.  Then  one-servant 

na  bula-ke  puchclibeo,  * ye  ke  gal  hbS  ? * Te 

(acc.)  called-havitig  it-was-askcd , * these  what  things  are  ?’  And 


us-ne  us-na 

keho, 

1 tero 

lihai 

a-geo, 

te  tera 

bapp-ne 

him-by  him-to 

it-was-said. 

* thy  brother 

came, 

and  thy 

fatlier-by 

bachchho  paleo-ho 

koh-chhureo, 

ki 

us-na  chango-bhalo 

calf 

kept 

killed-complctely, 

because 

hint  (aee.) 

well 

tha-geo.’ 

Te 

oh  khafe 

liuo, 

te 

andar 

nth  jae-tlio. 

Te 

was-found.' 

And 

he  angry 

became, 

and 

■in 

not  going-xoas. 

And 

us-ko  bapp 

hire 

geo,  te 

us-ka 

bara 

tarla 

kia. 

Us-ne 

his  father 

out 

went,  and 

his 

great 

petitions  were-made. 

Him-by 

apna-bapp-na  zawab  de-chliureo,  * itna-sama  me  teri  khizamt 

his-own-father-io  answer  was-given-completely,  * so-long-time  by -me  thy  service 

ki  te  kade  teri  gal  nt  morl,  te  t?  kadc  man  a 

was-done  and  ever  thy  word  not  was-turned , and  by-thee  ever  to-nie 

bakro  nth  ditto,  vH  apna-dostS-yarS-n&l  kbushl 

a- goat  not  was-given . that  my-own-friends-companions-with  happiness 


GUJl'Kt  OP  HAZARA. 


937 


karu.  »Tis-belc  tero  yo  put  ayo  jis-ne  tero  saro 

I -may -make.  At-what-time  thy  this  son  came , ichont-by  thy  all 

mill  kanjriS  bicbcb  utlayo,  to  is-ke-waste  paleo-ho  baebcblio 

property  harlots  among  was- squandered,  by-thee  him-of-for  (he- kept  calf 

kob-ditto.’  Te  us-no  us-na  kelio,  * put  a to  bamesb  mere 

toas-killed.’  And  him-by  him-to  it-icas-said , ‘ O-son  thou  alicays  me 

na(  ralie ; jitno  mcru  mat  bai,  tero  bai.  Khushl 

near  reniainest ; what-much  my  property  is,  thine  is.  Happiness 
honi  te  khnsb  liono  ehangl  gal  thl ; tero  yo  bbfu 

to-be  and  happy  to-be  good  matter  teas;  thy  this  brother 

mar-geo-tbo,  him  ji-geo ; te  gum-geO-tho,  lmn.  thu-goo.* 

died-had,  now  lived;  and  ..  lost-was,  now  found -is* 


VOt.  IX,  PART  IV. 


[ No.  2.] 

1NDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


938 


Central  Group. 

GUJTJBI. 

Specimen  II. 

The  Rev,  T.  Graham e Bailey,  B.T>.  East  Hazara, 

IlS  ajjur-ke-nal  tho ; nikra  biita-ke  uppur  charlieO  khalo  tho ; 

I flock-of-near  teas;  little  tree-of  ' on  climbed  standing  was, 

bakro  dankeo.  lln  daur-ke  lattlio ; richchh  tana  ban-bichch 

a-goat  cried-in-pain.  T rnn-liaving  descended ; a-hear  down  , forest-in 

lei-chaleo-thb.  IlS  pauoh&§,  kandh-bichch  gatti  marl ; us-no  na 

taken-away-had.  I arrived , back-in  stone  was-struck ; him-by  not 

chlmreo.  BhI  duji  gatti  marl  gata*biclich,  fir  chhbf-kc 

was-left.  Then  another  stone  was-struck  neck-in , then  left-having 

nas-geo.  Jit  satteo  bakro  us-ja  liS  ja-ke 

he-ran-away.  Where  icas-thrown  the-goat  (to-)  that-placc  I gone-having 

kbato-huo,  te  mere-dar  daur-kc  bhi  richchh  a-gco.  Ml 

stood,  and  in-my- direction  run-having  again  the-bear  came.  JBy-me 

nikrl-jehi  kuhari  mari  us-kc.  Patto  nlh  laggo  je  kuhari  ns-ke 

adittleish  axe  was-struck  him-to.  Trace  not  teas  if  axe  him-to 

laggi-hai  ya  nlh  laggi.  Pir  bakro  cha-ke  nas-geo,  lir 

hit -is  or  not  was-hit.  Then  goat  lifted-having  I-ran-aicay,  then 

koheo  us-na.  Koh  rebo  te  bhi  a-g&>  merc-dar. 

it-was-killed  it-as-for.  Killing  I- remained  and  again  he-came  in-my-direction. 
Mero  dujo  safiji  pauch-ayo.  Pir  ham-ne  doa-ne  gatti  marl, 

My  other  companion  arrived.  Then  us-by  two-by  stone  was-struck, 

te  oh  nas-geo. 

and  he  ran-away. 

FREE  TRANSLATION  OF  THE  FOREGOING. 

I had  climbed  up  a little  tree  near  my  flock,  when  a goat  cried  out.  I ran  down. 
A bear  had  taken  it  away  down  the  forest.  As  I came  up  I struck  him  on  tho  back 
with  a stone,  but  he  did  not  let  go  the  goat.  Then  I struck  him  on  the  neck  with 
another  stone,  and  ho  dropped  the  goat,  and  ran  away.  I went  to  where  he  had  dropped 
the  goat,  and  was  standing  there  wl.en  the  bear  came  back  and  ran  at  me.  I bit  at  him 


GUJU1U  or  HAZAltA. 


939 


■with  a little  axe  I had  by  me,  but  I do  not  know  whether  the  axe  actually  touched 
him  or  not.  I then  lifted  up  the  goat  and  ran  oil  with  it ; and  then  I slaughtered  it 
(for  food).  While  I was  engaged  in  slaughtering  it,  the  bear  again  came  running 
towards  me.  My  feilow-shepherd  then  came,  and  we  both  stoned  him  till  he  ran  away. 


vol.  ix,  part  iv. 


6 d 2 


940 


f No.  3.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group. 


GTJJURl. 


Specimen  III. 


The  Rev.  T.  Grahame  Bailey , B.D. 


Hu  nikro 
1 little 
kha-chlmrlf. 

eaten- were. 

mahg-kf* 
a. iked- having 

chhal-dittl, 
icas-placed, 
hichch 

in 


plias-gel 

stuck 

a 


tlib,  sih  hil-geb  bakri  kliaun-na.  Satt 

was,  a -leopard  nsed-was  goat  eat-to.  Seven 

Ekun-zimldar-kl  lului-ki  bani-hiil  khurakki 
One-landowner -of  iron-qf  made  trap 

an!  sih-ka  pakrun  -ke- waste. 

it-was-brought  leopard-of  catching-for. 

iua  bakrb  bannh-dittb.  Sih 

on-one-side  goat  was-tied.  Leopard 

laggb  dankun. 

he-began  to-cry-in-pain. 


East  Hazara. 

bakrf  us-ne 
goats  lxim-by 


thi. 

teas. 


Wa 

It 


ayo,  jang 
came,  leg 
Ose-bele  bam 

At-that-vervtime  we 


Wa 

It 

rah-mS 

way-in 

us-ki 


gira-na. 


gea 

went  rill  age- to. 
£kun-lambardar-ne 
One-headman-by 
nmn-kb  tbb 
maunds-of  was 
okun-jaglrdar-nc 
on  e- proper t y-h  older -by 
ditti. 

given- was. 


Kehb,  ‘ sib  pakrb-geb-ai.’ 

It-toas-said,  ‘ leopard  has-been-caught 
bandiik  mari,  sih  mar-geb. 

gun  Jired-was,  leopard  died. 
bharb.  Atth  jana  . cha-kf* 
heavy.  Light  men  lifted-haoing 

eha-lei,  te  liam-na  trl 

taken-vsas,  and  us-to  thirty 


rat 

at- night 

Ghana  jana  aya. 
3 fatiy  men  came. 
Do  adai 

Two  two-and-a-half 


le-gea-tha. 

took-away. 

rupayya. 

rupees 


Khalrl 

Skin 

bakhshish 

reward 


FREE  TRANSLATION  OF  THE  FOREGOING. 

When  I was  a boy,  a leopard  used  to  eat  our  goats.  Seven  goats  were  devoured 
by  him.  A farmer  had  an  iron  trap.  We  borrowed  it,  and  took  it  away  to  catcb  the 
leopard.  We  set  it  on  his  path,  and  tied  a goat  alongside  it.  The  leopard  came,  and 
it  was  caught  by  the  leg,  so  that  he  began  to  roar  in  pain.  We  went  at  once,  that 
very  night,  to  the  village,  and  gave  nows  that  the  leopard  had  been  caught.  A great 
crowd  assembled  One  village  head-man  shot  the  leopard  dead  with  a gun.  It  weighed 
100  or  200  pounds,  and  .t  took  eight  men  to  lift  him  and  carry  him  off.  A landlord 
took  the  skin,  and  gave  us  thirty  rupees  as  a reward. 


941 


GUJURI  OF  SWAT. 

The  Gujuri  of  Swat  has  two  sub-dialects,  Gujuri  and  Ajri.  Ajri  is  the  language 
of  the  Ajars,  a tribe  closely  allied  to  the  Gujurs,  and  inhabiting  some  six  hundred 
hamlets  in  the  Swat  Valley.  Both  Gujurs  and  Ajars  arc  here  Musa! mans.  The  main 
difference  between  them  is  that  Gujurs  tend  cows,  and  Ajars  sheep.  They  arc  all 
bilingual,  speaking  Gujuri  or  Ajri  amongst  themselves,  but  Pushto  to  their  neighbours, 
Hindu  or  Pathan.  It  is  an  interesting  fact  that  one  of  the  septs  both  with  the  Gujurs 
and  with  the  Ajars  is  called  Chauhan  which  is  the  name  of  the  It  a j put  tribe  which 
speaks  Mewari. 

We  shall  first  deal  with  Gujuri  proper,  the  dialect  of  the  Gujurs.  These  cowherds 
wander  through  the  Yusufzai  country  on  the.  North-West  Prontier  south  of  Swat,  and 
their  language  is  often  differentiated  as  ‘ Yusufzai  Gujuri.’  As  may  be  expected,  these 
Gujurs  frequently  make  use  of  Pushto  words  and  phrases,  but  their  language,  like  that 
of  other  Gujurs,  is  closely  allied  to  Mewati  and  Mewari. 

The  following  grammatical  sketch  illustrates  the  grammar  used  by  these  Gujurs 
in  its  pure  form  ; but  many  deflections  from  rule  will  he  noticed  in  the  specimens, 
due  to  the  influence  of  the  neighbouring  Pushto  and  Western  Panjabi  languages. 
These  I shall  notice  subsequently. 


YtfSUFZAI  GUJUEl  SKELETON  GEAMMAE. 


942 


GUJURI 


^3 


Do  not  chanee. 


YtfsUFZAI  GUJURI  AND  ajrI.  943 

The  iolloAving  points  may  he  noted  in  regard  to  the  grammar  of  tho  specimens 

I.— NOUNS. 

The  Agent  case  is  generally  the  same  as  the  Nominative.  Indeed  the  use  of  the 
Agent  with  the  Past  tense  of  a Transitive  verb  seems  to  have  almost  disappeared. 

In  the  case  of  nouns  in  o,  the  oblique  form  singular  usually  ends  in  d,  but  some- 
times, probably  owing  to  careless  speaking,  the  direct  form  is  used ; thus,  ghdrd-ko,  of 
a horse,  instead  of  the  more  correct  ghdrd-ko  ,*  viandd  (for  mandd)  kam-md  } mail'd  bdp- 
Jed,  for  maim  bap-kd.  Sometimes,  under  the  influence  of  PaKjabi,  the  oblique  form 
ends  in  e.  Thus,  when  the  younger  son  speaks  to  his  father,  the  narrative  says,  correctly, 
apvd  bdp-tah  kahid  ; but  when  the  elder  son  answers  his  father,  the  PaKjabl  idiom,  apne 
bap- 1 ah,  is  incorrectly  used.  / 

On  the  other  hand,  tho  influence  of  Panjabi  sometimes  makes  these  nouns  form  the 
direct  form  in  d instead  of  in  d.  Tlius,  ns-kd  (Cor  us-ko)  bard  put  patti  via  thd. 

Amongst  the  postpositions  may  be  mentioned  ma,  in ; kanah , with.  The  post- 
positions tah  and  noli  are  borroAved  from  Pushto.  They  are  used  indiscriminately  to 
mean  both  * to  ’ and  ‘ from.’  Thus,  ithdr-tah  d-jd,  come  to  this  place,  and  ithdr-tah  jd, 
go  from  this  place. 

The  folloAving  are  examples  of  the  correct  use  of  the  direct  and  oblique  forms:  wait'd 
put  mdyd  thd  (Hindi,  merd  put  mud  tlid),  my  son  Avas  dead  ; a pud  md-tali  (Hindi,  apne 
rndl-se),  from  his  own  share ; change  admi  (Hindi,  change  admi),  good  men  ; is-kd  paira- 
ma  (Hindi,  is- Ice  paird-me),  on  his  feet ; a pud  ddsta-kanah  (Hindi,  apne  dostd-sdth),  with 
(my)  own  friends:  cliangi  trimat  (Hindi,  cliangi  stri),  a good  Avoman ; is-ki  angri-mat 
(Hindi,  is-ki  anguli-me),  on  his  finger. 

Tho  use  of  the  Avord  yako,  one,  a,  appears  to  be  irregular.  I have  noted  : — 

Yako  bap,  a father ; yako  bdp-ko , of  a father ; but  yake  thdr,  in  a certain  place. 

Yakd  dhi,  a daughter;  yakd  cliangi  trimat , a good  Avoman;  yake  dhi-ko,  of  a 
daughter. 

II.— PRONOUNS. 

The  proper  form  of  the  Agent  of  hu  is  mat.  Thus : mat  tairo  khazmat  kid  hai 
(Hindi,  mai-ne  teri  kliidmat  ki),  by  me  thy  service  has  been  done.  But  hu  is  sometimes 
substituted  for  it. 

An  oxamplc  of  the  Agent  of  the  second  person  is  tai-ni  dito  hai  (Hindi,  tii-ne  nahi 
diyd  hai),  by  thee  lias  not  been  given. 

So  for  the  third  person  usd  bandid  (Hindi,  us-ne  bate),  by  him  was  divided ; its 
kahio  (Hindi,  us-ne  kahd),  by  him  it  Avas  said ; but  oh  (not  us  or  usd)  utliid  (Hindi,  tcah 
uthd),  he  rose. 

The  Relative  Pronoun  chi  is  borroAved  from  Pushto. 

III.— VERBS. 

In  tho  conjugation  of  verbs,  the  method  of  forming  the  Present  Definite  and 
Imporfect  should  be  noted.  Here  the  verb  exactly  folloAvs  the  McAvati  custom.  To  form 
these  tenses,  the  auxiliary  verbis  added,  not  to  the  Present  Participle,  but  to  the  A'arious 
persons  of  the  simple  Present  Tense.  Thus:  mdru , I beat;  mdru  hai  (not  mar  to  hdi). 


044 


GTJJDRt. 


I am  beating ; war U tho  (not  nidrtd  tho),  X was  beating.  Other  examples  are  karU  hai , 
I am  making,  used  as  a present  subjunctive,  (that)  I may  make  (merriment  with  my 
friends) ; karu  tho,  I was  making.  Irregularly  inlluenccd  by  Pafijabi  are  diyd  nd  thd, 
(anyone)  was  not  giving ; chain  nd  tho,  he  was  not  going ; chard,  thd,  lie  was  grazing. 

The  Present  Participle  is  used  to  form  a Habitual  Past.  Thus : khaitd,  he  used  to 
eat;  Plural  Masculine,  khaitd,  they  (the  swine)  used  to  eat. 

In  the  Simple  Present,  which  is  also  used  as  a present  subjunctive,  there  are  some 
irregularities  observable  in  the  specimens.  In  ham  khnshdli  karu,  fchnskdl  hu,  the  first 
person  singular  is  used  for  the  first  person  plural.  Pafijabi  is  responsible  for  khd-lat, 
and  hd  jay  at,  and  also  for  khdi  (they  eat),  in  which  last  the  singular  is  used  for  the 
plural. 

As  already  observed,  the  use  of  the  Passive  construction  of  the  Past  Tense  of  Tran- 
sitive verbs  appears  to  be  dying  out.  The  Agent  form  of  the  personal  pronouns  is  still 
usually  employed  before  these  tenses,  but  all  traces  of  the  Agent  case  liave  disappeared 
from  the  noun.  The  feeling  for  gender,  too,  is  very  weak.  Thus  we  have  mat  taird 
(iustead  of  tairi)  Ichazmat  kid  (instead  of  ki)  hai,  I have  done  thy  service  ; so  we  have 
jilt  kio,  instead  of  jilt  ki,  lie  shouted. 


945 


[ No.  4.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 

YCSUl’ZAI  GU.1URI. 

Specimen  I. 


Central  Group. 


Nando  put  apna 
By- t he  -young  son  h is -own 


bap-tah 
fa  ther-to 


(Sir  H.  A.  Deane , K.C.S.J.,  1898.) 

Yako  admi-ka  do  put  tha. 

One  man-of  two  sons  were. 

kaliio  chi,  ‘ai  hfip,  inana*  apna  ma  tah  bandd  dai-lai.’  Usa 
it-was-said  that,  ()  father,  to- me  thy-own  property  from  share  give.'  By-him 

dwanyam-pah  apna  ma  band  id.  KAi  di  pachhS  nandd  put 

both-on  hi  s-own  property  was-divided.  Some 

harkuj  yake-thar  kar-ke  dur  des-tah 

everything  (in)  one-place  having-made  far  conntry-to 


days  after 


glO. 

went. 


young 

Ut 

There 


son 


isa 

by-him 

apna  mil  mando  kain-niA  uda-lid.  Chi  habba  ma  Avajhcr-lid, 

liis-own  property  bad  works-in  was-wasted.  When  all  (his)  property  was-finished, 


oh  des-pah 

that  country-on 
oh  des-ma 

that  country-in 

tah  dai-galio, 
to  he-was-sent, 


vakd  bard 

V • 

one  great 
yako  khan 
one  chief 

chi  ‘ mandah  zinawar  char-Iai.’ 
that  ‘ (yon)  unclean  animal  gra:e.' 


(pihafc  ayd, 
famine  came, 
kannli  miukar  hd-gid. 
with  servant  became. 


dlt  blid 


khado,  chi  zTnawar  khaita,  hadd  kaunc 


oh  saurd  hd-gid.  Oh  gid, 

he  straitened  became.  He  went, 

Usa  apni  pattl- 
By-him  his-own  Jield- 

Oh  apna  lninah-pah 

He  his-own  desire-on 

diva  ua  Ilia.  Chi 


that  straw  wonhl-eat,  which  animals  eat, 
sul-mS  hd-gid,  isa  kahid  chi,  ‘ 

senses-in  became,  by-him  it-was-said  that, 

cliangd  tuk  kliai,  lul  bhakd  marl!.  Hn 


but  any-one  giving  not  was.  JHhen 
mail'd  bap-ka  katiia  naukar 
‘ my  fathcr-of  how-many  servants 

uthngd,  apna  bAp-tali  jawOgd, 


good 

food  eat. 

I hungry  am- 

■dying. 

I will-arise,  my-own  father-to  will-go, 

us-tah 

kahngd 

chi, 

“ai 

hap, 

liu  tail’d 

l)hl 

gunahgar 

hai,  Khudac- 

him-to 

will-say 

that, 

“ 0 

father, 

I thy 

also 

sinner 

am,  God- 

ka  bin 

gunahgar 

hai. 

Is-kd 

layi({ 

ni, 

chi 

tail'd  put 

lid-jawS ; 

of  also 

sinner 

am.  Of -this 

worthy 

not-I(-am), 

that 

thy  son 

1-ma y-beco  m e ; 

naukar A-ma  mana  ghal-lai.”  ’ Oh  uthid,  apna  bap-tali  ayd. 
servants-among  me  put.”  ' He  arose,  his-own  father- to  came. 

thd,  chi  apna  hap  isa  dathd,  tars  isa  kid, 

was,  that  by-his-own  father  to-liim  it-icas-seen,  pity  on-him  was-made, 

isa  bhajid,  gliara-gharai  hd-gid,  isa  chdmid.  Put  is-tali 

to-him  he-ran,  embracing  took-ptace,  him  it- was- kissed.  By-son  him-to 

VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


kho  apna 
but  thy-own 
Yd  la  dur 
He  yet  far 


(i  K 


946 


r.TTJURI. 


kahio  chi,  ‘ ai  bap,  hfl  Khudab-ka  bhl  gunaligar  hai,  tairo  bln 

it-was-said  that,  * O father,  1 Oocl-of  also  sinner  am,  thine  also 

gunaligar  hai.  Is-ko  layiq  nl  chi  tairo  put,  hb-jawa.’  TJs-ka  bap 

sinner  am.  This-of  worth  not-I{-am)  that  thy  son  I -may -become.'  By-his  father 

apna  naukara-tah  kahio  chi,  ‘ cliarigb  chirrb  lai-ab,  is-tah  ghal-leb 

his-own  serrants-to  il-was-said  that,  * good  dress  bring , him-to  put-on 

yaka  angri  is-kl  aiigri-ma  kar-leb,  pane  is-ka  paira-ma  kar-leb. 

one  ring  him-of  finger-on  put,  shoes  hitn-of  feet-on  put. 

AS  chi  tiik  kha-lai,  khushal  lib-jayaT,  is  sawab-tah  chi,  yb  mairb 

Come  that  food  we- eat,  merry  become,  this  reason-for  that,  this  my 

put  moyo  thb,  junto  hoyo  hai ; guiu  gib  thb,  lab-lib  hai.  We 

_g0n  dead  was,  living  become  is;  lost  become  teas,  recovered  is.'  They 

khushal  hb-gib. 


thb,  lab-lib  hai.’  We 
toas,  recovered  is.'  They 


merry  became. 

Hun  us-ka  barb  put  patti-ma  thb.  Chi  bh  ayb,  ghar-tali 

Now  him-of  elder  son  field-in  toas.  When  he  came,  house-to 

nairb  bo-gib,  git  naclian-ka  awaz  sunib.  Yakb  naukar-tali  bblib, 
near  became,  songs  dancing-oj  sound  heard.  One  servant-to  {he^called, 

usa  pachhio,  ‘ yb  kt  cliha  hai  ?'  Us  kahio,  chi,  * tairb 

to-him  {by -him)  it-was-asked,  ‘ this  what  matter  is?'  By-him  it-was-said,  that,  1 thy 
bhai  ayb  hai,  tairb  bap  kijairat  kid  hai,  chi  usa  rbgh-jbr 
brother  come  is,  {by)  thy  father  feast  made  is,  as  him  sound-and-well 

lado-hai.’  Oh  rus-gib ; andar  chala  na  thb.  Bap  is-ka 

{ by-him)it-has-been-found .'  He  sulked ; within  going  not  toas.  Father  him-of 

nakTib,  isa  minnat  kib.  Ts  apnc  bap-tah  zawab-m5 

came-out,  him-to  entreaty  was-made-by-him.  By-him  his-own  father-to  answer-in 
kahio  chi,  ‘ daikh,  hit  nil  machli  mudali  maT  tairb  khazmat  kib  hai; 

it-was-said  that , ‘ see,  so-mnch  long  time  by-me  thy  service  been-done  is; 

hechare  tairb  be-amri  ni  kib  hai.  Bill  taT  mana  yakb  lailb  ni 

ever  thy  disobedience  not-by-me  done  is.  Still  by-thee  to-me  one  kid  not 

ditb  hai,  chi  hn  apna  dosta  kanah  khushali  karH-hai.  Ilar-kadb  hi 

given  is,  that.  I my-own  friends  with  merriment  might-make.  As-soon-as  when 

tairb  yb  put  ayb,  chi  tairb  ma  kachni-pah  udayb-hai,  tai 

thy  this  son  came,  by -whom  thy  property  harlots-on  wasted-has-been,  by-thee 

us-pah  khairat  kib.’  Us  kahio,  chi,  * put,  tu  nit  mairo  kbr 

him-on  feast  made.'  By-him  it-was-said,  that,  * son,  thou  always  me  with 
hai,  a mairo  har-kuj  tairb  hai.  Yb  munasib  tbb,  chi  ham  khushali 

art,  and  my  everything  thine  is.  This  proper  was,  that  we  merriment 

karQ,  khushal  ho,  tii-chi  yb  tairb  bhai  moyo  thb,  jimtb  hoyo  h.ai ; 

make,  merry  he,  because  this  thy  brother  dead  teas , alive  become  is ; 


gum  gib  thb,  ladb  hai. 
lost  become  was,  recovered  is.' 


947 


[ NO.  6.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY.  Central  Group* 

Y C S UPZAI  OUJ  Ult  I. 

Specimen  II. 

(Sir  11.  A.  Deane,  K.C.S.I.,  1808.) 

Yako  jakat  lxai’  <1?  mliesa  ga  chara-tho,  parbat-ina  gra-tah 
One  boy  every  day  buffaloes  cotvs  used-to-graze,  mountain-in  villagc-from 

duv.  Yako  ell  chhS-pali  jili-kio  chi,  ‘ bagyar  ayo  bai.’  Gra 

far.  One  day  joke-on  it-was-shouled-by-hitn  that,  ‘ wolf  conic  is .'  Village 

ka  lok  war-nakrio,  chi  bagyar  khader-lai.  Chi  lok  apriii,  bagyar 

of  people  went-onl,  that  wolf  shonld-drive-off'.  When  people  arrive,  wolf 

na  tbo.  Jakat-taU  iua  pachhno  kio ; us  kahio  chi,  ‘ bn  ebbs 

not  was.  Boy-from  by-! hem  enquiry  was- mode ; by-hint  it-was-said  that , ‘ / joke 

kai'u  tbo.*  Lok  ghur-tah  pacblia  gio.  DujS  clt  yako  pavro 

making  was.’  People  house-to  back  wen/.  Second  day  one  leopard 

ayo.  Jakat  jill-kio  chi,  * wnrhuri-doo ; parro  ayo  hai.’ 

came.  By-the-boy  it-was-shouted  that,  ‘ come-rnnning  ; leopard  come  is* 

Lok  kaliio  chi,  4 yo  kuv  kabai,’  kaune  na  gio. 

By-the-people  it-was-said  that,  ‘ this(-boy)  lie  fells*  any-one  not  went. 


Paryo-ne 

jakat.  klui-lio. 

Cbba-ma 

By-the-leopard 

boy  was-decoured. 

Joke-i  n 

Numerala. 

JRk,  yako. 

Do.  Tin.  Chav. 

Panj.  Cbbo. 

1 

2 3 4 

5 (5 

BsirS.  Tera.  Chaudaha.  Pandra. 

Sobs.  Sat  ara. 

12  13 

14  16 

16  17 

1)6  to  bi,  etc. 

Dab  te  bi.  Yara  to  bi,  etc. 

22 

30 

31 

Dab  to  chawe  or 

paftjah.  YarS  te  chawe,  etc.  Satb 

60 

51 

(50 

Char  bi.  £k  to 

char  bi.  Do  te  dial 

■ hi.  Tin  to  e 

IS  19  20  21 

Cbawe.  Ek  te  cbawe,  etc. 

40  41 


80  81  82  83  t-  , 

Dali  to  char  bi.  Yara  to  cluir  hi.  Bara  t&  char  hi,  and  so  on,  up  to  Uni  te  char  In.  Sau. 
90  91  " (i  k >10°’ 

VOI-.  IX,  PAKT  IV. 


948 


gujukf. 


The  two  following  specimens  of  Ajrl  will  show  that,  save  for  some  variations  of 
spelling,  it  is  practically  the  same  as  Yusuf zai  Gujuri.  The  only  real  difference  is  that 
it  borrows  more  freely  from  Pushto. 


949 


[No.  6.J 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 

YtfSUFZAI  A.TRl. 

Specimen  I. 


Central  Group. 


(Sir  H.  A.  Deane,  K.C.8.1. . 1808.) 

JSk  jana  ka  do  put  tha.  U n-mS  nandbb  put-ne  bap-nab 

One  man  of  two  sons  we  tie.  Thcm-in  the-younger  son-by  father- to 

kahio,  ‘ai  bap,  mana  bun  do  kitna  band  a mar  maiui  apre.* 

it-was-said,  * O father , me-to  now  'give  how-much  share  property  me-to  falls' 

Us-ne  apno  blsat  un-na  band  ditti.  Thora  dl  pichhe  bh 

Him- by  his  wealth  them-to  dividing  was-given.  A-few  days  after  that 


luro  babbd 

boy  all 
chal  gio. 
having-gone  went. 
cbbdvid.  Us 


kuj  ek  thsir 

whatever  one  place 

Ut  apno  mar 
There  his-own  property 

thar-ma  bar- kuj 


kar-ke 

having-made 

bad-lamnl-ma 

debauchery-in 


dur  des-tah 

far  land-to 

uda 

having-caused- to- fly 


That  place-in  everything 


was-wastcd. 

bare  qabat  pai-gib. 

great  famine  fell-went.  He  now  poor 
ek  kban-ka  kure  ja  rabid,  - is-110 

one  chief-of  in-vicinity  going  remained,  him-by 

ebaran-ka  baste  clialaio.  Us-kd  yd  mind 

grazing-of  for  was-sent.  Him-of  this  craving 

mOdha  kbae  yd  bbij  | klia-ke  raj  rabe. 

swine  eat  this  also  having-eaten  satisfied  may-remain 

na  thd  dc.  Mb! 

not  was  giving.  Then 


lag-gib. 

Mb! 

us 

des-ma 

was-spent. 

Then 

that 

country-in 

iij  lid-gib. 

Mb! 

us 

des-ma 

• became. 

Then 

that 

country -in 

He 

apna  patta-ma  mndho 
his-own  field-in,  swine 

tlid  dh  bhd  jd 
was  that  straw  which 
Khb1  kdi  kuj 
But  anyone  anything 

surt-mE  ay  6,  to  kahio,  ‘ Mera  bap-ka 

sense-in  came,  and  it-was-said-by-him,  ‘ My  father-of 


muchb  muchh  majhi  bai,  muclib-mucbb  tuk  kliae, 

many  many  servants  are,  plentiful  food  eat, 

mart!  hai.  TlS  uth-ke  apna  bap-ka  kure  ja 

dying  am.  I rising  my-own  father-of  in-vicinity  going  will-remain 

tab  kaiitigd,  “ai  bap,  Rab-ke  age  bln, 


te  hu  bhukb-te 
and  I h nnger-from 
rabbgd.  Hn  us- 
I him- 


tere 


agfi  bhi,  gunaii  kid ; bun  us 
to  will-say , “ O father , Ood-of  before  also,  of -thee  before  also,  sin  done  ; now  that 
lakat2-kd  nab!  je  tairo  put,  bd-jawu.  Mana  apna  majbi-ko 

ability-to  not  {-am)  that  thy 


son 


should-become.  Me-to  thy-own  servant-of 


Corruption  of  liydq&t. 


1 Pu?t>td. 


950 


GUJUttl. 


ah  An.  6k  majln  joy-lS.”  * Mh?  uth-kc  apna  bAp-kA  kur6  gid. 

like  one  servant  make'*  * Then  rising  his~ouon  father -of  in-vicinity  went. 

Us  here  je  dur  tho  Aga-dA*  bAp-ne  agA  ditliO,  taras3  kid,  jliab 

That  time  when  far  was  him- of  father-by  he  was-seen , pity  was-taken,  haste 

kio,  AgA-dA  garA-nay  lalid,  ate  muchh  piar  dittl.  Put  AgA-da  kabid 

was-made,  him-of  neck-with  applied , and  much  love  given.  Son  him-of  said , 

' ai  bAp,  Rab-ko  at6  tere  age  ye  guuAli  kio,  bun  us  iAkat-kA 

* O father , Qod-of  and  thee  before  this  sin  done,  now  that  ability-of 

naliT,  je  taird  put  hdyd.’  BAp  upnA  in3jhiS-da  kahio  j6,  *ckangA 

not  (am),  that  thy  son  l -may -be. ’ Father  Ms-own  servants-to  said  that,  * good 

chatigA  chtyA  kad-ke  le-Ad,  is-da  lawA-chhdrd,  ate  is-ka 

good  robe  taking-out  bring,  lnm-to  ’ clothe,  and  him-of 

liath  mA  angri,  te  paira-mA  ckbitav  lawa-chhdrd,  ate  khAe  te  khushAl 
hand  in  ring,  and  feet-in  shoes  put-on,  and  we-may-eat  and  festivity 

manae ; je  mairo  yd  put  mar  giyd  the.  to  bun  jltd  bo-gid;  gum  gio 

celebrate ; as  my  this  son  dead  gone  was,  and  now  alive  became ; lost  gone 

tho,  bun  labh-lio  hai.’  MhT  khushAll  karan-lagia. 

was,  now  recovered  is.'  Then  merriment  they-t  o-make-began. 

Us-kd  bare  put  patta-ma  tho,  kere  here  gliar-da  neve  Ayd,  git  te 

His  elder  son  field-in  was,  what  time  house- to  near  came,  singing  and 

nachan-ka  awaz  sun-lid.  Us  here  ek  aslma  jan-tali  sadid 

dancing-of  sound  was-heard.  That  time  one  acquainted  man-to  it-was-called(-by-him ) 

te  tapes3  kio  je,  ‘ ye  ke  cbbay  hai  ? * Te  us-ne  kahio  je,  * tail'd 

and  enquiry  was-made  that,  * this  what  matter  is  ? ’ And  him-by  said  that  ‘ thy 

bhAi  Ayd  bai,  to  tairo  bap-ne  mucbli  rdti  kid  hai,  is  matlab-ka 

brother  come  is,  and  thy  father-by  great  feast  made  is,  of  this  reason-of 

chi. Oh  rdgh-jdr*  a-gid-hai.*  Khapa  hd-gid,  ghar-da  andav  na  barid. 

that  he  safe(-and) -sound  he-ccme-is*  Angry  he-became,  house-of  inside  not  entered. 

TVIhT  aga-dii  bap  bAhav  ayd,  aga-dA  pukbla*  kid.  Us-ue  bap-tab 

Then  his  father  out  came,  him  pacified  made.  Him-by  father-to 

jawAb-mA  kahio,  * Dekh,  itna  sama  maT  terl  kliidmat  kid  liai,  kadd 

reply-in  it-was-said,  * See,  (for)  so-many  years  by-me  thy  service  done  is,  ever 

bln  tero  hukam-te  bahar  nalii  hdyd.  Kade  bln  tai  mana  ek  laild 

even  thy  order-from  beyond  not  I-becamc.  Ever  even  by-thee  me-to  one  kid 

ditto  nalu  je  maT  Apna  yav  ashna  nar  kbushali 

was-given  not  that  by-me  my-own  friend  (and)  acquaintance  with  merriment 
kid  hdti.  Hun,  je  yd  tero  put  ayd  bai,  chi  tail’d  mAr  kachnl-pab 
made  might-be.  Now,  that  this  thy  son  come  is,  by- whom  thy  property  harlots-on 

* Corruption  of  da  hagha%  Pushto  = of  him,  the  position  3 Pme  Pushto  word  =s  enquiry. 

of  tho  da,  is  probably  the  result  of  the  influence  of  1 rbyh  jor  pure  Pu$btd  = safe  and  sound. 

Panjabi,  which  has  u**d<i  fo.  * of  him/  5 puk&la  Pui&td  word  = reconoilod. 

* Pure  Pushto  woid  — pity. 


YtSUPZAI  AJEl. 


961 


gharak  kio-hai,  tai  us-pah 

sunk  has-been- Made,  by  thee  him-on 

Us-ne  agii-da2  kahiu.  ‘ ai 

Him-by  him-to  it-was-said,  ‘ O 

Je-kuj  mairo  hai,  oh  tairo 


kitni  muchh 
how-much  large 
put,  harness  tu. 
son,  alicaya  thou 


khflir1 

feast 

maire 

me 


kio.* 
made* 
kure  hai. 
near  are. 


hai ; khushall 
Whatever  mine  is,  that  thine  is ; merriment 

him  munasib  tho,  kin  yd  tairo  blia! 

proper  was,  because  this  thy  brother 


karan, 


mar-gio 

dead 


te 

and 

tho, 

teas, 


khu3hal 

merry 

jito 

alive 


ho-gio ; 
became ; 


gum-gio 

lost 


tho,  hun  labh-lio-hai.’ 
was-,  now  recocered-is 


1 Corruption  of  Pu&tft  khairit. a feast. 


» Atjd-dZ  = hagha-ta  ~ ‘to  him’  in  rnsfctd. 


[ No.  7.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


952 


Central  Croup* 


YDSUEZAI  AJRl. 

Specimen  II. 

(Sir  H.  A..  Deane,  KC.8.I.,  1898.) 

Ek  jago  dhaka-rat  bakrl  cliarai  tlio.  Ilk  df  par-mt 

One  man  mountain-in  goats  grazing  was.  One  day  rock-in 

raaikliu  labli-lio.  Us-ne  kahio  chi,  ‘ liS  kap-liySgd,’  kho 

honey{-comb)  was-found.  By -him  it-was-said  that,  ‘ I will-cut-it-off,'  but 

hath  us-ko  na  aprid,  kiS-je  thar  sauro  te  auklio  tlio. 

hand  hvm-of  not  reached,  because  the-place  narrow  and  difficult  teas. 

Mill  wuh  gra-tah  ayo,  daru.  lio,  te  par-tali 

Then  he  village-to  came,  gunpowder  was-taken-by-him,  and  rock-to 

gio ; us-ko  liet  dab-chhorio,  chi  ag  la-ke  par 

went;  it-of  beneath  it-was-buried(-by-him ) that  fire  applying  rock 

uda-olihorngo,  te  maikliu  liabba  kad-liySgo.  Mill  palltah-nali  ag 

I-will-blow-up,  and  honey  all  will-extract.  Then  fuse-to  fire 

la-ke  bais-raliiO.  Mb!  daa  lioyo,  par  pliut-gio,  jano 

applying  he-sat-down.  Then  explosion  became , rock  burst,  ( the-)man 

uda-chhorio.  Ut  maikliu-ko  annan-ma  mar-gid. 

was-blovbn-up.  There  honey-of  longing-in  he-perished. 


Numerals- 

Ek.  Do.  Trai.  Cliar.  Paffj.  Clihe.  Sat.  Ath.  Ns.  Dah.  Yarah.  Barak. 
123  4 5 6789  10  11  12 

Tera.  CliaudaL  Pandri.  Sohri.  Safari.  Athari.  Un?.  Bi  Ek  te  bl 

13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21 

Do  tS  bi,  etc.  Dah  te  bi.  Y&rah  te  bl,  etc.  CU*fi.  Ek  te  ch*ri,  etc.  Dah  te  ch*yl. 
22  30  31  40  41  50 

Yarah  te  ch*yi,  etc.  Trai  hi.  Ek  te  trai  bi,  etc.  Dah  te  trai  bi.  Yarah  tS  trai  bi,  etc. 

51  60  61  70  71 

Char-bi.  Ek  tS  char-bi,  etc.  Dah  te  char-bi.  Yarah  tS  char-bi,  etc.  S&h. 

*>  81  90  91  100. 


953 


GUJURT  OF  KASHMIR. 

The  language  of  the  Gujurs  of  Kashmir  closely  resembles  that  of  Hazara  and  Swat. 
The  main  differences  are  really  matters  of  spelling.  Thus  we  have  na  instead  of  na,  the 
postposition  of  the  dative,  and  kihd  instead  of  Mho  for  ‘ said.  * 

The  borrowed  forms  come  from  Kashmiri,  and  some  of  them  are  instructive.  In 
the  word  kihd  for  kahid,  from  kahnd , to  say,  we  see  the  Pisacha  law  of  cpcntlicsis  coming 
into  force. 

We  also  come  across  the  Pisacha  tendency  to  disaspirate  soft  aspii*ate  consonants, 
and  then  to  harden  them.  Thus,  dhi,  a daughter,  becomes  first  dl,  and  tlien  tl ; ghdrd,  a 
horse,  becomes  first  gdro,  and  then  kdrd;  hharnd,  to  fill,  becomes  first  homo , and  then 
panto  ; and  bhukkhd,  hungry,  becomes  first  hnkklid,  and  then  pukkhd. 

The  declension  of  Nouns  is  nearly  the  same  as  in  Hazara.  The  only  differences  are 
that  masculine  nouns  in  i,  like1  ndml,  a man,  shorten  the  i in  the  oblique  plural,  forming 
ddmia,  not  ddmia.  So  also  feminines  like  Jeon,  a mare.  Tl,  a daughter,  and  ga,  a cow, 
have  their  nominative  plurals  tin  and  gavea,  respectively.  We  thus  get  the  following 
forms : — 


SlNGUL\K.  PLUltJAL. 


Nom. 

I 

Obi. 

No  iii. 

Obi. 

torn. 

a lioi>e 

i 

. . • j 

i 

C. 

tora 

Lap , 

a father 

1 

. . . , 

b'Tp 

Imp 

b(Jp(i. 

ad  mi. 

a man  . 

• 

fldmi 

njnv 

rl'hnia 

ItorT. 

a mare 

• • -i 

lr.rT 

Ion 

Iona 

ti. 

a daughter 

• ! 

n 

IKi 

til 

gs. 

a cow  . 

. . .j 

i 

[in 

(fniva 

(jn  ica 

The  postpositions  are  : — 

Agent, 

ne. 

Acc.-Dat. 

nd,  sometimes  ke. 

Inst. 

ndl. 

Abl. 

thS. 

Gen. 

kd,  go. 

Loc. 

md , in,  on  ; 

par,  on ; 

hole,  near. 

The  usual  postposition  of  the  dative  is  na  (not  na),  but  ke  sometimes  appears,  as  in 
phrases  like  us-ke  lad , put  (the  garment)  on  him. 

The  usual  genitive  is  kd,  but  wc.  sometimes  find  go,  especially  after  a vowel,  as  in 
tia-go,  of  the  daughters ; admi-go,  of  the  man  ; ddmia-gd,  of  the  men  r fdkd-gi  chdii-par , 
on  the  top  of  tlio  hill  (sentence  229).  On  the  other  hand  we  have  ll-kd,  of  a daughter 
(No.  111).  Oo  occurs  also  in  the  Bagri  dialect  of  Marwari,  and  related  forms  arc  gai, 
• the  sign  of  the  dative  in  the  Maiya  of  the  Indus  Kohistan,  and  go,  the  sign  of  the.  dative, 
in  the  G&dl  dialect  of  Chameali. 

G K 

VOfc.  IX,  PART  IV. 


954 


eujURl. 


Kb  and  go  change  for  gender  and  number  as  usual,  but  I have  not  noted  an  oblique 
plural  form  corresponding  to  the  Hazara  kd. 

As  regards  Adj6CtiV6S,  the  only  thing  to  note  is  that  the  oblique  form  of  eh,  one, 
when  used  as  an  indefinite  article,  is  ekan. 

The  Pronouns  exhibit  a feAv  variations  from  the  Hazara  standard.  Thus : — 


I. 

Thou. 

Sing. 

Xom. 

'h® 

t® 

Ag. 

mat 

tai 

Dat. 

mind 

find 

Obi. 

ma 

ta 

Gen. 

merb 

tero 

Flur. 

Nom. 

liam 

tarn 

Ag- 

ham-ne 

tam-ne 

Obi. 

ham 

lam 

Gen. 

maharo 

thdro 

The  Demonstrative  pronouns  are : — 

This. 

That. 

Sing. 

Nom. 

yu 

tcu 

Obi. 

is 

ZIS 

Gen. 

is-kb 

us- kb 

Plur. 

Nom. 

yi 

vl 

Obi. 

in 

tin 

Gen. 

iii'kb 

un-ko 

No  instances  of  the  nominative  feminine  have  been  noted,  but  they  doubtless  exist  as 
in  Haziira. 

For  the  Relative  and  Correlative  we  have  jo  (obi.  jia)  or  jerb,  who,  and  so  (obi.  tis), 
that.  So,  kbn  (obi.  kis),  who ? and  ke,  what?  kot,  anyone,  some  one,  and  kuchh,  any- 
thing, something ; jo-kuchh,  whatever. 

The  Verb  Substantive  is  thus  conjugated  in  the  present: — 


Sing. 

Plur. 

i. 

ho 

ha, 

2. 

hm 

hi 

3. 

hai 

hi 

The  past  is  tho,  etc.,  as  in  Hazara. 

There  is  a negative  verb  substantive  nai,  is  not,  used  for  all  persons  of  both  numbers, 
as  in  is-laik  kb  nai,  I am  not  at  all  worthy ; badal  nai  kario,  (I)  did  not  disobey.  Note 
the  use  of  the  Rajasthani  kb,  at  all  with  the  negative.  This  is  almost  universal  in 
Rajasthani. 


GUJUJU  OP  KASlIMIlt. 


955 


The  ordinary  negative  is  not  nai,  but  no. 

The  following  are  the  main  points  of  the  conjugation  of  the  Active  Verb 

The  Infinitive  ends  in  no  (no)  as  in  hand,  mdrnd.  The  oblique  form  ends  in  an 
(an),  the  a being  dropped  if  the  root  ends  in  a vowel.  Tims,  hb»  logo,  he  began  to  be ; 
karan  logo,  they  began  to  make ; char  an  eholdgd, , sent  (him)  to  feed  (swine) ; gdu-kd,  of 
singing ; nachchan-kd , of  dancing. 

The  Present  Participle  ends  in  to,  thus  libtd,  mdrtd.  In  khStb,  eating,  the  root, 
ending  in  a long  vowel,  1ms  been  nasalized. 

The  Past  Participle  ends  in  id  as  in  murid.  This,  like  the  Swat  eo,  is  liable  to  be 
contracted  to  e,  as  in  mare,  dead. 


Irregular  are : — 

jdnd,  to  go 

Past 

Part,  gid 

and,  to  come 

9 9 

» ago 

lend,  to  hike 

99 

,,  lid 

(lend,  to  give 

99 

„ (jLitld 

baisnd , to  sit 

99 

• „ bo  i thd 

kohnd , to  say 

99 

„ kihd 

laggnd,  to  begin 

99 

„ logo 

karno,  to  do,  is  regular,  making  karid. 

In  this  form  of  Gujuri,  the  past  participle  frequently  takes  the  suffix  v 7,  without 
changing  its  meaning,  as  in  mdriu-ci,  lagd-n.  So  we  have  bai/hd-vi  liai,  he  is  seated 
(sentence  230) ; lid- cl  hat , you  have  taken  (240)  ; mare-vi  (or  marid-ri ) thd,  he  was 
dead ; gain  gid-vi  tho,  he  was  lost ; Cojd-rl  hai,  (thy  brother)  has  come  ; ruti  kari-vi  hai, 
he  has  made  a feast.  Perhaps  this  suffix  means  ‘ gone,  ’ and  we  may  in  this  way 
compare  it  with  the  Sindln  word  via  having  this  meaning. 

The  Conjunctive  Participle  is  formed  as  usual . Thus,  mdr-ke , having  struck ; ho-ke, 
having  become. 


The  Imperative  singular  is,  as  usual,  the  same  in  form  as  the  root.  Thus,  mar, 
strike;  tie,  give  (sentence  234).  Le-la,  take  (sentence  235),  seems  to  be  irregular. 

The  Old  Present  is  thus  conjugated : — 


Singular 

Plural 

1. 

. A#  v 

/■v 

mam , maro 

mar  a 

2. 

mare 

mare 

3. 

muri't  mard 

mare 

Lagdvl  (pi .logon;  fern,  login),  the  past  participle  of  laggnd,  may  be  added  to  any 
of  these  forms.  Thus,  gadrd  dice  logon , the  boy  comes  (sentence  230). 

The  Present  Definite  is  mar  rahid-hd,  I am  striking  = Hindi  mar  valid  lift. 

The  Imperfect  is  mar  rahio,  I was  striking=llindi  mar  rahd. 

The  Future  is  formed  by  adding  go  (go,  gi)  to  the  old  present.  Thus,  mdrUgd  or 
mardgo,  I shall  strike. 

The  tenses  formed  from  the  past  participle  are  as  usual,  and  call  for  no  remarks, 
except  that,  in  the  case  of  intransitive  verbs,  the  first  person  is  not  nasalized  as  in  Hazara. 


Thus,  hit  gid,  not  hit  gio,  I went. 

The  usual  negative  is  na,  tho  negative  verb  substantive  being  nai.  ^ote  the  eurious 
use  of  ta,  to  mean  ‘ when.  ’ 

6 f “2 

VOI..  IX,  PART  IV. 


[ No.  8.] 

INDO-ARYAN  FAMILY. 


950 


Central  Group, 


GUJURI. 

Kashmir. 

Ekan-jana-na  do  put  tka.  Un-biclickn  nikra-ne 

One-person-to  two  sons  were.  Them-from-among  the-youngcr-by 

aba-na  kihb,  ' O aba,  mal-kb  hiso,  36  mina 

the-father-to  it- was- said , * O father , the- property  -of  share,  which  to-me 

» 

fnve,  mina  de.’  Phir  us-no  mal  un-na,  band-ditto. 

nay -come,  to-me  give * Then  him-by  the-property  them-to  was-divided-out. 

Tkbra-diyara  pichke  nikra-gadra-ne  sarb-kuchh  batlo  kar-ke 

A-few-days  afterwards  the-younger-son-by  everything  collected  made-having 

eka  n-dur-ka-mulk-mil  jaii  lagb,  hbr  6ga  apnb  mal 

a-distancc-of -country -in  lo-go  began,  and  there  his-own  property 

paira-kamma-nal  urayo.  Pbir  ta  sarb-kuchh  kbarcli 

bad-work-in  was-camed-io-fly-away.  Then  when  everything  expended 

kar-chlibrib,  us-mulk-ma  barb  kal  pib,  hbr  wu  kahgal 

was-made-completely , that-conntry-in  a-great  famine  fell,  and  he  poor 

lion  lagb.  Pbir  us-mulk-kii  ekan-baya-sardar-kblb  ja-lagb. 

to-be  began.  Then  thal-country-of  a-grcat-chief-ncar  he-went-{and-)stuck. 

TJs-ne  us-na  apniS-dbgia-ma  bankuta  charan  clialayb,  hbr  us-na 

Jlim-by  him-as-for  his-own-ficlds-in  swine  to-feed  he-was-sent,  and  him-to 

arman  tlib  ki,  * un-sakkS-nal,  jera  bankuta  kbao,  apnb  pet 

longing  teas  that,  ‘ thosc-hnsks-with,  which  the-swine  eat,  my --own  belly 

parn,’  ki  us-na  kbi  nai  de-tlib.  Hbr  hbsh-ma  ay  6, 

I-may-Jill ' because  him-to  anyone  not  giving-was.  And  sense-in  hc-came, 

kibb,  ‘ mera-aba-ka  kitna  manjiat-na  jbr  rut!  hai,  hbr  hS 

it-icas-said,  ‘ my-father-of  how-many  servants-to  much  bread  is,  and  I 

pukkhb  mark.  Bn  uth-ke  apna-aba-kble  jabgb,  pliir  us-na, 

hungry  die.  I arise  n-hav  in  g my -own- father-near  will-go,  again  him-to 

kaliogb  ki,  “ 0 aba,  mai  asman-ka  hots  bbr  tera 

I-will-say  that,  “ O father,  by-rne  heaven-of  in-the-presence  and  of-thee 

hbt3  gunah  kariii,  bbr  bn  is-laik  kb  nai  ki 

in-the-presence  sins  were- done,  and  T this-woi'thy  at-all  am-not  that 

pbir  terb  put  kabao ; mina  apna-manji5  bichchS  ekan-ke 

again  thy  son  I-may-be-called ; me  thine-own-servants  from-among  one-to 

brabar  bana.”  ’ Pbir  utk-ke  apna-aba-kble  gio,  hbr  wu 

like  make Then  arisen-having  his-own-father-near  he-went,  and  he 


GUJUBI  OP  KASHMIR. 


967 


aj$  dur  tho,  ki  us-na  dekh-ke  us-ka  aba-na  tars 

yet  far  toas,  that  hint  ( acc .)  scen-having  him-of.  the-father-to  compassion 

ayo ; pliir  dor-ke  gal  la-lio,  hor  much  muni 

( on-tke-)neck  he-was-applied,  and  much  kiss 


came  i then  run- having 


ditti. 

was-given. 
hots 

in-the-presence  and 

nai  ki 

I-am-not  that 


Gadra-nb 
Thc-son-by 
hor  tera 


us-na 

him-to 


apna-manjia-na 

his-own-servants-to 


us-ke 


lao ; 


of -thee 

phir 

again 

kiho, 

it-icas-sakl, 
hor  us-ka 


kiho 

it-was-said 
hots 

in-the-presence . 

tero  put 

thy  son 

‘ changi-thn 
* gbod- than 
hatth-ma 


ki, 

that, 

gunah 

sins 


0 aba, 

O father, 
karia, 
were- done, 
kaliSo.’ 

I-may-be-called.* 
changi  poshak 


mai  asman-ka 

hy-me  heaven-of 
phir  is-laik 

and  this- war  thy 
Bap-nc 
The-fat  her-hy 
kar-le-ao,  pliir 


good  garment  bring-forth,  and 
chimp,  hor  paira-ma  joro 


him-to 

put-on 

; and 

him-of  hand-on 

a-ring,  and  feet-on  pair(-of-shoes) 

lao ; 

hor 

ham 

khata  khoslii 

kara ; kyuki 

mcro  yu 

gadro 

put-on  ; 

and 

tee 

eating  rejoicing 

may -make  ; because 

my  this 

son 

marc-vi 

tho, 

hun 

jivio  hai ; gum 

gio-vi  tho,  him 

tliayb.’ 

Hor 

dead 

was. 

again 

alive  is;  lost 

gone  was,  again 

was- found.' 

And 

vi 

they 


khoslii 

rejoicing 


karan 
to- make 


laga. 

began. 


dogi-ma 


Hor  us-ko  barb  gadro 

And  him-of  the-big  son  the-Jield-in 

ayo,  gan-ko  hor  naclichan-ko  awaz 

he-came,  singing-of  and  dancing-of 


tho. 

was. 


TS 

When 


ncrc 

near 


sound 


puchchlio 

it-was-asked 


ki, 

that, 

ki,  ‘ terb  bliai 
that,  * thy  brother 

karl-vl  hai, 


kuk-kc 
called-having 
kilio 

it-wassakl 
ruti 

bread  (i.e. feast)  made 
khafa  lio-ke 

angry  become-hacing 
us-ka  aba-ne 

him-of  thc-father-by 
aba-na  jaivab-ma 

the-father-to  answer-in 

khidmat  karto 
service  doing 
karib,  par  tl 


yu 

this 


ayo- vi 
come 


ghar-ke 

the-house-of 

Phir  ekan-mafijia-na 
Then  one-servant -to 

hai  ? ’ TJs-uc 

is  ? ’ llim-by 

hor  tcrii-abii-nc 

and  thy-falher-by 

cliango-bhalo  ayo.’ 

good- well  came. 

* andar  ja8.’ 

‘ within  I-may-go .’ 

tyu  mamiyO. 

lie  was-entreated. 

itnS-barsS-tlm  lm 

so-many-years-from  I 

raliio-liS,  hor  kadi  tcra-hukm-thn  badal 

remained-am,  and  ever  thy-command-from  against 

kadi  ek  bakri-kb  bachclio  mina  na  ditto, 


is, 

na 


ki 

that 


is-wastb 

this- for 

mani 

not  it-was-wished 

baliar  a-kc 

outside  came-having 
kilio,  * dekli, 

it-icas-said,  * see. 


sumo. 

was-heard. 

kb 
what 
liai, 

is, 

wu 

he 

ki, 

that, 


done,  but  by-thee  ever  one  goat-of  young-one  to-rne  not  was-given, 


us-na 

him-to 

bari 

a-great 

Wu 

He 

Phir 

Then 

Us-nb 

llim-by 

terl 

thy 

nai 
not-is 
ki 

that 


958 


OUJUBl. 


apaS-dosta-nal  klioslil  karS ; lior  tS  tSro  yQ  * gadro  ayo, 

my  -own-friends-with  rejoicing  I-may-make ; and  when  thy  this  son  came , 

jis-nS  tero  mal  paira-kamma-ma  urayo,  t®  * us-k6 

tc  horn- by  thy  property  bad-work-in  was-caused-to- fly -away , by-thee  , Mm-of 

waste  bar!  ruti  karl.’  Us-iie  us-na  kilio,  * O backchaK 

for  a-great  feast  - was-made Ilim-by  him-to  it-was-said,  . * O child , 

to  hamesli  more-kole  hai,  hor  jo-kuclih  rnSro  liai,  so  ' tero  hai; 

thou  always  me-near  art,  and  whatever  mine  is,  that  thine  is ; 

magar  ; khoshi  manani  hor  khosh  hOno  lazam  thb,  is-wSstS 

but  rejoicing  to-be-celebrated  and  happy  to-become  proper  was,  this -for 

ki  tero  yu  bhai  4 mario-vi  tho,  so  jivio  hai ; hor  gum  gio-vi  tho, 

that  thy  this  brother  dead  was,  he  alive  is;  and  lost  gone  was , 

so  ajj  thayo-hai.’ 
he  now  found-is 


959 


GUJARI  OF  THE  SUB-MONTANE  PANJAB. 

It  lias ‘been  stated  above,  as  a broad  generalization,  that  while  the  Gujurs  of  the  hill 
country  speak  Gujuri,  the  Gujars  of  the  Pan  jab  plains  have  abandoned  their  own  langu- 
age, and  adopted  the  ordinary  Pafijabi  of  their  .neighbours.  We  have  also  stated  that 
■while  the,  hill  people  of  this  tribe  are  called  Gujurs,  and  their  language  Gujuri,  those  of 
the  Panjab  plains  are  called  Gujars. 

Although  the  Gujars  of  the  plains,  as  a rule,  speak  ordinary  Pafijabi,  a language 
called  Gujari  has  been  reported  from  the  sub-montane  districts  of  Gujrat,  Gurdaspur, 
Kangra,  and  Hoshiarpur.  The  number  of  speakers  is  reported  to  be  as  follows : - * 


District.  Number  of  speakers. 

Gujrat # 111,000 

Gurdaspur  ............  60,000 

Kangra 8,460 

Hosbiarpur  ............  47,489 


Total  . 226,949 

An  examination  of  the  specimens  forwarded  shows  that  there  is  some  foundation  for 
the  statement  that  the  Gujars  of  these  districts  have  a language  of  their  own.  The 
specimens  are  all  written  in  a form  of  speech  that  is  a mechanical  mixture  of  a 
language  closely  resembling  the  true  Gujuri  spoken  in  Hazara,  and  of  the  local  Pafijabi. 
Gujuri  and  Pafijabi  forms  are  mixed  together  and  used  at  random.  It  would  be  waste 
of  time  to  give  a grammar  of  this  mongrel  dialect.  It  Avill  suffice  to  give  a short 
specimen  of  each.  We  commence  with  the  so-called  Gujari  of  Gujrat. 


960 


GUJARI  OF  GUJRAT. 

Ikk-jana-ke  do  put  tar  tha.  Un-richclio  nikko  puttar-no 

One-tnan-of  two  sons  -were.  Them-from-among  the- younger  son-by 

peu-nfi  akheo,  ‘bap,  liam-nfi  apna  hisso-barl,  jo-kuchh-awe  > 

father -to  it- was- said,  i father , rne-lo  wy-own  share,  tohateocr-comes, 

dCv  TJs-ne  un-ko  apnl  jaydat-ke  hisso-bari  wand-ditto. 

give’  Him-by  them-to  his-own  properly  share  tcas-dicidcd. 

Thora-dino-ke  bad  nikkb-puttar-ne  apna  mal-nsbab  lai-ke 

A-few-days-of  after  t he-yoitnger-son-by  his-own  property  token-having 

diir-ke  mulk  tur-gio.  Mara  kammo  vicheh  odliar  apna, 

a-distance-of  country  went-away.  Wicked  deeds  in  there  his-own 

inal  gawd-ditto.  Jis-wakt  0 saro  mill  khareli 

property  was-wasted.  When  he  all  property  expenditure 

kar-cliuko,  plier  us-mulk-viehch  kal  pai-giii.  Plier  6 garlb 

made-completely , then  that-country-in  u-famine  felt.  Then  he  poor 

ho-gio.  Plier  o us-mulk-de  rais  kbl  kamO  jii-reo. 

became.  Then  he  that -country -of  chief  near  as-servant  went-(and-)stayed.  • 

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  point  out  that  the  foregoing  is  an  ungrammatical  mixture 
of  Gujurl,  Panjabi  and  even  Hindustani.  To  Hindustani  belong  forms  such  as  un-ko 
(Gujurl  un-na),  to  them;  thorn  dino-ke  bad  (Gujurl  thorn  dina-kd  bad);  jand-ke 
(Gujurl  jand-kd),  and  so  on.  To  Hindustani  or  Panjabi  belong  phrases  such  as  apna 
mat  (Gujurl  a pub  mal) ; and  the  mixed  a pud  hisso  (Gujurl  apnb  hisso),  and  so  on. 

The  Grammar,  or  un-grammar,  of  phrases  such  as  nikko  put/ar-ne,  or  jdyddt-ke 
hisso-bdri  tea  (id-ditto,  defies  analysis.  Pure  Panjabi  in  their  form  are  peu-nff,  to  the 
father,  and  mulk-de  rais  kbl,  near  a chief  of  the  country.  On  the  other  hand,  thd,  they 
were,  is  good  Gujurl. 


9G1 


GUJAR-I  OF  GURDASPUR. 


The  Gujari  of  Gurdaspur  is  a mere  mixture  of  PaKjabl  and  Hindustani.  The 
following  specimen  shows  hardly  a trace  of  real  Gujuri. 

Ikk-adnil-ko  do  puttar  the.  ChhSte-ne  apne-hap-nu 

One-man-of  hco  sons  were.  The-ijounger-by  his-own-futher-ta 

kiha  ki,  ‘lie  bap,  marii  hesa  de-kar  inere-ko  wakli 

it-was-said  that,  ‘ O father,  my  share  given-having  me-to  separate 

kar-de.’  Bap -ne  dolia-puttra-nfi  hesa  wand-ke  de-dia. 

make'  Thc-fathcr-by  the-two-sons-to  share  divided-having  teas- given. 


Thore-dinO-pichchhe  chliota  puttar  sari  jaidad  lai-ke 

-fete-day  s-af ter  the-yonngcr  son  all  properly  taken-having 


pardes-nu  gio.  Utthi 

a-foreign-land-lo  went.  There 

hard  kal  ho-gia.  Oho 

a-great  famine  became.  That 

kisi-gra-do-ikk-admi-de  pas 

a-certa  in-ri  Uage-of-a-man  -of  n ca  r 


Utthi 

sari 

jaidad  gawa-di. 

There 

all  property  was-lost. 

Oho 

larkii 

hard  mdrd  ho-gia. 

That 

boy 

very  thin  became. 

pas 

olio 

kdrnd  riba. 

of  near 

he 

as-servant  remained. 

Us-balait-me 

That-foreign-country-in 

Pardes-mi 

The-foreign-land-in 


6 a 


VOL.  IX,  part  IV. 


962 


GUJART  OF  KANGRA. 

The  Gujari  of  Kangra  is  an  ungrammatical  mixture  of  Gujurl  and  the  local  Pafi- 
jabi.  In  the  very  first  line  avo  liave  txvo  bad  grammatical  mistakes,  A'iz.  ddml-ko  for 
adnii-ka  and  Ibhkb-nc  for  Ibhka-ne. 

On  the  whole,  in  this  dialect,  the  Gujurl  element  predominates,  but  ei'cry  noiv  and 
then  the  Pafijabi  influence  comes  to  the  front,  as  in  the  dative  termination  nB,  a corrup- 
tion of  the  Pafijabl  ntt. 

Kisi-admi-kO  do  put  tha.  ITn-mS-te  l6hko-ne 

A-certain-man-of  two  sons  were.  Them-in-from  thc-yonnger-by 

bap-no  kahyo,  ‘ ai  bap,  lato-pato-mS-te  ju  mere  liisso 

the-father-fo  it-was-said,  * O father,  property •in-from  what  my  share 

nikle,  so  min-no;  de-de.’  Ta  un-no  un-nfi  apno  lato-patO 

comes-ont,  that  me-to  give.’  Then  him-by  them- to  his- own  property 

band-dinno.  Mata  dhiaro  naliT  Into  ke  lohko  put 

was- divided-out.  jilany  day  not  passed  that  the-younger  son 

sab-kuclih  kattha  kar-ke  dur-des-no  clialo-geo,  Iior  uttlic 

everything  together  made-having  a-far-conntry-to  went-away,  and  there 

luchpan-mS  dhiaro  guAvfu*  apno  lato-pato  ura-dinno. 

debauchery -in  tlic-day  a-spending  his-own  property  icas-canscd-to-Jly-aicay. 

Jo  oh  sab-kuchlx  gmva-chuko,  ta  us-des-ma  bara  kal 

JVhen  he  everything  spent- completely,  then  that -country -in  a-grent  famine 

peo,  lior  Oh  kankal  ho-gOO.  Hor  oh  ja-ke  us-des-ke 

fell , and  lie  indigent  became.  And  lie  gone-having  t,  hat-country -of 

raihnewalo-mS-te  ikkan-ke  ghar  raihn  lago. 

the- dweller s-in- from  one-of  ~ (in-)  house  to-dwcll  began. 


963 


GUJARI  OF  HOSHIARPUR. 


Tlie  follow  ini'  specimen  shows  that  the  Gnjari  of  lloshiavpur  closely  resembles  that 
of  Kangra.  The  Panjabi  inllucnce  is,  perhaps,  a little  stvongei*,  and  the  whole  is  more 
grammatical,— hut  that  is  all. 

Ek-iidmi-ka  do  putt  tha.  Dbha-m?-sb  chhdta-ne  hap-nS 

Onc-man-of  two  sons  were.  The- two- in- f rom  the-younger-by  the-father-to 


kiho,  ‘sun,  bap,  jo  mera-nuil-kb  hissa  hai, 

it-was-said , ‘ hear , father,  what  my -property -of  share  is, 

de-do.’  Phir  bap-ne  mfd  baiul-dliiha. 

give.'  Then  tlie-father-by  the-property  was-dirided-out. 

chhota-putt-ne  sabh-kuchh  kattho  kar-ke  kite 


so  min-nu 

that  me-to 
ThbrS-dina-magro 
A-few-days-after 
dur-nS 


t he-younger-son-by  everything  together  made-haring  some- whither  dislance-to 


chalb-gib. 


Tr-iui 


ucliakpuna-l)ich  klib-dlnha. 


irenl-away.  There  gone-haring  his-own  property  debauchery -in  was-wasted. 


Jab  sabh-kuchh  muk-gib,  us-dbs-bich  kal  pai-gib,  aur  bh 

When  everything  was-expended , that-conntry-in  a famine  fell,  and  he 


garlb 

poor 


hb-gio. 

became. 


Til  us-des-ka  ikk-amir-ko  kamo  lib-gib. 

Then  that-conntry-of  a-prinee-of  servant  he-became. 


VOL,  IX,  FART  IV. 


G O S 


STANDARD  WORDS  AND  PHRASES 


English. 

! 

! 

Mewati. 

i 

Gujuri  (Hazara). 

i 

» 

! 

i 

i 

Yusuf zai  Gujuri. 

1 . One 

• 

• 

! 

i 

i 

• 1 

Rk 

• 

• 

• 

Rk. 

• 

* i 

YalvO  a a a 

• 

2.  Two 

• 

• 

• 

Da 

• 

• 

• 

i 

1 

DO. 

9 9 

• 

Do 

a 

3.  Three 

• 

• 

• 

Tin 

• 

• 

• 

Trd 

9 9 

• ! 

Tin 

• 

4.  Four 

• 

• 

Cliyar 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Char  • 

9 9 

• 1 

Char 

• 

5.  Five 

■ 

• 

Pach 

• 

Panj 

9 9 

Panj 

• 

6.  Six 

• 

• 

• 

Chhai 

• 

ClihG  • 

• • 

• ; 

ClihG  a • • 

• 

7.  Seven 

• 

• 

Sat 

• 

• 

• 

* 

Satt 

* 

• • 

* 

Sat  a • • 

a 

S.  Eight 

• 

• 

' 

Ath 

' 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Afth 

• • 

• 

.Ath  ■ a a 

• 

9.  Nine 

• 

• 

• 

Nau 

• 

• 

• 

NS. 

• • 

Nau 

• 

10.  Ten 

• 

• 

* 

Das 

• 

Das 

• • 

Dali  a a a 

• 

11.  Twenty 

• 

• 

■ 

Bis 

• 

• 

• 

Pi  . 

• 

Pi  • a a 

• 

12.  Fifty 

• 

• 

Paehas 

• 

• 

Das-to-chall 

• a 

• 

Panjfth  . 

• 

13.  Hundred 

• 

• 

Sau 

• 

• 

• 

1 

Sau 

* ■ 

• 

SaU  a a a 

a 

14.  I . 

• 

• 

• i 

Mai 

• 

• 

• 

Hn. 

• • 

• : 

i 

Hu  1 a • 

• 

15.  Of  me 

• 

• 

• ‘ 

Merft 

• 

• 

• 

i 

Morfl 

• a 

• . 

MairG,  mairl  (/cm.)  . 

Id.  Mine 

• 

• 

• 

MerG 

• 

i 

MerG 

a . 

MairG,  mairi  (fern.)  . 

17.  We 

a 

• 

• 

Ham 

• 

i 

• i 

Ham 

a a 

• i 

Ham  • 

18.  Of  ub 

• 

• 

• 

MharG 

• 

• 

• 

i 

t 

MharG 

a a 

• 

MaharO,  mah&ri  (/cm.) 

• 

19.  Our 

t 

• 

; MharG 

• 

• 

• 

i 

| 

. ; 

i 

MharO 

• » 

• 

MaharG,  mah&ri  (Jam.) 

a 

20.  Thou. 

• 

• 

• 

Tu 

i 

m 

• 

• 

• 1 

1 To  . 

! 

t « 

• 

Tn,  tG  . 

a 

21.  Of  thee 

• 

• 

• 

i 

Ti’rO  . 

• 

TerO 

• a 

• 

TairG,  tairi  (/cm.)  • 

a 

22.  Thine 

• 

• 

• 

i 

Tirfl 

• 

• 

• 

TerO 

a • 

• 

TairG,  tairi  ( fem .) 

• 

23.  You 

• 

• 

; Tam 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Tam 

a • 

• 

T am  • • • 

• 

24.  Of  you 

• 

9 

• 

; TharO 

• 

• 

• 

• 

TharG 

• • 

• 

TharG,  th&ri  {fem.')  • 

• 

25.  Your 

• 

9 

• 

i 

ThfirO 

• 

• 

• 

• 

TharG 

• a 

• 

TharG,  th&ri  (fem.)  • 

• 

964— Gujuri, 


IN  THE  VARIOUS  FORMS  OF  GUJURT. 


Yurofsai  Ajfl. 

Gojurl  (Kashmir). 

English. 

Rk  • . • 

Ek  .... 

1.  Ono. 

Do  .... 

DO  .... 

2.  Two. 

Trai  .... 

Tra  .... 

3.  Three. 

Char  .... 

Char  .... 

4.  Four. 

PaSj  .... 

Panj  .... 

5.  Five. 

Child  .... 

Chha  .... 

6.  Six. 

Sat  .... 

Satt  . f 

7.  Seven. 

Ath  .... 

Atth  .... 

8.  Eight. 

No  .... 

Nan  .... 

9.  Nine. 

Dah  . . . j 

Das  .... 

10.  Ten. 

Bi  .... 

Bi  .... 

11.  Twenty. 

Dah  tS  ch*rl  • 

Panja  .... 

12.  Fifty. 

Soh  . . . . ! 

So  .... 

13.  Hundred. 

Hit  . i 

Ha  .... 

14.  I. 

1 

Mairfl 

MSro  .... 

15.  Of  me. 

1 

Mairft  . . . . . 

HerO  .... 

16.  Mine. 

Ham  • . . . ; 

Ham  .... 

17.  We. 

i 

i 

MaharO  . 

| Maharo  .... 

j 

IS.  Of  ns. 

Mah&rO  • • 

| MaliSra  . • 

11).  Onr. 

To  .... 

! 

' Tn  .... 

20.  Thou. 

T airO  . . « • 

T(5rO  . 

21.  Of  thee. 

TairO  . 

Tero  . 

22.  Thino. 

Tam  • • • . 

Tam  . • 

i 23.  Yon. 

Th&rO  .... 

TliarO  • • • 

24.  Of  you. 

1 hArO  • . • • 

TharO  • • 

25.  Your. 

Gajurl — 965 


English* 

26.  He 

27.  Of  him 

28.  His  . 

29.  They 

80.  Of  them 

81.  Tlieir 

32.  Hand 

33.  Foot 

34.  Nose 

35.  Eye 
3G.  Mouth 

37.  Tooth 

38.  Ear 

39.  Hair  . 

40.  Head 

41.  Tongue 

42.  Belly 

43.  Back 


Mtw&tl. 

• • WO  ( fem.  w&) 

• • WnT-kfl  . 

• . WaT-ko  . 

. Wo 

• * Un-kO 

• • Un-kO 

. Hat 

i 

| 

• • | Pag 

. • Nak 

i 

• • Akhya  . 

. . MSh 

. uat 

. • Kan 

. Bal 

• • Sir 

. • Jib 

• P(5fc 

i 

i 

. - | Mahgar  . 


QnjnrI  (Hazara), 

0 (fem.  w5) 

Us-kO 

Us-ko 


. Dhiddh 

. Mar 


I YOanfzai  Gujurt. 

i 

j 

i 

| Oh,  wuh 

j Us-ko,  ns-kl  (fem.) 
Us-ko 

i 

! 

wo 


U n-kO 

• 

• 

. Un-kO, 

Un-krt 

- 

- 

. Un-kO, 

Hntth 

• 

• 

• Hath 

Pair 

• 

• 

. Pair 

Nsikk 

• 

• 

i 

. Nakh 

Akkh 

• 

• 

1 

. Akh 

M«ih 

• 

• 

. m 

Dand 

• 

• 

. Dand 

Kann 

• 

• 

. Kan 

Bal 

• 

- 

. Bah 

Sir 

• 

. Sar 

Jibh 

. Jlbli 

Dhadh  . . 

Li-uidO  • 


44.  Iron  • • 

j 

Lok 

- 

• 

LuhO 

- 

• 

• 

Loho 

45.  Gold  . 

• 

i 

i 

• j 

SOnu 

- 

• 

. SOnO 

• 

• 

• 

Rato  zar 

46.  Silver 

• 

1 

1 

RtipO 

. lluppO 

• 

Chito  zar 

47.  Father 

• 

•i 

i 

Bap 

. Biipp 

• 

# 

Bap 

•18.  Mother 

Ma 

. M a 

• 

Ma 

49.  Brother 

• 

• 

Bhal 

• 

. Bbal 

- 

Bhal 

50.  Sister  • 

# 

- 

<w 

BahSp. 

• 

. Bhep 

• 

• 

i 

Bain 

51.  Man 

• 

• 

Ad*ml 

• 

• 

. Adml 

• 

. j 

Adml 

52.  Woman  • 

• 

• 

! 

| Lugal 

• 

. i Trirat 

• 

• 

. 

Trlmat 

Yumfzki  Ajrl. 

Gujuri  (Kashmir). 

English. 

Oh,  wuh 

Wfl 

. 

20.  He.  , 

Us-kO  . 

Us-ko  . 

27.  Of  him. 

Ufl-ka  . 

Us-ko  . 

j 28.  His. 

\ 

Ws  . 

Vi 

• • • • 

1 

| 29.  They. 

| 

Un-kG  . 

1 

Un-gfl  . 

1 30.  Of  them. 

XJ  n-ko  . 

Un-gO  - 

1 

31.  Their. 

Hath  . 

» 

; Hatth  . 

| 

32.  Hand. 

Pair 

1 Pair 

33.  Foot. 

Nak 

; Nakk 

i 

5 34.  Nose. 

’ ! 

Akh 

. 1 Akkli 

. ' 35.  Eye. 

Mah 

! 

. . Mnh 

. 36.  Mouth. 

i Dand 

. Dand 

37.  Tooth. 

Kan 

. Kann 

38.  Ear. 

Bap 

. Bal  ... 

39.  Hair. 

Sir 

. Sir 

40.  Head. 

Jibh 

. Jib 

41.  Tongue. 

IDhid 

• 

P^t 

. 42.  Belly. 

Man  gar  . 

| 

i 

* j 

MOra 

43.  Back. 

' LfihO 

0 

Ti.lllO 

. 41.  Iron. 

Itattrt  zar 

i 

i 

i 

SOno 

. 15.  Gold. 

Chittfi  zar 

i 

Cliandi  • 

. 46.  Silver. 

Bap 

• 

Aba  (one's  own  father),  bap  17.  Father. 

(another's  father). 

MS  . 

• 

j 

' 4 - 

Ama 

48.  Mother. 

Bhal  • 

• 

Bhal 

i 

4 12.  Brother. 

i 

| Baii> 

i 

! Bahai^,  bahav  • 

i 

50.  Sister. 

Ja\iO  • « 

! Adml  • 

i 

51.  Man. 

i 

| TrSmt  • * 

I 

j ZananS  • 

52.  Womnn. 

i 

Gujurl — 967 


EagU 

mb. 

XMU. 

Gnjurf  (Hazara). 

' 1 

Yfisnfsai  Gujurl. 

53>  W if® 

• 

• 

• 

Lttg&l 

• 

a 

• 

• 

Trlmt 

a a 

a 

Trimat  . 

• 

54.  Child 

• 

a 

• 

Bftjak 

a 

• 

• 

• 

Bacheho  • 

• a 

i 

NSnda,  mftsflm 

• 

55.  Son  . 

• 

a 

BStO 

• 

a 

• 

'i 

Pat 

• % 

a 

p«t  . . . 

• 

56.  Daughter 

• 

a 

Beta 

a 

• 

• 

i 

Dhl 

• a 

a 

Dhl  • • 

• 

57.  Slave 

• 

• 

« 

B5d« 

a 

• 

• 

* j 

Gliulam  • 

• • 

a 

Mrayrt  • 

• 

58.  Cultivator 

• 

• 

• 

Jimld&r 

a 

a 

ZimidSr  . 

a • 

Zaraidar,  hay  f . 

j 

j 

59.  Shepherd 

• 

• 

• 

aaa  • 

• • 

I 

Ajri 

a • 

Ajri  • • 

60.  God  • 

• 

• 

Tsar 

• 

a 

EQmdS  . 

a a 

Khuda  . . • 

• 

61.  Devil 

• 

a 

Bhat 

• 

• 

• 

gli  atari  • 

• a 

Shaitan  • 

■ 

C2.  Sun  . 

• 

a 

Srtraj 

• 

• 

• 

Dili 

a • 

• 

Dl  ( also  means  € day  ') 

j 

i 

63.  Moon 

« 

a 

Chad 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Cliann 

a a 

Chan  • • 

i 

i 

i 

64.  Star  . 

• 

a 

Tarrt 

* 

• 

Tarn 

a • 

Tam 

' 

• 1 

65.  Fire  . 

• 

a 

• 

Ag 

• 

• 

• 

Ag  g 

a a 

a 

Ag  ... 

66.  Water 

• 

a 

Paqil 

• 

• 

a 

Pa  ill 

a a 

a 

Paul 

• 

67.  Honae 

a 

a 

• 

Ghar 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Gliar 

1 

a a 

' Gliar  „ • . 

» 

• t 

i 

68.  Horae 

a 

a 

• 

Ghara 

• 

• 

• 

’ Ghflrfl  • 

1 * 

• a 

' Ghrtrfl  . . • 

i 

i 

69.  Cow  . 

• 

a 

• 

Gay 

• 

• 

• 

1 

!GS 

a a 

| Oft  a a a 

j 

70.  Dog  . 

• 

a 

f 

Kntta 

• 

• 

# 

Kutt^  a 

1 

a • 

a 

i 

! KlltO  a • a 

’j 

71.  Ca*  • 

a 

• 

• 

BilAl  (/em.) 

• 

• 

Billd  ( mate .) 

a a 

a 

Bill  • a • 

72.  Cock  . 

a 

• 

• 

Kukafft 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Knkknp  • 

a • 

a 

Kflkaj-  • • , 

# 

78.  Duck . 

a 

• 

• 

Batak 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Badk 

a a 

a 

Batak  e aaa 

•• 

74.  Ass  . 

a 

• 

• 

Gadhd 

a 

• 

• 

• 

Khato  . 

a a 

a 

G&dhO  a a « 

4 

75.  Camel 

a 

• 

• 

tfth 

• 

• 

• 

f;th 

a a 

a 

trjjh  (Pw$*0)#  flth  . 

• 

76.  Bird  . 

a 

• 

• 

Pakhdrft 

• 

• 

• 

Pakhgrft 

a a 

• 

Chin 

• 

77.  Go  . 

a 

a 

• 

.Ta  . 

• 

• 

• 

J3  . 

a a 

a 

Chal,  ( infinitive ) ohalap 

• 

78.  Gat  . 

a 

a 

• 

Khi 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Kha  • 

a a 

a 

Kha,  kh&wap  • 

• 

79.  Sit  . 

a 

• 

• 

Bais 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Bais  • 

• a 

a 

Bais,  baisau 

• 

968— Gujurl. 


Yfcrafzai  A]  ft. 


Gnjurt  (Kashmir). 


English. 


TrSmt 


Ran  ...»  53.  Wife. 


Nikkfl,  xn&flflm 


Bacha 


. , 54.  Child. 


| Pfit  (one'i  own  son),  gadrfl  55.  Son. 
( another9 8 son). 


Gulam  . 


. 56.  Daughter. 


. ! 57.  Slave. 


Hall 


! 58.  Cultivator. 


! Ajri 


gbuda 


abftitan  or  Qljfttan 


Pah  aid 


Khuda  . » • 


afcitan  • 


. I 59.  Shepherd. 


60.  God. 


I 61.  Devil. 


. 62.  Sun. 


Chaun 


. 63.  Moon. 


. 1 04.  Star. 


. 65.  Fire. 


# 66.  Water. 


I Ghar 


Ghftr* 


. 67.  House. 


. 08.  Horse. 
, . 69.  Cow. 


Kutta 


. . 70.  Dog. 


. 71.  Cat. 


Kukur 


llai  • 


Gaddfl  . 


I Kuknr 


Ohiri  • 


Chal  . 


. ! Batak 


KUO 


i Khii 


. 72.  Cock. 


73.  Duck. 


74.  As*. 


75.  Camel. 


76.  llinl. 


77.  Go. 


78.  Eat. 


. Bais 


79.  Sit. 


VOL.  IX,  PART  IV. 


Guiurl  —969 

6 H 


English. 

Mewati. 

Gujurl  (Hazara). 

Yufiafsa.i  Gujurl. 

80.  Come 

• 

Aw 

• 

Au  .... 

A,  &-j&,  twa^  . 

81.  Beat  . 

• 

Mfir 

• 

Mar  • . 

Mar,  maray 

82.  Stand 

• 

Utb 

• 

Kha}  .... 

Kha^O  ho,  khafO  hoo 

83.  Die 

• 

Mar 

• 

Mar  «... 

Mar-ja,  mara^n  • 

84.  Gire 

• 

DO 

• 

Do  .... 

Dai,  daiwan 

85.  Run  . 

Dany 

• 

Nas  .... 

Bhaj,  bbajan  • 

86.  Up . 

Upar 

• 

UfrS  • • • 

OphrS  .... 

87.  Near 

NlyO 

• 

Nerai  • • . 

Naij-e  .... 

88.  Down 

Nlchai 

• 

Tala  .... 

TRfii  .... 

89.  Far  . 

9 

DfSr 

• 

Dfir  .... 

Dllr 

90.  Before 

Agai 

• 

Agg«  .... 

Ag6  .... 

91.  Behind 

. 

Plchhai 

• 

PiuliclihO 

Cbliekaf,  paohhS 

92.  Who 

Kano 

• 

Kfio  .... 

KOy  .... 

93.  What 

• 

Ke 

• 

Ke  .... 

Ki  .... 

94.  Why 

KyS 

• 

Kit?  .... 

Kau  .... 

95.  And 

i 

1 

Ar 

• 

Te  . . 

A . 

96.  But 

Par 

• 

Apdfl  .... 

97.  If  . 

Jai 

• 

i Jc  . • • • 

; 

K*  ( P«4<<5)  . 

98.  Yes  . 

• 

Hi? 

• 

j 

i 

AhS  .... 

i 

Ho  .... 

99.  No  . 

e 

NSh 

- 

Nlh 

Ni  .... 

]0i).  Alas 

Hay 

• 

j HS0  haO 

Arman  dai  (j pity  is) 

(Pnsfyto). 

101.  A father  • 

• 

J B«i> 

• 

1 Bapp 

! 

YakO  bap  • 

102.  Of  a father 

e 

Bap-kO 

Bapp-ko  • 

YakO  bilp-ko  or  (obi.)  -ka  . 

103.  To  a father 

• 

Bapnai 

i 

• 

Bapp-na  • • 

i 

YakO  bap-tah  (Ptiffyd)  . 

104.  From  a father 

e 

Bap-taT 

• 

Bapp-tO,  (dfir-8,  from  far)  , 

YakO  bap-nah  (ditto) 

105.  Two  fathers 

• 

DO  bap 

• 

DO  b5pp  .... 

Do  bap  .... 

106.  Fathers 

e 

i 

B&p 

• 

Bapp  « • ... 

B&p  • • • • 

i 

970— Gujurl. 


Yusuf zal  Ajfl. 


Gujurl  (Kashmir). 


English. 


A-]5  • • * 

Mar 

KliarO  bo 
Mar-ja  . 

Dai 

Bkaj,  nas 

Upar,  ficbat  {Puff^tO) 
NaiyO,  kupO 
Tayfl  het,  tagii 
Dfir  • • 

AgS,  siimnS  • 
Pichhe,  kad 
1£Oli  • • 

K 0 • • 


To,  at  fi  . 
KJjO  {pnftto' 
Ka  {ditto) 
Hall  • 

Nl 

Arman 

Ek  bap 
Ek  bap-ko 
Ek  bap-tub 
Ek  b&p-tS 
Do  bap  • 
B&p 


An 

. . Mar 


f KbalO  bo 


80.  Come.’ 

81.  Boat. 

82.  Stand. 


Mar  . . . . j 

83.  Die. 

Drt  ....  | 

84.  Dive. 

Dor 

85.  Run. 

tJpar  .... 

8fi.  i:p. 

NOfe 

87.  Near. 

Bunli  • . . ; 

88.  Down. 

i 

Dflr  . . . . ! 

! 

80.  Far. 

1 

j 

Ago  . . . - j 

90.  Befi  re. 

PickhO  . . . • j 

91.  Behind. 

.... 

92.  Who. 

j 

Kfl  .... 

93.  What. 

i Kijd  .... 

! 

94.  Why. 

; HOr  . . . • j 

95.  And. 

i 

■ Magar  .... 

90.  But. 

! Agar  .... 

97.  If. 

Hrt  .... 

98.  Yes. 

, Nai  . 

99.  No. 

. HaO  . 

100.  Ala?. 

. Bap  . 

101.  A father. 

. Bap-kO  . 

102.  Of  a father. 

, Bap-n5  . 

103.  To  a father. 

. Bap-tbS  • • • • 

104.  Frcm  a father. 

. DO  bSp  • 

, j 105.  Two  fathers. 

. BSp  • 

10G.  Fatheis. 

" Gujurl— 1 

VOL.  IX,  PAM  IV- 


English. 

MiwStl. 

107.  Of  fathers 

• 

BapS-kff  . 

10S.  To  fathers 

• 

Bapa-nai 

109.  From  fathers 

• 

BapS-taT . 

110.  A daughter 

• 

Bf'tl 

111.  Of  a (laughter 

lioti-ko  • 

112  To  a daughter 

* 

Beti-nai  . 

* 

113.  From  a daughter 

' 

BStl-taT  . 

114.  Two  daughters  . 

i 

DA  botya  . 

115.  Daughters 

i 

. i 

{ 

Betyfl 

116.  Of  daughters 

• 

i 

B(HyS-kfl 

117.  To  daughters 

• 

BStya-nai 

118.  From  daaghtors 

• 

BetyS-taT 

1 19.  A good  man 

flic  bhalA  ad* in! 

1*20.  Of  a good  man  . 

• 

Rk  bhala  :’idam!-kA 

121.  To  a good  man  . 

• 

Rk  bhala  ;ldaml-nai 

1*22.  From  a good  man 

Rk  bhala  ndaml-taT 

123.  Two  good  men  . 

DA  bhala  adaml 

124.  Good  men 

• 

Bhala  fulfill! 

125.  Of  good  men 

• ; 

Bhala  fulnmya-kA 

126.  To  good  men 

i 

i 

Bhala  ad*myS-nai 

127.  From  good  men  . 

• 

Bhala  iidarnya-taT 

12b.  A good  woman  . 

• 

Rk  bhali  lugai 

1 ‘29.  A bail  boy 

• 

! 

Rk  bui'A  chhArA 

130.  Good  women 

• 

Bhall  Ingalyil  . 

131.  A l>;wl  girl 

• 

•c 

rC 

"o 

Ji 

w- 

132.  Good 

• 

B’.alO 

13*3.  lletti-r  . . 

(Wai-taT)  bhalfl 

I 


Qujuri  (Ila/aru). 

Yfttufzai  Gujari. 

BappS-kA 

BapS-kA  or  (obi.)  -ka 

/V 

Bappa-na 

BapS-tah  or  -nvkh 

Bappa-to 

BtipS-tali  • • 

; Uhl  .... 

Yaka  dhl  . • . 

Dhl-ko  .... 

i 

Yak  6 dlu-kA,  (obi.)  -ka  . j 

Dlil-na  .... 

i 

YakS  dhi- tab  , , . ! 

Dhl-to  .... 

Yaks  dhl-tali  . 

DO  dh  IS  . % . 

Do  dhi  .... 

Dhlg  .... 

Uhl  .... 

DhiS-kA  .... 

DhlS-kA,  (oil.)  -ka  . 

DhiS-na  .... 

DhlS-tah 

i 

Dhia-te  .... 

i 

Dlfiil-tah 

Rk  chafigA  ad  ini 

Yuko  chango  admi  . . 

| 

Rkun  changa  adnil-kA 

! 

Yak  A changA  adml-kA  . \ 

Rkun  chahga  adml-na 

i 

YakA  cliahgA  adml-tah  . j 

t 

Rkun  chahga  ndml-tS 

1 

YakA  cliahgA  adml-tah  . i 

DAy  chahga  ad  ml 

Da  chahga  adml 

Changa  ad  ml  . 

Changa  adm! 

Chahga  adinIS-kA 

I 

Chahga  admlS-kA  . , ; 

i 

Chahga  admia-na 

1 

Chahga  ad  nnS-tah  . . ■ 

| 

Chahga  ad rn la- to 

j 

Chahga  admia-tah  . . { 

| j 

Rk  ehahgl  trlmt 

| Yaka  chahgl  trlmat 

ftk  mandA  lAhj*A 

! 

YakA  nakar  (Pufatd)  jakat 

Chahgl  trlmte  . 

Chahgl  trlmat 

Rk  mandl  b.'tkl 

i 

Yaka  nakar  (Pnsfytd)  bSfckl  j 

j 

ChangA  .... 

CliahgA  .... 

(IJs- to)  chahgA,  much 

OhahgA  . 

changA.  1 

1 

972 — Gniurl. 


Yflsufzai  AjrL 

BapS-ko  . 

Bftpa-tah 
BapS-tC  . 

j Ek  dhi  , 

i 

i 

| Ek  dhi-krt 
Ek  dhi-tah 
6k  dhi-ta 

: Do  dhi  . 

i 

! 

; Dhi 

! 

i Dliiii-ko  . 

i 

! Dhi;l-tak 

i 

| 

■ DhiS-tO  . 

I 

, 6k  changO  ja^O 

i 

i 

Ek  changO  janfc-kn  . 
Ek  cliahgo  ja^a-tali  . 
Ek  changfi  jagii-td 
Do  clmn  go  ja$a 
ChangO  jana  . 
ChangO  ja^a-ko 

i 

ChangO  jagn-tah  • 

i 

! 

j ChangO  ja^a-tO 
i Ek  changi  trOmt 
Ek  nakar  lnyO 
Changi  trOmt  . 

6k  nakar  betki 
ChaiigO  . . 

ChangO  , . 

I 

I 


Gnjnrl  (Kashmir). 

. Bapi-kO  . 

. ! BapR-na  . 

• Bapa-thn 

. Tl  ... 

. Ti-kO 

| 

. Tl-na 

. Ti-thi  . 

.Dot! 

. TiS 

. Tm-go  . 

. Tia-na 
. Tla-thS  . 

. Ek  changd  adml 
. Eka^  chaiiga  ad  mi-gO 
. 6ka$  changa  adml-na 
. Ekap  changa  adrai-th3 
. Do  changa  ndrni 

. Changa  adml  . 

i 

! . 

< , Changa  adiniS-gfl 

! ^ 

. i Changa  admia-na 

i 

i 

• ; Changa  admia-thn  . 

• 6k  changi  zaniinS 

• : Rk  paifO  gadrO 

| 

. Changi  zanaua 
. Ek  pairl  gadri  » 

, ChangO  . 

. Much  changO 


English. 

. 107.  Of  fathers. 

• 108.  To  fathers. 

. 10 j.  From  fathers. 

• 110.  A daughter. 

. J 111.  Of  a daughter. 

! 

. j 112.  To  <i  daughter. 

| 

. ; 1 13.  From  a daughter. 

. j 114.  Two  daughters. 

i 

i 

. | 115.  Daughters. 

I 

i 

. 116.  Of  daughters. 

. j 117.  To  daughters. 

. | 118.  From  daughters. 

. j HO.  A good  man. 

! 

| 

. ^ 120.  Of  a good  man. 

i 

i 

. . 121.  To  a good  man. 

I 

. j 122.  From  a good  man. 
. , 123.  Two  good  men. 

. 124.  Good  men. 

j 

. , 125.  Of  good  men. 

j 

. ; 126.  To  good  nu  n. 

i 

i 

. 127.  From  good  men. 

! 

i 

. 12S.  A good  woman. 

. 12l).  A had  boj^. 

1.30.  Good  women. 

. 131.  A had  girl. 

. 132.  Good. 

. 133.  Better, 


Gujuri— 973 


Engttsh. 

1 

1 

Miwitt. 

Gujnrf  (Hazara). 

Yflsufzai  Gnjurl. 

184.  Beat  . 

• • 

Sab-tai  bhald 

• 

e 

• 

S5rS-t3  oha&gd 

• 

• 

HabbS-mS  ohaftgd  ( [all - 

j 

among  good)* 

135.  High 

i 

i 

• . • 

fjchd 

* 

• 

• 

Uohat  (Pug^to),  flohd 

136.  Higher  . 

• • 

(WaT-taT)  SohO 

• 

99 

tJohfl  • • • • 

137.  Highest  . 

■ • 

Sab-tai  flohd 

9 

\ 

Habbft-mS  flohd 

138.  A horse  • 

i 

• • 

GhOfO  . 

9 

Gli  Of o 

■ • 

• 

YakO  ghdfO 

139.  A mare  • 

e • 

Ghori  • 

9 

GhOfl 

• • 

• 

Yaka  ghdfl  • . , 

140.  Horses 

e • 

GhOfi  • 

9 

GhdfS 

• • 

• 

Ghdr&  . 

141.  Mares 

• • 

GhflfyS  . 

9 

GhOf?  . •• 

• • 

* 

CrhofiS  . w 

142.  A ball 

• • 

BijSr 

• 

Dand 

• • 

Yakd  dad 

143.  A cow  • 

• • 

Gfty 

• 

• 

GS 

■ 

• 

Yaka  gS  . . . | 

144.  Bulls  • 

• • 

Bijir 

• 

9 

Dand 

• • 

• 

Dad  . . . . 

145.  Cows 

■ • 

G»y5 

• 

9 

GS 

» • 

• 

Ga  * . . • 

146.  A dog 

• « 

Kuttd 

• 

Kuttd 

• • 

• 

Yakd  kutd  . 

147.  A bitch 

• e 

Kuttl 

• 

Kuttl 

• 

Yaka  kuti 

148.  Dogs  • 

• • 

Kutta 

• 

• 

Kutta 

• 

• 

Kuta  . , . , 

149.  Bitches  * 

• • 

KuttlyS  . 

• 

j Kutti  . * 

! 

• 

• 

Kuti  .... 

150.  A he-go&t 

• 

Bakard 

• 

• 

I 

i 

! Bakrd 

i 

• 

• 

Yakd  bfckrd  . 

151.  A female  goat 

• • 

Bakarl 

• 

i 

i 

Bakrl  • 

• • 

• 

Yaka  bakri  . . . 

152.  Goats  • 

• • 

Bak*ra 

• 

Bakra 

• 

• 

Bakrl  «... 

153.  A male  deer 

e ■ 

Hit  o 

Harn 

• 

• 

Yakd  flsai  (Pufytti) 

154.  A female  ‘deer 

• * 

Hir*oI 

i 

Harm 

• 

• 

Yaka  flsae  (ditto) 

155.  Deer 

• • 

r 

j Hiro 

i 

Harn 

• 9 

• 

tTsae  . 

1$G.  I am  • 

• • 

1 

j Mai  hS  . 

i 

Ha  ha,  has 

9 9 

• 

Hflhai  . 

157.  Thou  art  • 

• • 

| Tn  hai  . 

j 

• 

To  ai  hai 

9 9 

• 

Tu  hai  . . . 

158.  He  is  • 

• • 

! WO  hai  . 

i 

• 

• 

0 ai,  hai 

9 9 

• 

Wuh  hai 

159.  We  are  • 

• • 

! 

Ham  hS  . 

• 

• 

Ham  hS  . 

9 

• 

Ham  hai 

ICO.  You  are 

• • 

Tam  hd  . 

• 

• 

Tam  d,  hd 

• • 

Tam  hai  , . . 

J 

974 — Gnjurl. 


Yfiaufzai  Ajff. 

Habba-mft  ohabgO  « 
Tjchfl,  flchat  . 
tTcho,  flchat  . 
Habb&-mS  ficbO 
Ek  ghOjO 
Ek  gbOyl 
GhOya 
GhOji 
Ek  dftnd 


I Oujnrl  (Kashmir). 

S5r5-th&  ohafigO 

Uchob©  . 

I 

! 

Much  uchoho  . 
i Sar5-thfi  uchohO 
KnrO 

! 

i 

K8fl 

. • • • 

. Kflr? 


*V  1 

Ek  ga 

GS 

Dand  • • • • j 

Dand 

% 

Ga  ...  * 

M Al 

Gawa 

Ek  kutt©  • 

KutO 

t -♦  <•  l 

Ek  kutti  . . • : 

Kutl 

Kntta 

Kuta 

Kutti  • • • 

Kutl 

Ek  bakrO 

i 

BakrO 

1 

Ek  bakrl  • • • 

Bakrl 

i 

Bakrl 

i 

Bakra 

Ek  fisai  . 

ROsO 

Ek  ftsao  . 

Rflsl 

j 

tJsae  • 

! ROsa 

H8  bai  • 

; Hil  ho 

i 

To  bai  . 

; Ti  bai 

Wuh  bai  • 

Wfi  hai 

Ham  bai 

Ham  ha 

Tam  bai  . • • 

| 

| Tam  hS 

English . 

• 134.  Best. 

. 135.  High. 

. 136.  Higher. 

. 137.  Highest. 

. 138.  A horse. 

. 139.  A mare. 

. 140.  Horses. 

. 141.  Mares. 

. 142.  A bull. 

. 143.  A cow. 

. 144.  Bulls. 

. 145.  Cows. 

. 146.  A dog. 

. 147.  A bitch. 

. 148.  Dogs. 

. 149.  Bitches. 

. 150.  A lie-goat. 

. 151.  A female  goat. 
. 152.  Goats. 

. 153.  A male  deer. 

. 154.  A female  deer. 
. 155.  Deer. 

. ,156.  I am. 

. 157.  Thou  art. 

I 

. * 158.  He  is. 

. j 159.  We  are 
. j 160.  Yon  arc. 


Gujnrl— 975 


English, 


Mtwati. 


Gujnrl  (Hasara). 


Yusuf  sal  Gujurl, 


161.  They  are  . 

• 

. Wfi  haT  . 

• 

• 

. Wfiai,  hai,h# 

. 

• Wfi  h&i  • 

a 

e 

162.  I was 

• 

• Mat  tbs  • 

• 

• 

. HSthO  . 

• 

e 

• Htt  the  . 

• 

163.  Thou  wast 

. 

. Tfl  tho  . 

• 

• 

. TO  tho  . 

• 

. Tfl  thO  . 

• 

164.  He  was 

* 

. Wotho  . 

• 

• 

. 0 tho 

e 

• Wuh  thfl 

• 

165.  We  were  . 

e 

• Ham  th& . 

• 

• 

• Ham  th5 

• 

• Ham  th&  • 

• 

166.  You  were 

• 

• Tam  tha  . 

• 

• 

. Tam  tha 

e 

. Tam  th& . 

• 

367.  They  were 

e 

. W8  tha  . 

m 

• 

. Wo  tbS  . 

• 

. WSthS  . 

• 

168.  Be  . 

• 

. YVhft 

a 

. 

.Ho 

e 

. HO 

• 

169.  To  lie 

• 

• Hflufi 

• 

• 

. Ho?3 

• 

• Hop  • 

• 

170.  Being 

• 

. HOW 

• 

• 

• Hsts  • 

• 

. Ho-ko 

• 

171.  Haying  been 

• 

. Hfl-kar  . 

• 

• 

. H05 

e 

. Hfl-giO  . 

• 

172.  I may  be  . 

• 

. Mai  MU 

• 

• 

. MaT  hs2 

e 

. HtthttgO 

• 

173.  I shall  be  . 

a 

. MaT  h2gS 

• 

• 

. MnT  hOiigO 

. 

. 1 Htt  httgO 

• 

174.  I should  be 

» 

« .. 

1 tt» 

Htt  hstt  hai 

i 

• 

175.  Beat 

• 

• Mar 

• 

• 

• Mar 

• 

! 

. Mar 

• 

17G.  To  beat 

• 

# Mar*uft  . 

• 

• 

• MSrnS  • 

• 

• ^ Marap  • 

• 

177.  Beating  . 

• 

. MarHS 

• 

• 

• Marta 

• 

. MiirS 

• 

178.  Having  beaten 

• 

. Mar-kar  . 

• 

e 

• Mare  • 

• 

. Mar  lift 

i 

• 

179.  I beat 

• 

. MaT  m&r2 

• 

• 

. Il2  mSr3 

• 

i 

. Htt  mar 2 

• 

180.  Thou  beateat 

• 

« Tfl  mar  a 

# 

• 

. To  mSrS  • 

• 

. Tfl  mar&i 

• 

181.  He  beats  . 

• 

. We  mara 

• 

• 

• 0 mSre  . 

• 

. ,Wuh  m&rai 

• 

182.  We  beat  . 

e 

. Ham  mart 

e 

. Ham  mart 

• 

. ' Ham  m&rt 

i 

• 

183.  You  beat  • 

. 

• Tam  marS 

• 

e 

. Tam  marfl 

• 

. Tam  m&r3 

• 

184.  They  beat 

• 

. WG  maraT 

. 

• 

. Ws  marl 

• 

. Ws  m&raT 

• 

185.  I beat  ( Pa$t  Ten# a) 

. MaT  m&ryS 

. 

e 

. Me  marifS 

• 

. MaT  m&riO 

i 

• 

1S6.  Thou  beateat 

(Past  TaT  maryS 

. 

. T8  mSrSfl 

• 

. TaT  mans 

• 

• 

Tense), 

187.  He  beat  ( Part  Ten »e) 

i . WaT  maryfl 

• 

• 

. Us-nS  raSrSs 

• 

. j Us  (or  us  -ns)  mfir'd 

' ! 

976 — Guiurl, 


YUsufiai  Ajfl. 


Gujar!  (Kashmir). 


English. 


WS  kai  . 

• 

• 

• 

Vi  hS  . 

. 161.  Tkey  aro. 

i 

Hi  tka  . 

• 

• 

• 

Ha  tha  . 

. 162.  I was. 

Ta  tka  . 

a 

• 

• 

Til  tha  . 

. 163.  Tkou  wast. 

i 

Wuk  tka 

• 

• 

• 

Wa  tha  . 

! 

. ! 164.  He  was. 

Ham  tka 

• 

• 

Ham  tha 

i 

i 

. 165.  We  were. 

Tam  tha  . 

• 

• 

Tam  tlia  ; 

. 166.  You  were. 

! 

Wa  tka  . 

• 

• 

VI thS  . 

• 

• 

9 

. 167.  They  were. 

Ha 

• 

• 

Ha 

• 

i 

. 168.  Be. 

Ha^ 

• 

Hu^a 

i 

. | 161).  To  be. 

Ha-ke 

• 

Hata 

. 170.  Being. 

Ha-gia 

• 

Ha-ka  . 

i 

. 171.  Having  been. 

HU  ka-ga 

• 

• 

• 

lift  ha  . 

. 172.  I may  be. 

Hu  hft-ga 

• 

• 

• 

Hu  kaga . 

. 173.  I shall  be. 

Hfi  htt-hai 
Mar 

Marau 

Maian  ( verbal  noun) 
Mar-k3  • • 

HU  marft-hai 
Ta  ni  aril- hai  • • 

Wah  marU-kai 
Ham  marU-hai  • 

Tam  marl-kai  . 

Wo  m3r£-kai  • 

Ma\  maria 

Tai  maria  • • 

Us  (or  us-n3)  maria 

VOL.  IX,  PA11T  IV. 


Mar 

Marntt  . 

Marta 

M ar-ko  . 


174.  I b lion lil  be. 

. 175.  Beat. 

• : 176.  To  beat. 

• 177.  Beating. 

. 178.  Having  beaton. 


Hn  marU,  liu^marli  la^  179.  I beat. 
gUvI,  li§  maro,  hU  raarS 
lagflvl. 

Tu  mare,  til  mare  lagayl  • 180.  Thou  beatest. 


Wii  mare,  wii  maiv  lagftvl,  181.  He  beats, 
mar  a,  mara  lagGvi. 

i 

Ham  mara,  ham  mara  la-  : 182.  We  beat, 
gavl. 

Tam  mar?,  tam  mare  lagSvi  183.  You  beat. 


Yl  mare,  yI  mare  lagavi 
Mai  maria  • 

Te  maria 

i Us-na  maria  • • 


184.  They  beat. 

185.  I beat  ( Past  Tense ). 


186.  TbQu  beatest  (Past 

Tonse ). 

187.  He  boat  ( Past  Tense). 


Cfujiirl— 977 

6 I 


English. 

Me  wati. 

Gujuri  (Hazara). 

Yusufsal  Gujuri. 

188. 

We  beat  (Fast  Tense)  . 

Ham  maryo 

• 

Ham-no  mar£0 

• 

Haxn-nO  m&rio  \ 

« 

189. 

You  boat  ( Fast  Tense ) 

Tam  maryo 

• 

Tam-nO  marSo 

• 

Tam-nO  mario  • 

• 

190. 

They  beat  ( Past  Tense ) 

Un  maryo 

• 

Unhe  mSrOO 

• 

Un-nO  mario 

• 

i 

191. 

I am  beating 

• • 

Mai  marS-hu  . 

• 

Hfl  mSrn-hn 

• 

Hft  raartt-hai  . 

• 

192. 

1 was  beating 

• • 

MaT  marai-thO 

Hn  maril-tho 

% 

Hft  marft-tho  . 

• 

193. 

I had  beaten 

MaT  maryo-thO 

I 

i 

• 

1 

MS  maryO-thO  . 

• 

Htt  mario- hai  • 

• 

194. 

I may  beat 

Mai  inaril 

llilmSrU 

• 

Hft  marftgO  . . 

■ 

195. 

I shall  beat 

• • 

Mail  marugO 

• 

Hfi  marSgO  5 

lift  marftgO 

• 

196. 

Thou  wilt  beat 

• 

• 

Tfi  maraige 

• 

i 

TO  maregO 

• 

Ta  maraigO 

• 

197. 

He  will  beat 

* • 

W0  maraigO 

! 

O maregO 

• 

Wuh  maraigO  . . 

• 

198. 

We  shall  beat 

• • 

Ham  mai'a<?a  . 

Ham  mariga  . 

• 

Ham  maraigS  . . 

• 

199. 

You  will  beat 

• • 

Tam  mai  Ogf\ 

• 

Tam  marOga 

Tam  maraiga  . 

9 

200. 

They  will  beat 

• • 

We  maraTga 

• 

We  marSga 

• 

We  maraiga 

m 

201. 

1 should  beat 

« • 

! 

Hit  marit-hai  . . 

• 

502. 

I am  beaten 

• • 

Mail  mai  yO  hn 

• 

Hn  marO  jail  . 

• 

Hft  mario 

• 

203. 

1 was  beaten 

• • 

Max  maryo  tho 

• 

Ha  raarO  g65  . 

• 

Hit  mario- tho  . 

m 

to 

o 

I shall  be  beaten 

Mai  maryO  jaugO 

• 

Ha  mare  ja3g0 

Hit  mario  jfiftgo  . 

• i 

205. 

I go 

■ 

MaT  jan  . 

Ha  jan  • 

Hft  chalti 

206. 

Thou  goest 

• 

j 

Tfi  jay  . 

9 

TS  jae  . 

Tu  chalai  . • 

207. 

He  goes 

• • 

WO  jay  . 

• 

O j&e 

Wuh  ohalai  • • 

• 

208. 

We  go  . 

• ' • 

Ham  jih 

• 

Ham  jaS 

Ham  chalai  ( colloquial ) 

• 

209. 

You  go 

• 

j Tam  jawo 

• 

Tara  jSO 

• 

Tam  chalai  (do.) 

• 

210. 

They  go  . 

• • 

! 

| W0  jay  ah  „ 

• 

ws  jas  . 

• 

We  chalai  (do.) 

• 

211. 

1 went 

• • 

MaT  gayO 

Ha  geo  • 

H 8 gio  . 

* 1 

212.  Tliou  won  tost 

• • 

Tu  gayO  . 

• 

t3  geo  . 

• 

Ta  giO  • 

• 

213. 

He  went  . 

• • 

WO  gayO 

• 

T8  geo  . 

• ■ 

Wuh  gio  • • 

• 

214. 

We  went  . 

• • 

Ham  gay  a 

• 

Ham  gOa 

t * 

Ham  gia 

• 

978 — Gujuri. 


YGsufsai  Ajfl. 


Chijurt  (Kashmir). 


English. 


Ham-nft  marirt 

• 

Tara-n&  marirt  . 

t 

Un-nft  marirt  . 

Hft  mSrtt-hai  . 

• 

Hft  mSrft-thrt  . 

• 

Mai  marirt-hai  • 

• 

Hft  marft  hai  . 

• 

Hft  marftgrt 

• 

Trt  maraigrt 

■ 

Wuh  maraigrt  . 

• 

Ham  maraiga  . 

• 

Tam  maraiga  . 

• 

Wft  maraiga 

• 

Hft  marft -hai  • 

• 

Hft  marirt-hai  • 

• 

Hft  mftrirt-thrt  . 

m 

Hil  marirt  hftgrt 

• 

Hft  chalft-liai  . 

Trt  chalai 

Wuhohalai 

Ham  cbalai  ( colloquial ) 

Tam  chalai 

(do.) 

WS  cbalai 

(do.) 

Hft  girt  . 

Ta  gia  . 

• • 

Wuh  gia 

• • 

Ham  gi& 

• • 

, Ham-nS  mSrirt  . 

. Tam-nft  marirt  . 

Un-nft  marirt 
ll3  mar  rahirt-hrt 
. H3  mar  rahirt  . 

. MaT  marirt-thrt 

• H3  mar3 

. H3  marugrt  . 

. T3  maregrt 

• W ii  maregrt  , % 

. j Ham  marSga  . 

i 

i 

. ; Tam  mar?ga 

j ■ 

. ! Vi  marcga 

j 

i 

. i 

i 

- j H3  maro  girt 

. H3  maiv  ghvtlirt 

• ! Il3  maro  jaUgrt,  jadgrt 

I 

- j Hil  ja3,  jao,  jao  Uigrtvl 

i 

. : T3  jao,  jao  lagavl 

p 

. ! Wfi  jae,  jao  lagrtvl 

i 

. j Ham  j§,  ]5  lagavl 
• Tam  jao,  jao  lagavl  - 
. j Vi  jae,  jao  lagavl 

. ! Il3  girt  . . • 

. T3  girt 
. Wfl  girt  • 

. Ham  giya 


. 188.  We  beat  ( Past  Tense), 

. 189.  You  beat  (Past  Tense), 
. 190.  They  beat  ( Past  Tense). 
. 191.  1 atn  beating. 

. J 192.  I was  beating. 

, 193.  I had  beaten. 

. 194.  I may  beat. 

I 

. 195.  I shall  beat. 

. 196.  Thou  wilt  beat. 

. 197.  He  will  beat. 

. 198.  We  shall  beat. 

. j 199.  You  will  beat. 

i 

. ! 200.  They  will  beat. 

201:  I should  bent. 

. 202.  1 am  beaten. 

. 203.  I was  beaten. 

. 204.  I shall  bo  beaten. 

. 205.  T go. 

. 206.  Thou  gcost. 

. 207.  Ho  goes. 

. 208.  Wo  go. 

. 209.  You  go. 

. 210.  Thoy  go. 

• 211.  I wont. 

. 212.  Thou  weutcst. 

. 218.  He  went. 

. I 214.  Wo  went. 


VOL.  IX,  PAKT  IV- 


Gujuri  —979 

6i2 


English. 

MSwatl. 

Gujurl  (Haitra). 

Yusufsai  Gujurl. 

215.  You  went,  • 

Tam  gayS 

Tam  gd5 

Tam  gift  . 

216.  They  went 

W6  gayS 

Wd  gda  .... 

We  giS  . 

217.  Go  . 

Ja  . . • . . 

Ja  . . • « • 

J5  • • * » 

218.  Going 

J atd  .... 

JatC  .... 

Chalap  .... 

219.  Gone 

Gay  5 .... 

Geo  ... 

GiO  .... 

220.  What  is  your  name  ? . 

Tdx*d  ke  nSw  hai  ? 

Tdrd  nii  ko  ai  ? 

Taird  kl  n5  hai  P 

221.  How  old  is  this  horse  ? 

Yd  glidyd  kit*ni  umar-maT 
hai  ? 

Is  ghdra-kf  kitnl  ummar 
ai  P 

Yd  ghdyd  ketna  samo-kd 
hai  P 

222.  How  far  is  it  from  here 
to  Kashmir  ? 

Kashmir  it-taT  kitRnI-k  dnr 
hai  ? 

Is  ja-te  Kashmir  tayn  kitnd 
dfir  ai  ? 

Ithar-taT  Kashmir  katnfi 
dnr  hai  ? 

228.  How  many  boos  are 
there  in  yonr  father’s 
house  ? 

Teia  bap-kji  ghar-mai 

kitRna-k  beta  hai  ? 

, 

t 

Tor  a bapp-ka  ghar  kitna 
put  h§  ? 

Taird  bap-k3  ghav-m3  katnfc 
put  hai  ? 

224.  1 have  walked  a long 
way  to-day. 

Aj  maT  bhaut  cl  fir  chalyd- 

hS. 

Ajj  hS  bard  diirB  turdS 

Ilil  aj  machh  pharid 

225.  Tho  son  of  my  ancle  is 
married  to- his  sister. 

Mera  kaka-kaj>'fca-kd  by  ah 
waT-ki  bahii^-taT  liuyd- 
hai. 

Mera  patriya-kd  put  us-kl 
behp.  nal  biayd  lifid  hai. 

Maird  patyd-kd  pHt  ns-kl 
bai^  biyft  hai. 

226.  I n tho  house  is  the  sad- 
dle of  the  white  horse. 

Saped  ghdra-kl  jin  gliar- 
maT  hai. 

Chitta  ghdra-kl  kathl  ghar- 
ma  hai. 

Chita  ghdya-kd  zln  ghar 
hai. 

227.  Put  the  saddlo  upon 
his  back. 

Jin  wai-kl  pith-par  dhard  . 

Us-kl  kan  dli-pur  kathl 

ghnlld. 

Ziu  us-ka  landd-pali  ghal 
lai. 

228.  I have  beaten  his  son 
with  many  stripes. 

MaT  waT-kd  betd  bhaut 
kaiRya-taT  maryd-hai. 

Me  us-ka  pfit-ua  baya 
kdrra-nal  marc-hdc. 

MaT  us-kd  pfit  kardyah-pah 
machh  marid. 

229.  He  is  grazing  cattle  on 
the  top  of  the  hill.  j 

Wd  pahay-k;*i  fipar  ilkdr 
chara-rayd-liai. 

Oh  dhaka-ki  chdti  up  par  ga 
bakrl  chare. 

1 

Wuh  parbat-ka  sar-pah  ma 
chfirai. 

230.  He  is  sitting  on  a horse  * 

Wd  wai  raukh-kai  nlchai 

Oh  ghdya  uppur  rukkli 

Wuh  rukh-ka  tab  (below) 

under  that  tree.  j 

ghdra-par  baithyd-hai. 

lieth  bnithfl  hdd. 

ghdra-pah  baithid. 

231.  nis  brother  is  taller 
than  his  sister.  | 

WaT-kd  bhal  waT-kl  balian- 
taT  lambd  hai. 

Us-kd  bhal  us-kl  b<"hu-te  ; 
bar d iii. 

Us-kd  bhal  apoi  baiu-tah 
iichd  hai. 

j 

232.  The  price  of  that  is  two 
rupees  and  a half. 

WaT-kd  mdl  (lhai  rapaiya 
hai. 

Is-kd  mul  adhai  rupayya 
hai. 

Is-kd  mul  sa^a  dd  rupaya 
hai. 

233.  My  father  lives  in  that 
small ‘honse. 

Merd  bap  waT  okhdta  ghar- 
maT  rahai-bai. 

Merd  bapp  us  niky5  ghar- 
biclich  rahe. 

Maird  bap  us  nag  da  ghar- 
ma  bdwai. 

234.  Give  this  rupee  to  him 

Yd  rapaiyd  waT-nardyd 

Yd  rupayyd  us-na  dd 
chhdyd. 

Yd  rtipay  usa  dai  lai 

235.  Take  those  rupees  from 
him. 

Wai  rapaiya  waT-taT  1yd  . 

Ye  rupayya  us  kdlo  cha 
led. 

Wuh  nlpai  us -tah  cha  lai  • 

236.  Beat  him  well  and  bind 
him  with  ropes. 

WaT-nai  khnb  mard  ar 
jewRya-taT  bade. 

Us-na  much  mard  te  solla- 
nal  bannhd. 

Usa  chahgd  raSrlai,  a rassiS- 
pah  bad  lai. 

237.  Draw  water  from  the 
well. 

Kuwa-taT  pa&I  ka<Jhd 

Is  khal  bichchd  pa^I 
kaddhd. 

Khdi-tah  pa^l  ka4  Ini  • 

238.  Walk  before  me  . 

Merai  agai  chal 

Herd  aggd  chal 

Maira  aga-ma  chal  • 

239.  Whose  boy  comes 
behind  you  ? 

Terai  pachhai  kaTh-kd 
clihdrd  awai-hai  ? 

Terd  pichchhd  kis-kd  Idhyd 
36  P 

Kas-kd  jakat  taira  pachhl 
awai  ? 

240.  From  whom  did  you 
buy  that  ? 

Tam  w d kit-taT  mdl  llyfl  ? . 

Yd  te  kis-td  mdl-kd  liyd- 
hai? 

Yd  ohij  kas-tah  layd  ? 

241.  From  a shopkeeper  of 
the  village. 

G3w-k5  6k  h5t-walS-tai  . 

i 

QirE-kS  kise  dukanhalS- 
kdjo. 

Gr3-ka  dfik5ndar-tah 

980  — Gujurl. 


1 

Yftsufzai  Ajff. 

Gujnrl  (Kashmir). 

English. 

Tam  gia  . . . • 

Tam  giyS 

215.  You  went. 

Wd  giS  .... 

Vi  giyS  .... 

216.  They  went. 

Chal  • • • • 

J5  .... 

217.  Go. 

Chala^ft  (verbal  noun) 

Jsto  .... 

218.  Going. 

Gio  .... 

GiO-vI  .... 

219.  Gone. 

Taird  kd  nS  bai  f 

1 

TerO  nS  kft  bai  ? 

220.  What  is  your  name  ? 

Yd  ghdfd  kii^a  samS-kd 
bai  ? 

Yfi  kdrd  kitnfl-ek  bard  hai  ? 

221.  How  old  is  this  horse  ? 

Kashmir  ithar-te  kitod  dfir 
hai  ?■ 

Itu  Kashmir  kitnl-dk  dfir 
hai  ? 

222.  How  far  is  it  from  here 
to  Kashmir  ? 

Taird  bap-kd  ghar-m2  kit$& 
put  bai  ? 

TTn  aj  mu  ebb  phirid  bai 

i 

Tera  bap-ka  gbar-ma  ketna 
put  be  ? 

Mai  ajj  much  pdndd  kajiG- 
bai. 

223.  How  many  sons  are 

there  in  your  father's 
house  ? 

224.  I have  walked  a long 

way  to  day. 

Mail'd  pityd-kd  pfit-nd  is-kl 
bai  9 biyahi  bai. 

Mf*ra  chacha-ka  pfit-kO  biah 
us-kl  b&ba^-nal  bo  gio. 

225.  The  son  of  ray  uncle  is 
married  to  his  sister. 

Cbitta  ghdra-kl  kathl  gbar- 
ma  bai. 

Gbar-ma  cbitta  kO|*a-ki  zm 
bai. 

226.  In  the  house  is  the  sad- 
dle of  the  white  horse. 

Kathl  us-ka  mangar-pah 
dhar. 

Us-ka  mOrS-par  zin  kar 

227.  Put  the  saddle  upon 
his  back. 

Mai  us-kd  pttt  muchb  kard- 
ya-pah  marift  bai. 

MaT  mared  us-kd  gadrO 
apjil  kamchl  nal. 

228.  I have  beaten  his  son 
with  many  stripes. 

j Wnb  dhaka-kd  sir-pah 

j dangar  ebarai  bai. 

! Wnb  rukh-kd  bet  glidpa- 
i pab  bait  lift  hai. 

Wfi  us  taka-gl  ehdtl-par 
ap^a  ckdkhara-na  chara 
landvi. 

Wfi  us  rukkb-ke  bet  kdra- 
par  baithd-vi  bai. 

229.  He  is  grazing  cattle  on 

the  top  of  the  bill. 

230.  He  is  Bitting  on  a horso 

under  that  tree. 

! Us-kd  bbal  apul  baip-tc 
j uchd  hai. 

Us-kd  bbal  us-ki  baban-tbS 
lamtnft  bai. 

231.  His  hi  other  is*  taller 
than  his  sister. 

Is-kd  mul  sada  do  rupy  a bai. 

Us-kO  mul  dai  rupaya  be  . 

i 

232.  The  price  of  that  is  two 
rupees  and  a half. 

MairG  bap  ua  na^dd  gbar- 
m5  hdwai. 

| Mdrd  bap  us  nikka  ghar-ma 
| raha. 

233.  My  father  lives  in  that 
small  house. 

Yd  rfipyd  us-nah  dai 

Yfi  rupaya  us-na  dfi 

234.  Give  this  rupee  to  bim. 

Wub  rupya  us-td  lai . 

i 

Vi  rupaya  us-thn  le-la 

235.  Take  those  rupees  from 
him. 

Us-nah  ebangd  mar  atraBsi- 
pab  badb  chhdy 

Us-na  cbangl  tarab  mard, 
bOr  rasla-nal  badO. 

236.  Heat  him  well  and  hind 
him  with  ropes. 

Khdl-td  pa^I  kad  1$  . 

Khfi-thu  pagl  chSjd 

237.  Draw  water  from  the 
! well. 

Maira  agd  chal 

Mere  agge  agge  chal 

238.  Walk  before  me. 

Taira  ka<J  kis-ko  lord  aw£  P 

Tore  pichho  kis-kd  gadrO 
; awe  lagOvI  ? 

239.  Whose  boy  comes  be- 
hind you  ? 

Yd  to  kis-td  lio  hai  ? 

Te  wu  kis-thTl  mul  liO-vl 
hai  ? 

240.  From  whom  did  you 
buy  that  ? 

GrS-k8  dflkSndSr-tO  . 

Gr3-k5  hStl&lS-thfl  . 

241.  From  a shopkeeper  of 
the  village. 

Gujuri—  981 


CALCUTTA 

SUPERINTENDENT  GOVERNMENT  PBINTTNO,  INDIA 
8,  HASTINGS  STB  nr 


