GOVERNMENT  OF  INDIA 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL  SURVEY  OP  INDIA 

TFNTR  AT 

ARCHEOLOGICAL 

LIBRARY 

ACCESSION  NO.  

CALL  No..  33S.10354^^ 

Si. 


D.G.A,  79 


m 


*'  .V  » <- 


b 


S A N G E S ,P  L A I M 


HIMALAYAN  FOLELOEE 

Kt;j£AON  AHD  WEST  NEPAL 


BIBLIOTHECA  HIMALAYICA 


SERIES  II 


VOLUME  10 


Ediud  hy 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


KUMAON  AND  WEST  NEPAL 


S.S. Oakley  aad  Tara  Dutt  Gairola 


WTH  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  1977  l®IT10N 

«Y  ■ ' ' 

MARC  GABORIEAir 


3n.Z0^Sk-U 


PUStAlC  BHANDAR 
KATHMANDU  NEPAL  1977 


Oakley  & Gairola : HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


First  Published  in  1935 


THE  PURPOSE  OF 

BIBLIOTHECA  HIMALAYICA 


IS  TO  MAKE  AVAILABLE  WORKS 
ON  THE  CIVILIZATIONS  AND  NATURE 
OF  CENTRAL  ASIA  AND  THE  HIMALAYA 

BIBLIOTHECA  HIHALAYICA 


© H.  K.  Kuloy 

^ • *^*  ' *^*  • IMt#  ^ ^ 


s tr* 


CONTENTS 


Introduction  - 1977  , . . 

Preface  - 1934 

General  Introduction  - 1934  . 

SECTION  I 


CHAPTER  I— Legends  of  Heroes 


i ^ 


Raja  Man  Sah  . 
Kaffu  Chawhan 


Kala  Bhandari  , . . . 

SuRJU  Kunwar  . . , 

Kau  Harpal  .... 
Baga  Rawat  .... 
Panchu  Thag  . . . . 

Bhagdeo  the  Warrior  . 
Ajwa  Bampla  . . . . 

Brahma  Kunwar  . . . 

Saunu  and  Birmu  . . 

Hansa  Kunwar  . . . 

Malu  Sahi  and  Rajula  . 
Gangu  Ramola  . , . 
Bighni  and  Bijai  Pal  * 
Kukji  Pal  and  Kirti  Pal 
Jag  Deo  Panwar  (Katura) 


. xi-xliv 
xlv-xiviii 
1-32 


33- 34 

34- 37 

37-42 

42-47 

47-54 
54-59 
59-63 
63-69 
69-78 
78-83 
83—89 
89-93 
93-94 
95“99 
99-105 
105-118 
I I 8-131 


VI 


INDEX 


Pages 

Raja  Pritam  Deo  . . , 121-126 

SuMERU,  RaUTELA  AND  RaNI  SuRlfA I26-I33 

Hyunraj  Mahara I33-I37 

Brahma  Deo  and  Birma  Dotiali 138-143 

Raja  Brahmdeo's  War  against  the  Champa- 

WAT  Rajas 144-146 

Adhapati  Chauhan  and  Dhamdeo  Chauhan  . . 146-148 

Belwals  of  Belihat 148-150 

Chhaplia  Hyunr  150-152 

Asa  Rawat - . . . . 153-156 

Goril .156-159 

Rand  Rawat  and  Supia  Rawat  . . . . . . 159-166 

Birth  of  Deoki,  mother  of  Krishna  ....  166-168 
The  Invention  of  Ploughing  . . . . . . 168-169 

Nir^kar . . ir7o-;i7i 

Song  in  honour  of  Niranrar  r*7i-i7a 

SECTION  n 

Introduction  by  Rev.  E.  S.  Oaklet  . . , , 173-179 

CHAPTER  n— Wit  and  Wisdom 

WAitoro  to  Misers  ....  , . .181-185 

The  Luck  y Simpleton  . . . , . . , , . 185-188 

The  Precious  Counsel  ...  . . . . . i^SS-f^i 

The  ThriE'  Focmls';  V " V '^91 

Tm  Sagacious  Dog  . . , . . i . . I 191-193 


INDEX 


vii 


Pages 

A SiNSELBSs  Fooi 193 

A VitLAOE  Wiseacre 193-195 

The  Debtor  borrows  with  cheerfulness  but 

REPAYS  WITH  SORROW  I95-I96 

Wonderful  feats  of  two  Ascetics 197—198 

A Faqir  alone  can  judge  the  iaerit  of  another 
Faqir 198-aoo 

Faith  in  God's  Bounty 200-202 

The  IwBATiENT  Creditor 203-005 

A Darvesh's  Wise  Advice 305-208 

The  Godly  man  is  as  mad  to  the  world  as  the 

Worldly  man  to  the  Soul 208-209 

Your  Majesty  is  the  Fourth  Fool 309-010 

Discernment  of  Goo  or  Goo  helps  a Righteous 

Person 210H213 

A Simpleton  who  foixowed  his  instructions  too 

LITERALLY 213—316 

In  this  age  all  are  sinners  , , . . . . . 216-217 

A GRtPPLE  FAVOURED  BY  LUCK 

A FAiiHFUL  Wife  who  sA^m?  her  Husband  from 

Death 2i9-ra22 

The  Two  Clever  Thieves  .......  222-226 

The  Bhadra  Outwitted  . . . , . . . . 226-^ 

WiHioM  SuFSRioR  TO  Wealth  . . . . , , 

The  Thing  . Most  Aperbciatsd  IN  the  World  . 830'-'^ 
An  UERIGIIT  OFFKEiK  ; . . . . . , . . 234-4^ 


vni 


INDEX 


Pages 

A Just  and  Wise  King 

‘The  King  is  like  the  Philosopher's  Stone  . . 236-237 

CHAPTER  III — Animal  Lore 

The  Foxes  and  the  Elephant  . . . , / . 238-240 

The  Jackal  and  the  Tiger's  den 240-241 

The  Jackal  and  the  Tigers 241-244 

The  Tiger  and  the  Traveller 244-245 

The  She-Goat  and  the  Leopard 245-246 

The  Feline  Race  247 

The  Cunning  Foe 247-249 

A Tangled  Yarn  249-2^ 

A Goat's  Resources  252 

The  Sensitive  Tiger :^2-254 

The  Elephant  and  the  Mouse ^54-'^5 

The  Cat  and  the  Mouse 255-256 

An  Ungratepul  Fox  chastised  by  God  ....  256-257 

A Fox  AND  A Bear , . . 257-260 

The  AMproous  Mouse  . 260-263  ✓ 

CHAPTER  IV — Bird  Folklore 

Tjee  Titwa  Bird  and  the  Sea  . , . . . . 269-270 
The  Listia  Bird  and  the  Elephant  . ^ 

A Rash  Mother  tuwed-WO  a Wild  Dove  . 271-^272 

An  Anxious  Brother  turns  into  a Wiud  Pigeon  ^2-^3 


INDEX  iX 

Paget 

Faith  in  God  saves  the  Pigeons 273-274 

The  Cuckoo 274-276 

A WoNDEREDL  Mouse  276-280 

The  Fgk  and  the  Paetkidge 280-281 

CHAPTER  V— Ghost  and  Demon  Lore 

The  EjAyAsTH  and  the  Demon  282-284 

The  Princess  and  the  Enoiantto  Sword  . . . 284-286 

The  Prince  and  the  Demon’s  Daughter  . . . 286—288 

The  Prince  and  the  Celestial  Flowers  . . . 288-^5 

The  Ghost  and  the  Sick  Man 295-297 

The  Ghost  and  the  Firewood 297 

A Magical  Contest 297—300 

The  Ghost  and  the  Four  Women 300—302 

The  Dead  Man  who  Moved  and  Talked  . . 303-304 

A Ghost  in  a Mill 3o+"3°5 

The  Ghost  and  his  Son 3°^ 

A Girl  and  her  Snake  Husband 307~3*o 

The  Boy  and  the  Demoness 3io-3*5 


X 


BAQhA  HURSIA 

TnriMi  of  tilt  radeiit  budt  ot  tin  Kumtun  hUU. 
Ht  Ndtod  Joany  ot  tin  folk  teltt  In  fhli  book. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  1977  EDITION 

More  than  forty  years  after  its  first  edition,  the  Wma- 
layan  folklore  of  E.  S.  Oakley  and  T,  D.  Gairola  has  lost 
nothing  of  its  importance.  Except  for  a few  scattered  referen- 
ces in  older  books\  it  is  the  only  work  on  the  subject  in 
a Western  language.  It  is  also  the  most  comprehensive  col- 
lection, as  the  authors  were  able  to  record  traditions  which 
have  partly  died  out.  Indian  folklorists,  who  have  recent- 
ly extended  their  research  to  cover  this  Himalayan  area, 
have  relied  largely  on  this  volume  and  a Hindi  translation 
was  published^.  Nevertheless,  the  Oakley-Gairola  collec- 
tion has  certain  lacunae  which  can  now  be  filled  up  at  least 
in  part.  Such  is  the  aim  of  this  preface,  I shall  concentrate 
mainly  on  the  first  section  which  was  written  by  T.  D.  Gairo- 
ila.  It  contains  thirty-two  legends  of  heroes’;  after  field  en- 
quiry, these  proved  to  be  narrative  songs.  Relying  both  on 
books  recently  published  in  Hindi  on  the  subject^  and  on 
information  which  I have  collected  in  the  field^,  I shall 


^ These  references  are  mentioned  by  Gairoia  in  his 
‘General  Introduction’,  pp.  2-3. 

^ Under  the  title:  ffirnedayu  kf  bk-kathde  [literally: 
folk-tales  pf  the  Himalaya],  translated  by  Samsvati 
Saran  Kaiph,  and  published  by  Kittb  Mahal,  Allaha- 
bad, 2nd  edition,  Saica  1883  [A,D. 194  pp. 

3 BABULKAR,  a>,  pp.  J9I-194.  CATAK  <a)  pp. 
208-278,  md  (b)*  lo4l  (Krsp  uamia). 
JO^rCPrayjig).  PAljlREYA,  pp.  lS8wj99. 

* A first  field  eaqtiiry  was  co-nducted  id  Western  Mepal, 
in  October-Noveniber  in  coJiaboration  wftfi  Mrs. 
Mireitte  Heliisf,  Tvyp  subsequent  enquiries  were 
(xtnducted  in  Ivumaon,  in  the  Alinora  area,  in  January 
February  1970  and  fboni  October  1970  to  April  19?}, 
About  eighty  hours  of  narrative  songs  were  tape 
recorded;  the  tapes  are  being ratatogued  and  depos’ted 
in  MuSee  Guiinet  and  Musee  de  rHotnifie  id  Paris. 


Xll 

describe  the  content  and  the  context  of  those  songs.  I shall 
limit  myself  to  a few  comments  on  the  second  section  of  the 
book.  This  preface,  I hope,  will  serve  as  a guide  to  the  re- 
cent literature  and  research  on  the  subject. 

Concerning  first  the  ‘legends  of  heroes’,  let  us  define  the 
geographic  area  in  which  they  are  known.  T.  D.  Gairola 
ascribes  them  to  Kuitiaon  and  Garhwal,  two  Indian  pro- 
vinces situated  immediately  to  the  West  of  the  present  Nepa- 
lese border,  which  were  independent  kingdoms  up  to  the 
end  of  the  XVIIIth  century.  On  field  enquiry,  it  appears 
that  part  of  the  same  corpus  of  legends  is  also  known  in 
the  Westernmost  districts  of  Nepal  between  the  Karnali 
and  the  Mahakali  rivers,  where  once  flourished  the  kingdoms 
of  Doti,  Bajhang  and  Accham,  Thus  the  whole  area  from 
Western  Nepal  to  Garhwal  must  be  considered  as  one  from 
tke  point  of  view  of  the  culture.  Although  the  people  speak 
dialects  of  the  Pahari  language  which  are  quite  distinct  and 
not  mutually  intelligible,  common  features  are  noticeable 
in  their  caste  structure,  popular  religion,  art  and  architec- 
ture This  unity  is  strikingly  emphasized  in  the  songs 
themselves.  A common  origin  is  ascribed  to  the  Katyuri 
kings  of  Kumaon  and  to  the  kings  of  Doti.  To  this  day, 
Kumaoni  bards  tell  of  raids  by  thdr  heroes  on  the  capital 
of  Doti.  pne  of  the  most  famous  local  gods  of  Kumaon, 
Ganganath,  is  none  other  than  the  ghost  of  a crown-prince 

In  addition,  I had  access  to  the  recordings  made  in 
Kupiaon  by  Mrs  M.  T.  DaJtta  and  deposited  in  the 
Tntematioaal  Institute  for  comparative  Music  Studies 
and.  Documentation’  in  Berlin;  and  to  the  recordings 
made  by  the,  ’Saageet  Natak  Akademi’  of  New-Delhi 
(see  Catahgm  of  tdpe  recordings,  New-Delhi,  no  date, 
under  ‘Folk  Music,  littar  Pradesh  (Kumaon  and  Gar- 
whal).  Dr.  Konrad  Meissner,  of  Frankfurt  in  Germany, 
was  kind  enough  to  allow  me  to  listen  to  his  personal 
collection  of  recordings  made  in  Kumaon. 

SHARMA  (Prayag  Raj).-  A pmtlminary  study  of  the 
art  md  architecture  of  the  Karnali  basin,  Paris.  1972. 


of  Doti;  night  after  night,  in  the  villages  of  Kumaon,  his 
story  is  sung  to  compel  the  god  to  possess  a local  mcdiuip 
and  to  speak  through  his  mouth.  On  the  Nepalese  side,  one 
hears  of  Bika  Paneru,  a local  brahman,  who  after  quarell- 
ing  with  the  king  of  Doti  went  to  serve  the  Chand 
kings  of  Champawat  in  Eastern  Kumaon,  Sangrim  KarkI 
was  even  mote  adventurous : he  conquered  succes- 
sively Champawat  and  Katyur  (Baijnath  in  Kumaon) 
and  finally  met  his  death,  after  a victory,  in  Garwhal. 

Gairola  tells  very  little  about  the  ethnographical  con- 
text of  those  songs,  although  he  proposes  a historical  re- 
construction based  on  the  texts  of  the  legends.  He  explain^ 
that  bards  called  hurkiya^  attached  to  royal  families,  had  the 
function  of  encouraging  warriors  on  the  battle  field  and 
entertaining  guests  at  the  court.  But  he  tells  nothing  about 
the  performances  of  bards  in  his  own  day.  By  contrast, 
I shall  start  with  what  I was  able  to  observe  in  the  area  in 
recent  years. 

♦ ♦ * 

I was  first  struck  by  the  diversity  of  the  circumstances  in 
which  the  legends  are  sung®.  First  come  rcli^ous  cere- 
monies called  ySgur’,  held  either  in  temples  or  in  pri- 
vate houses.  For  instance,  during  the  autumn  1970,  an  old 
man  called  Gopi  Das  invited  me  to  attend  such  a ceremony 
in  the  house  of  some  of  ihis  relatives  in  Almora.  When  I 
arrived  in  the  little  dai^k  house  at  about  9 p.  m,,  he  was 
ready  to  sing,  holding  in  his  hand  his  small  hour-glass 
shaped  drum  Qtmko),  On  his  left  was  sitting  a wom^  Who 
was  to  be  the  mtSmm.  In  between  a brass  plate  containing 
rice,  flowers,  incense  and  an  oil  lamp  was  prepared  for  the 
worship;  more  than  twenty  men,  women  and  screaming 

• A more  detailed  study  of  the  criteria  of  classification 


A vivid  description  of  such  a ceremofiy,  with  the  full 
of  tte  Songs  in  Hindi  translation,  will  be  found  in 
MATIYANI,  (a). 


xiv 

children  were  crowded  into  the  room.  GopT  Das  first  sang 
the  evening  prayer;  then  the  edifying  story  of  Yogi  Bhart- 
rhari.  About  an  hour  was  thus  spent;  suddenly,  the  rhythm 
of  the  drum  changed : the  beats  became  stronger  and  more 
rapid;  an  assistant  joined  in,  playing  a brass  plate  (thali) 
with  wooden  sticks:  GopT  Das  began  to  call  Goril,  a local 
god: 

“Goriya,  my  lord,  leave  the  mount  Kaila^  where  you 
reside  with  your  maternal  uncle  Mahadeva;  come  here, 

”,  and  he  went  on  singing  the  legend 

of  Goril  (see  no.  27,  pp.  156-159).  Gradually  the  medium 
started  shivering,  rose  on  her  knees  and  stood  up.  As  he 
sung,  she  danced  and  mimed  the  episodes  of  the  story. 
The  bard,  by  the  power  of  his  drum  and  of  his  words,  had 
compelled  the  god  to  efiect  his  descent  (avatar)  into  the  body 
of  the  medium.  We  >yci«  m ion|er  looking  at  a poor  un- 
touchable woman;,  the  god,  was  manifesting  himself,  was 
really  present  among  us.  Suddenly  the  dance  stopped;  the 
god  expressed  himself  through  the  mouth  of  the  woman, 
first  singing,  then  speaking  in  a lugh-pitohed,  jerky  voice. 
The  bard  and  a few  people  from  the  audience  asked  him 
questions,  mainly  about  a sick  boy  in  the  crowd  who  had 
fitted.  When  the  consultatfon  was  finished,  GopT  Das  aga- 
in beat  his  tom,  singing  :"Goriyl,n^  lord,  return  to  the 
mount  Kailas,  to  your  uncle  Mahadeva.”  The  medium  dan- 
ced again,  and  after  a few  minutes  collapsed  on  her  back; 
the  god  had  Irft  her.  GopT  Das  then  started  the  story  of 
.Ganganath  (see  below).  The  same  medium  was  possessed 
by  three  deities  in  succession:  Ganganath,  his  mistress 
Bhliiu  and  their  child.  At  the  end,  an  anonymous  ghost 
(bhut)  descended  into  the  body  of  another  woman  medium, 
but  the  sick  boy  was  still  lying  unconscious  On  the  ground. 

From  this  example,  one  can  get  an  idea  of  jagar.  The 
JSgar  I witnessed  was  a short  one;  in  private  houses  such 
ceremonies  can  go  on  for  several  nights;  and,  in  rich  tem- 
ples, up  to  twenty-two  nights.  On  such  occasions  the  bard 
caa  sing  a considerable  repertory  of  religious  stories,  either 


1.  GopT  Das  at  Kausani  in  Kumaon,  playing  his  hurki  durm  and 
standing  above  the  Baijnath  Valley  where  theKatyuri  kings  first 
established  their  capital. 


3.  Mohan  Singh,  one  of  the  few  bards  belonging  to  a high  caste,  and  his  three 
assistants,  in  their  village  near  Almora,  singing  a heroical  ballad. 


XV 


in  order  to  induce  trances  in  which  case  the  songs  arc  called 
jagar,  or  only  to  ‘please  the  gods’,  the  songs  being  called 
bharat. 

* ♦ ♦ 

Another  type  of  stories  (called  bharau)  concerning  loca- 
lized and  supposedly  historical  heroes  arc  sung  to  entertain 
people  gathered  for  a variety  of  purposes.  When  there  is 
a religious  ceremony  in  a private  house  (birth,  initiation, 
and  marriage),  the  head  of  the  household  may  hire  a 
bard  to  entertain  hjs  guests.  Listeners  may  also  gather  to 
while  away  the  long  winter  evenings,  or  bards  may  perform 
for  the  crowds  assembled  at  religious  fairs  (meJS) . The 
style  of  the  perfomutnces  varies  from  mea.  to  area;  no 
first  hand  description  is  available  for  GarfawaL  In  the  Almo- 
ra  area  of  Kumaon,  the  bard  sits  facing  his  audience 
and  plays  the  hu^ko  while  telling  the  story.  He  sings  most  of 
the  time,  but  some  passages  are  dedaimed  or  even  simply 
spoken.  By  his  side  sit  two  assistants  who,  at  the  end  of  each 
stanza,  join  in  to  repeat  the  few  last  words  or  a refrain, 
and  to  hold  the  last  note  until  the  bard  begins  a new  stanm. 
Performances  in  Eastern  Kumaon  or  in  Western  Nepal 
are  much  more  spectacular.  The  bard  puts  on  a spedal 
ceremonial  dress  consisting  of  a white  pleated  skirt,  a 
black  waistcoat,  and  a white  turban.  Several  bdls  hmig 
from  the  step  of  his  hurko  and  ring  while  he  plays,  dances 
and  mimes  the  episodes  of  the  story  he  is  tdling.  Most  of 
the  text  is  declaimed  and  ponotuated  with  the  beats  of 
the  drum.  Between  ^isodes  arc  inerted  songs  devoted  to 
certain  standard  thomes  such  as  the  dress  of  the  hero, 
fighting,  or  lamentation  on  the  death  of  the  hero.  The 
bardmtoaes  the  lines;  a few  assistants,  who  stand  in  the 
background,  join  in  and  play  additional  drums.  The  au- 
dience sit  in  a drcle  around  the  performers. 

Stories  of  heroes  are  ako  sung  to  encourage  and 
tain  workefs  In  the  rice  fields,  at  the  time  of  transplanth® 
and  weeding.  In  Kumaon,  such  performances  are  done  to 
the  sound  of  the  the  bard  standing  in  front  of  the 

ine  of  the  wortes  ami  dancing  In  Garhval,  they  dmc 


xvi 


to  the  sound  of  a horizontal  drum  (dhol).  Such  are  the  main 
circumstances  in  which  bards  sing  their  songs  nowadays. 
As  previously  noted,  T.  D.  Gairola  suggests  that,  before 
the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century,  at  the  time  when  the 
local  kingdoms  were  still  in  existence,  the  bards  would 
entertain  kings  and  their  courtiers  in  the  royal  palaces, 
and  encouraged  warriors  on  the  battle-field.  There  is  no 
documentary  evidence  for  such  a claim,  but  a few  allusions 
in  the  songs  themselves  make  it  very  likely  (see  for  instance 
pp.  67-68). 

Circumstances  may  be  thus  roughly  divided  into  two 
categories:  religious  ceremonies  on  the  one  hand,  gatherings 
for  entertainment  (or  work)  on  the  other.  To  these  two  cate- 
gories correspond  two  classes  of  bards.  There  are  first  those 
who  perform  the  religious  songs;  among  them  we  can  dis- 
tinguish several  types  according  to  the  instruments  they 
play  and  the  castes  from  which  they  are  recruited.  In  addi- 
tion to  the  thdIT  and  hurko  mentioned  above,  two  combi- 
nations of  instruments  are  used  for  the  jdgar  ceremonies: 
thaJT  plus  damaru  (small  hour-glass  shaped  drum  struck 
by  knotted  strings),  and  horizontal  drum  (dhol)  and 
kettle-drum  (damau).  These  two  sets  of  instruments  seem 
to  correspond  to  two  distinct  functions;  including  the 
trance  and  giving  rhythm  to  it.  They  are  clearly  separated 
in  Western.  Nepal  where  trances  are  induced  by  a main 
medium  (MBrnt)  playing  a bell  or  a brass  plate  and  acting 
as  the  gum  of  secondary  mediums,  while  the  untouchable 
taitor-musidans  (Aa^^  Who  confine  themselves  to  playing 
kettle-drums,  beat  out  the  rhythm  for  the  dances  of  the 
mediums.  Singing  a rdi^ous  story,  as  a third  function, 
may  be  oomMned  with  frst  two  ones  in  diffdent  ways. 
In  Garhwal,  'th^ U high  e^te  man,  who  plays 
thalT  ^r\d  damaru,  both  induces  the  trance  and  sings  a 
story:  this  is  a first  type  of  religious  bard.  A second  one  is 
represented  in  this  area  by  the  untouchabie 
plays  horizontal  drums  and  kettle-drums;  he  both  gives 
rhythni  to  the  trance  of  the  medium  and  sings  stories.  A 


XVII 


third  type  of  religious  bard  who  cumulates  the  three  func- 
tions is  found  in  Kumaon.  If  he  plays  the  horizontal  drum 
accompanied  by  kettle-drum,  he  always  belongs  to  the 
untouchable  tailor-musician  caste  and  is  usually  called 
das,  i.  c*  'slave^  of  the  gods.  If  he  plays  the  combinadon  of 
damaru  and  thalT^  or  of  hufka  and  thdiL  he  may  belong  to 
any  caste  (except  brahman).  We  thus  have  a first  class 
of  religious  bards -not  at  all  mentioned  by  Gakola  - which 
comprises  several  subtypes  and  may  be  recruited  among 
various  castes. 

To  the  second  category  of  circumstances  corresponds 
only  one  instrument:  the  Iwrko,  from  which  is  derived  the 
traditional  name  of  the  second  class  of  bards  (the  only  one 
mentioned  by  Gairota) : hurkiyd.  We  find  nowadays  both 
in  Garhwal  and  in  Western  Nepal  that  bards  who  sing 
Stories  of  heroes  usually  belong  to  the  untouchable  tailor- 
musician  caste  (dlwIT).  We  would  be  tempted  to  associate 
the  function  of  entertaining  exclusively  with  this  caste,  but 
there  is  another  still  lower  caste  of  begging  musicians  who 
are  precisely  called  hurkiyd.  They  do  not  have  a wide  re- 
pertory: they  usually  sing  fashionable  songs  and  make 
their  women  sing  and  dance  (t.  e.  prostitute  them).  Are 
those  hurklyd  the  real  descendants  of  the  former  royal 
bards  ? Can  we  assume  that  they  have  degenerated  and 
their  repertory  has  been  taken  over  by  the  Ot  are  the 
hurkiy^  ^ degraded  branch  of  the  4^olT  caste,  as  suggested 
by  informants  in  Westerp  Nepal  ? The  question  canwt 
be  solved  for  we  lack  documentary  evidence.  Let  us  only 
conclude  that  the  function  of  entertaining  h lisuaJly  filled 
by  the  lowest  untouchable  castes. 

We  have  thus  two  classes  of  bards:  religious  om  who 
are  recruited  in  a wider  range  of  castes,  and  entertainers 
who  belong  to  the  lowest  castes.  But  the  two  classes  may 
overlap  and  in  some  cases  the  same  bard  may  belong  to 
both  classes:  such  is  for  instance  the  case  of  GopT  Dis 
who  sings  both  stories  of  heroes  and  religious  stories, 

♦ ♦ ♦ 


xviii 


Gairola  presents  his  thirty-two  ‘legends’  in  no  particular 
sequence.  We  have  already  identified  two  classes  of  circums- 
tances and  two  classes  of  bards.  The  same  principle  may  be 
utilised  to  establish  a classification  of  the  repertory.  Thus 
the  first  class  comprises  religious  stories,  which  are  sung 
during  the  jagar  ceremonies.  T.  D.  Gairola  quotes  only 
a few  of  them.  This  class  has  two  main  subdivisions  which 
I shall  illustrate. 


In  the  first  subdivision  come  the  edifying  stories  (bharat) 
sung  at  the  beginning  of  the  ceremonies.  Gairola  includes 
brief  versions  of  four  stories  of  this  type(n®  29-32:  pp.  166- 
172).  These  items  represent  only  small  extracts  of  a very 
extensive  orally  transmitted  mythological  corpus  which 
tells  in  detail  of  the  creation  of  the  world,  of  the  origin  of 
the  classical  god§  and  goddesses  (both  Shaiva  and  Vaish- 
nava)  and  of  the  foundation  of  their  shrines  in  the  area. 
This  corpus  may  be  indefinitely  extended  by  borrowings 
from  such,  classical  texts  as  the  mahabharata,  the  raniayai:fa 
and  the  puraija.  There  is  no  need  here  to  insist  on  this  part 
of  the  repertory  which  is  derived  from  a wider  Indian  tradi- 
tion. Stories  of  this  nature  sung  in  Kumaon  and  Garhwal 
have  been  cataloged  by  Indian  folk-lorists*.  One  can 
also  place  in  the  same  subdivision  two  other  groups  of 
stories.  The  first  set  deals  with  Indian  Yogis  of  the  nath 
sect,  two  of  whom  are  widely  known  in  Kumaon  ; Gopi 
Cahd  and  Yogi  Bhart:rharP.  Secondly,  a cycle  of  stories 
centered  around  the  Rtoaull  family,  legendary  musmians 
ahd  magicians  who  are  Supposed  to  have  lived  in  Garwhal 
and  who  ^ye^c  sometimes  the  enemies,  sometimes  th^s  allies 
of  the  god  Kfan^a  aiid  his ‘brothers’ Br^iraa  KUn^’^ai'  and 

« see  cAmK,  pp. 

» for  a general  view  of  the  m$h  literature,  see  DAS- 
GOfTA  (Shashibhusan).-  Of)Bcme  rdigiom  mits 
qf  Bengd,  3rd  edition,  Calcutta,  1969,  pp.  191^225;. 


4.  Beginning  of  a possession  ceremony  in  a house  of  Almora  town. 
The  woman  wrapped  in  her  white  shawl  is  the  first  medium;  the 
bard  GopI  Das,  and  his  two  assistants  are  sitting  on  the  carpet 
at  the  left;  in  the  foreground,  a brass  plate  containing  offerings 
for  the  deities. 


xix 


Surju  Kunwar^^. 

Gairola  has  mcluded  only  a few  episodes  of  the  Ramanla 
legend;  let  us  see  how  they  fit  in  the  whole  cycle.  The  head 
of  the  Ranmula  family  is  Gangu:  he  was  first  an  enemy  of 
Krsm  but  finally  acknowledged  him  as  his  overlord  (n^^ 
14,  pp.  95-99).  He  had  two  sons  Siduva  and  fiiduva.  Their 
mother  died  and  they  were  brought  up  by  a Yogi  who  sent 
them  to  Bengal  to  learn  the  art  of  magic.  They  became  the 
most  powerful  magicians  in  the  world.  The  Krsna  family 
would  call  them  in  time  of  difficulty:  for  instance,  DevakT 
(Kfsna’s  mother)  asked  them  to  go  and  bring  back  to  life 
her  sons  Surju  Kunwar  and  Brahma  Kunwar  who  had  been 
Idlled  respectively  by  a Tibetan  (n''  4,  pp,  42-47)  and  by  the 
Serpent  King  (n"*  10,  pp.  78-83).  Siduva  had  married 
a ravishing  wife  called  Bijora.  The  old  father,  the  two 
brothers  with  Bijora  and  her  son  Bala  l^rT  Nath  were  living 
in  peace  in  their  castle  of  RamauIF  Garh.  This  part  of  the 
cycle  is  not  mentioned  by  Gairola,  nor  does  he  include  the 
following  episode  which  is  very  frequently  sung  in  Kumaon 
nowadays  and  which  I summarize  from  a paformance 
recorded  near  Almora  in  1970: 

*«One  day  Krsna,  his  family  and  all  the  gods  were  assem^ 
bled  at  Dwarika.  The  Ramaulas  were  mentioned  in  die 
conver^tion.  Radha  said  to  Krsna:  ^'Please,  call  Sldu\€ 
and  Biduva  to  entertain  us:  they  are  such  wonddrfu!  magi- 
cians, they  know  so  many  tricks  r Krsna  could  not  refuse 
anything  to  his  beloved  wife;  he  immediately  sent  a messen- 
ger to  RamauIT  Garh.  But  the  two  brothers  refused  to  come 
saying:  *‘We  won’t  obey  Krsna;  he  is  a wicked  boy  who 
stole  the  daughters  of  the  cowherds/’  When  the  messenga^ 
brought  back  this  answer,  Krsna  swore  to  take  revenge^ 

During  the  next  summer,  a terrible  drought  affiiged 
Ramauir  Garh:  grass  was  no  longer  available  to  feed  the 
flock  of  goats  and  sheeps.  One  night  Siduva  saw  in  a dream 

The  best  connected  summary  of  this  cycle  will  be 

found  in  PAN  REYA,  pp.  166-'n2. 


XX 


his  wife’s  younger  sister,  Surija,  who  told  him:  “Here, 
in  the  high  pasture,  on  the  slope  of  the  Himalaya,  plenty 
of  grass  is  available;  come  and  join  me.”  He  woke  up 
thinking  only  of  his  sister-in-law  and  announced  his  deci- 
sion to  leave  immediately  for  the  mountains.  His  father 
and  his  wife  tried  to  stop  him,  but  Siduva  would  not  listen 
to  any  of  their  arguments.  He  went  to  consult  the  astrolo- 
ger who  told  him  the  time  was  not  auspicious.  Siduva 
refused  to  believe  him,  saying:  “Live  fish  is  not  found  on 
the  sandy  bank  (of  the  river),  a truthful  brahman  is  never 
to  be  found.”  He  prepared  his  provisions  for  the  way  and 
the  next  day  after  taking  a last  meal  cooked  by  Bijora,  he 
set  off  with  his  brother,  leaving  his  old  father  and  his  young 
child  to  the  care  of  his  wife. 

After  many  incidents,  they  made  their  way  to  the  high 
pasture  where  the  beautiful  Surija  was  waiting  for  them. 
In  the  meantime,  Krsna,  having  heard  of  their  departure, 
sent  his  friend  Kalu  WazTr  with  a huge  army  to  destroy 
RamaulT  Garh;  when  Bijora  woke  up  one  morning,  she 
saw  the  enemies  ravaging  the  rice  fields.  She  awakened 
the  old  Gangu  who,  his  magical  weapons  in  his  hands, 
went  out  to  fight  them.  He  died  after  having  killed  many 
qf  them.  When  the  young  child  woke  up  and  learned  about 
the  death  of  his  grandfather,  he  insisted  on  going  out  him- 
self to  fight.  In  turn  he  was  also  killed.  Bijora  ran  away 
to  father’s  house  while  the  enemies  were  sacking  RamaulT 
Gajrh, 

Siduvl  and  Biduva  were  having  a fine  time  with  their 
sister-in-law  and  were  completely  unaware  of  the  events. 
One  day  a cuckoo  perched  on  the  horns  of  their  biggest 
goat,  and  started  speaking  to  them : it  ptpved  to  be  the  soul 
of  BIS  Sri  Nath  who  had  come  to  inform  them.  JLeaying 
their  flock  to  the  care  of  SurijS,  they  rushed  to  RamaulT 
Garh,  which  they  found  completely  destroyed.  They  swore 
to  take  their  revenge.  Disguising  themsdves  as  begging 
hurkiya,  they  went  to  the  court  of  Kalu  WazFr,  and  ptohused 
to  give  him  a wonderful  show.  All  the  sub|edta  above  tea 


and  under  eighty  years  of  age  were  invited : Siduva  and  Bidu- 
va  played  their  instruments  and  danced  in  front  of  them  until 
their  listeners  were  completely  bewitched  by  the  music  and 
became  unconscious.  Siduva  and  Biduvl  killed  all  of  them. 
They  went  back  to  RamauIT  Garh,  brought  back  to  life  the 
old  father  and  the  young  child,  rebuilt  their  cattle  and  called 
back  Bijora;  and  all  of  them  lived  in  peace.” 

The  second  sub-division  comprises  the  religious  stories 
which  are  sung  to  induce  and  direct  trances ; they  are  proper- 
ly called  jagctr,  T.  D.  Gairola  cites  only  one  of  them,  that 
of  Goril  (n®  27;  pp.  156-159)  who  is  the  protector  of  Kumaon 
and  the  dispenser  of  justice.  Similar  songs  deal  with  deities 
associated  with  the  territory;  god^ses  of  the  rivers 
rfevl),  fairies  (pari)  who  dwell  on  the  mountains,  gods  like 
a/ff  otmtsham  who  protect  the  cattle.  -Many  pgar  tell  about 
human  beings  who  met  a violent  death  and  were  afterwards 
deified.  The  story  of  Ganganath,  resumed  here  on  the 
basis  of  several  recordings  made  near  Almora,  may  serve 
as  an  example: 

“Ganga  was  the  son  of  Bhavai  Chand,  king  of  Doti. 
When  he  came  of  age,  he  became  disgusted  from  the  prince- 
lylife  and  decided  to  renounce  his  throne  and  become  a 
Yogi.  His  father,  his  mother  Pyula  Rani,  his  seven  queens 
and  his  22,000  subjects  came  to  him  crying  and  entreating 
him  not  to  leave  them.  But  no  matter  whatever  arguments 
they  used  to  try  to  persuade  him,  he  would  not  listen  to  any 
of  them.  He  monted  his  mare  Hasulh  and  headed  West  to- 
ward Kumaon>  He  rode  through  the  Bazar  of  SHgarhi 
and  went  down  to  cross  the  Seti  river.  Pursuing  his  way, 
he  traversed  all  the  kingdom  of  Doti  and  rarived  one  evening 
on  the  bank  of  the  Kali  river  which  marks  the  border  with 
Kumaon,  He  launched  his  horse  into  the  water,  but  when 
he  reached  the  middle  of  the  current  he  was  attacked  by  a 
mUsem,  a fearful  ghost,  and  he  had  to  fight  with  him  for  the 
whole  night  before  reaching  the  other  bank. 

He  wandered  for  months  in  search  of  a gum  and  finally 


xxii 


arrived  at  Hardwar  at  the  time  of  the  Kumbha  Mela.  Sadhus 
of  all  seets  had  gathered.  He  became  the  disciple  of  Kan- 
phatha  Yogi,  he  served  him  for  twelve  years,  fetching 
water  and  begging  food  for  him,  keeping  his  sacred  fire 
(dhunl)  lighted  all  days  and  all  nights.  After  this  period  had 
elapsed,  he  was  fully  initiated:  his  ears  were  pierced  and 
adorned  with  the  big  rings  which  are  the  emblems  of  the 
noth  sect.  He  went  then  on  his  own,  and  looked  for  a suit- 
able place  in  which  to  settle  in.  He  finally  built  a hermitage 
in  Eastern  Kumaon,  not  far  from  the  border  of  Doti. 

Years  passed. . . Bhana,  the  dauthter  of  a local  brah- 
man, used  to  graze  her  buffaloes  in  the  forest,  not  far  from 
the  hermitage.  She  used  to  bring  milk  everyday  to  Ganga- 
nath  who  fell  in  love  with  her.  When  later  the  parents  of 
the  girl  discovered  that  she  was  pregnant,  they  suspected 
the  Yogi  and  spied  on  him.  One  day,  they  saw  him  with 
Bhana;  they  stoned  both  of  them  to  death  and  abandoned 
their  bodies  on  the  spot.  But  the  child  came  out  miracul- 
ously from  his  mother’s  womb,  managed  to  survive  and  later 
came  to  the  parents  of  the  girl  to  ask  for  maintenance. 
He  was  killed.  The  ghosts  of  Ganganath,  BhanS,  and  their 
child  roamed  around  and  started  troubling  villagers,  who 
had  to  placate  them  by  building  shrines  and  presenting 
regular  offerings.  Now  the  three  of  them  have  joined  the 
army  of  the  god  Siva  on  the  mount  Kailas;  and,  whenever 
called  by  the  bards  who  sing  their  story,  they  have  been 
effecting  their  descent  on  the  bodies  of  mediums.*’ 

Kings  of  Kumaon  who  met  a violent  death,  like  the 
last  Kalyuris  (see  below)  or  Bholanath  who  belonged  to 
the  Chand  dynasty,  are  Worshipped  in  a similar  way.  More 
humble  villagers  have  Mso  been  deified,  as  for  instance 
0ana  Golla  whose  story  I recorded  from  a singer  of  Patiya 
village  ne^r  Almora: 

the  village  of  Patiya,  near  Almora,  lived  a man 
called  Kilu  Bifta:  he  had  a quarrel  with  d local  brahman 
family,  the  mu  lakhT  Panre,  who  were  traditionatiy  the 


xxiii 


finance  ministers  (devan)  of  the  Chand  kings,  and  whose 
huge  palace  can  still  be  seen  in  the  vilfage.  He  was  ruined 
and  went  to  live  with  his  family  and  his  buifaloes  in  the 
jungle  of  the  Terai,  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains. 

One  night  he  had  a dream:  he  saw  the  oaks  and  the 
blooming  rhododendrons  of  the  Binsar  forest  above  Patiya. 
and  the  daughter  ofthePanreas  beautiful  as  the  full  moon 
with  her  six-yards4ong  plaited  hair  and  her  twenty  rings 
adorning  her  ten  fingers.  He  woke  up  and  could  no  longer 
take  any  interest  in  what  was  going  around  him  in  the 
plains.  He  would  not  eat  and  would  think  only  of  the 
beautiful  girl  in  the  rhododendron  forest,  He  made  known 
his  decision  to  leave  for  Binsar.  His  father  tried  in  vain 
to  stop  him.  His  mother  came  to  him  : 

- “Kalu,  why  you  do  want  to  leave  ? 

~ Mother,  I am  ashamed  to  tell  you, 

- For  ten  months  I bore  you  in  my  womb,  for  two  years 
I looked  after  you  in  your  cradle:  at  that  time  you  were  not 
ashamed.  One  has  not  to  be  ashamed  in  front  of  one’s 
own  mother  1 ’’Hetold  of  his  dream.  She  entreated  him 
not  to  leave,  representing  to  him  the  dangers  of  the  road 
and  the  wickedness  of  their  enemies,  the  Panre.  His  sister 
tried  also  to  stop  him:  ‘*If  you  die,  who  will  give  me  presents 
in  the  month  of  caff  But  he  would  not  listen  to  anybody. 
He  prepared  his  provisions  for  the  road,  and,  one  morning, 
after  taking  a last  meal  cooked  by  his  mother,  he  left  for 
the  mountains  driving  his  herd  of  buffaloes.  In  ten  days 
he  crossed  the  first  two  ranges  of  mountains  and  arrived 
near  Patiya.  He  drove  his  buffaloes  up  to  the  Binsar  forest 
and  built  a hut  where  he  could  sleep  at  night.  In  the  day 
time,  he  would  graze  his  buffaloes,  milk  them,  prepare 
curds  and  clarified  butter  which  he  would  exchange  for 
food  in  the  neighbouring  villages. 

That  is  how  he  entered  Patiya  village  where  he  met  the 
Papre  girl.  He  recognized  her  from  his  dream.  She  also  fell 
in  love  with  him.  They  would  then  meet  secretly  in  the 
forest  when  she  came  to  cut  grass.  Months  passed  : her 
family  came  to  know  of  her  love  affair  with  KSlu.  They 


xxiv 

decided  to  take  their  revenge  and  kill  him.  They  spied  on 
him  and  one  day  overtook  him  while  he  was  sleeping  in  the 
forest.  They  beheaded  him  with  an  axe.  Then  his  miser- 
able soul  roamed  around  causing  trouble  to  the  people. 
To  placate  him,  the  murderers  had  to  build  him  a shrine 
at  the  place  where  he  was  killed,  and  another  one  near 
Patiya  village;  they  worshipped  him  regularly.  He  was 
henceforth  called  Dana  Golla,  i.  e.  Goril  of  the  hill-tops. 
He  has  joined  the  army  of  Siva;  and  for  ages  whenever 
called  by  the  bards,  he  has  been  effecting  his  descent  on  the 
bodies  of  the  mediums,” 

i|:  sj:  He 

The  second  class  of  stories  which  are  sung  for  entertain- 
ing can  properly  be  called  ‘legends  of  heroes';  they  are 
locally  known  as  bharau,  i.  e.  songs  of  heroes.  They  tell 
of  the  deeds  of  men  who  are  supposed  to  have  lived  in  the 
area,  who  are  believed  to  be — and  most  probably  were— 
historical  personages.  T.  D.  Gairola  gave  summaries  of 
twenty-four  of  these  hero-stories.  I should  like  to  show  how 
they  can  be  classified : and  to  introduce  new  material  recent- 
ly collected. 

This  corpus  of  stories  may  first  be  divided  into  two  sub- 
classes corresponding  to  two  successive  periods  of  the  his- 
tory of  this  area.  First  come  legends  concerning  the  Katyuri 
dynasty,  Atkinson  had  already  shown  that  they  make  up 
a connected  cycle^^i;  but  Gairola  dispensed  them  among 
other  legends.  On  the  basis  of  a complete  recording,  their 
proper  order  can  be  established  as  follows.  The  founder 
of  the  dynasty  is  Asanti  who  first  lived  at  Joshimath  in 
Garwhal  as  mentioned  by  Gairola  (p.  12)  . The  bards  sing 
the  following  story  about  the  beginning  of  the  kingdom  of 
Kumaon: 

“In  ancient  times,  King  Asanti  ruled  over  Joshimath. 

One  night  he  saw  in  a dream  a beautiful  Tibetan 


ATKINSON,  vol.  II  pp.  467-468,  493-^494  and  831. 


11 


XXV 


Princess  called  Him!  March!  He  fell  in  love  with  her  and 
decided  to  go  and  fetch  her.  His  wife  Na^hava  tried 
in  vain  to  stop  him*  He  took  a last  meal  served  by  his  wife, 
donned  his  clothes  and  left  for  Tibet.  After  a long  and  diffi- 
cult journey,  he  reached  the  palace  of  Hima  MarchT  and 
introduced  himself  to  her  parents.  They  agreed  to  give 
him  their  daughter,  but  asked  him  to  stay  with  them  for 
some  time.  One  day  they  put  poison  in  his  food;  he  died; 
his  soul  appeared  in  a dream  to  the  god  Narsingh  who  went 
to  Tibet  and  miraculously  brought  him  back  to  life  The 
god  and  the  king  decided  to  leave  immediately  this  sinful 
country  and  travelled  together  toward  GarwhaL  When 
they  drew  near  Joshimath,  Narsingh  went  ahead  and  reach- 
ed the  palace  first.  He  asked  for  hospitality.  Queen  Na^ha- 
vl  served  him  a meal.  He  then  insisted  on  sleeping  in  the 
bed  of  Asanti,  But  a magical  bell  was  hanging  under  this 
bed  and  it  rang;  Asanti  who  was  still  fifty-two  leagues 
away  heard  it.  He  hurried  to  his  palace  and,  seeing  a 
stranger  in  his  bed,  thought  he  was  a paramour  of  his  wife. 
Asanti  drew  his  sword  and  pierced  Narsingh's  thigh.  When 
milk  flew  from  the  wound,  he  recognised  the  god,  threw 
away  his  sword  and  asked  for  forgiveness.  As  a punishment 
he  had  to  abandon  Joshimatb,  which  since  that  time  be- 
longs to  Narsingh  and  where  a mark  of  the  wound  can  still 
be  seen  on  the  statue  of  the  god. 

Asanti  left  with  his  family  servants  and  belongings  in 
search  of  a place  to  establish  a new  kingdom.  He  reached 
the  Kausani  pass  above  Katyur  (the  modern  Baijnith 
near  Almora)  : the  valley  was  then  a lake.  He  asked  a boon 
from  the  god  Indra;  the  elephant  AirupatT  descended  from 
heaven,  swam  around  the  lake  and  cut  the  mountain  with 
his  tusks.  The  water  flowed  out  of  the  lake  to  form  the 
GomatT  river.  In  the  middle  of  the  dried  up  valley,  at  the 
confluence  of  the  GomatT  and  Garu^  rivers,  he  established 
a temple  dedicated  to  Siva;  not  far  from  that  place  he  built 
his  palace  and  an  audience  hall.  The  town  of  Baijnith 
developed  and,  in  time,  the  subjects  multiplied  and  became 
known  as  the  900.000  Katyuris.  That  is  how  the  kingdom 
of  Kumaon  was  founded.’" 


xxvi 


j There  is  then  a huge  gap  of  twenty  two  generations  in 
j the  cycle:  the  bards  only  say  that  the  kingdom  flourished, 

I then  the  kings  started  committing  injustice  and  the  dynasty 
\ declined.  Several  stories  concern  the  last  three  generations 
\ of  Katyuris.  King  Pritham  Deo  had  no  children  from  his 
wife  Maula  DeT  (also  called  Jiya  Rani).  She  went  on  a 
pilgrimage,  and  a son  was  miraculously  born  to  her  (n" 
18,  pp.  121-125).  He  was  called  Dham  Deo  (or  Dula  Sahl). 
In  order  to  be  recognised  as  the  rightful  heir  to  the  throne, 
he  had  to  undergo  many  tests.  Only  the  last  of  these,  the 
fight  with  the  demon  Samwa,  is  mentioned  by  Gairola 
(pp,  125-126).  Malu  SahTwas  the  last  powerful  king  of  this 
dynasty.  The  story  of  his  love  for  a Tibetan  girl  called 
RaJuITis  the  best  known  part  of  this  cycle  (n°  13,  pp.  92-94). 

Other  legends  concern  another  personage  who  belonged 
to  a collateral  branch:  Brahma  Deo.  He  was  engaged  tomarry 
a princess  of  Doti  (n°21,  pp.  138-143)  and  fought  with  the 
Chand  kings  of  Champawat  (n°22,  pp.  144-146).  Accounts 
of  his  death  are  conflicting.  Acbording  to  a version  I re- 
corded, he  was  stoned  to  death  for  his  illicit  love  with  his 
maternal  aunt.  According  to  others  sources,  he  was 
thrown  into  a ravine  by  porters  who  were  carrying  him  in 
a palanquin^^;  or  he  was  killed  by  the  army  of  Vikram 
Chand^®.  The  once  powerful  dynasty  ended  thus  in 
ignominy^^. 

In  Western  Nepal,  where  the  kings  of  Doti  claimed  to 
be  Katyuris,  part  of  this  cycle  is  also  known.  The  bards 
sing  of  Pritham  Deo  and  Maula  DeT  (see  n®  1 8 quoted  above). 

son  niiraculously  bom  to  the  queen  is  identified  witJi 
the  historical  King  N5g  Malla  (end  of  the  XlVth  century), 

op.  cit.,  p,  494. 
op.  dt,  p.  831. 

Gairola  considers  Jagdeo  Punwar  as  belonging  to  the 
Katyuii  dynasty  17,  pp.  118-121,  see  also  p.  13) 

But  this  is  an  error : this  story  is  an  edifying  one  borrow- 
ed from  a wider  Indian  traditioni  see  references 
in  GATAK  (a),  p.  244. 


XxvH 


who  in  legends  and  songs  is  considered  as  the  real  organizer 
of  the  Doti  kingdom.  He  built  the  capital  of  Ajaymirkot 
and  made  generous  donations  to  the  temples. 

Can  this  cycle  be  replaced  in  the  documented  history  of 
the  area  ? Atkinson  tried  to  do  so  and  brought  to  light 
interesting  documents,  but  his  chronology  and  his  inter- 
pretations are  partly  outdated T.  D.  Gairola  tried  to 
correct  him  by  using  the  texts  of  the  legends (pp.  12-17): 
but  this  is  a dubious  method  since  the  bards  consider  theii 
heroes  to  be  gods  and  have  no  notion  of  chronology.  For- 
tunately, recent  historical  research  has  brought  a new' 
light  on  the  subject^®.  T shall  here  briefly  summarize 
the  present  state  of  the  question.  On  archaeological  and 
paleographical  grounds,  it  can  be  established  that  a power- 
ful dynasty  ruled  over  Garhwal,  Kumaon  and  Western 
Nepal  from  the  Vll-VIIIth  to  the  XVth  centuries,  from 
a capital  situated  in  the  present  Baijnath  which,  in  the 
inscriptions,  is  variously  named  as  Karvirpur,  Kartripur 
or  Karttikeyapur.  These  names  undoubtedly  correspond 
to  the  Katyur  of  the  oral  traditions,  and  this  dynasty  is 
none  else  than  the  Katyuri  dynasty  of  the  bards.  There 
can  be  little  doubt  about  this  identification.  But  the  com- 
parison between  oral  texts  and  written  documents  cannot  be 
pursued  much  longer.  The  bards  tell  stories  about  the  birth 
and  decline  of  a dynasty,  using  mythological  ideas  and 
ready-made  narrative  devices . On  the  other  hand,  whatever 
may  be  the  gaps  between  the  written  documents,  they  bring 
to  light  a very  tormented  history.  For  instance,  from  the 
Xllth  to  the  XIVth  century,  the  whole  area  was  ruled  over 
by  the  Mallas  of  Western  Nepal.  This  whole  episode  has 
been  completely  forgotten  by  the  oral  tradition  To 
sum  up,  the  Katyuri  cycle  refers  to  a historical  dynasty, 

IS  ATKINSON,  vol.  ll,  pp.  467--530. 
i«  see  NAUTYAL,  pp.  10-76, 

17  see  TUCCl.  - Preliminary  report  on  mo  scientific 
e.^peditions  in  Nepal,  Rome,  1958;  and  SHARMA, 
op.  cit. 


xxviii 


but  it  is  not  as  such  a historical  document.  History,  as  we 
conceive  it  today,  has  to  be  built  from  evidence  of  other 
kinds. 

In  the  second  sub-class  of  the  legends  of  heroes  belong 
stories  which  refer  to  the  subsequent  historical  period, 
from  the  XVth  century  onwards.  Three  dynasties  became 
powerful  in  the  area,  but,  in  contradistinction  to  the  Ka- 
tyuri  period,  no  connected  cycle  is  devoted  to  any  one  of 
them.  The  deeds  of  famous  kings  are  sometimes  sung, 
as  for  instance  the  fight  between  Man  Sah  of  Garhwal  and 
Laksmi  Cand  of  Champawat  (n°  1,  pp.  33-34).  But  the 
names  of  the  kings  are  usually  mentioned  in  connexion 
with  the  stories  of  other  heroes.  Our  knowledge  of  those 
dynasties  is  still  very  meagre  and  ^o  definite  chronology 
has  yet  been  established.  The  present  state  of  the  question 
can  be  summarized  as  follows  (the  names  of  the  kings  are 
given  in  exact  transliteration):  , 

In  Garhwal,  around  the  XVIth  century,  a new  dynasty 
was  established  by  Ajaya  Pal  (1500-1521).  He  was  succeeded 
by: 

Sahaya  Pal 

Man  (1592-1610)^^ 

Dularam  Sah 

Mahipat  ^ah  (around  1625) 

Medini  ^ah 
Phate  ^ah 

LaJit  ^ah 

In  Eastern  Kumaon,  the  Chand  dynasty  established  his 
capital  at  Champawat,  and  gradually  conquered  the  Katyuri 
kingdom.  The  order  of  succession  is  given  as  follows  in 
gerabaldgies  only  reopntly  written  down.First  comes  a list 
of  kings  whose  history  cannot  be  established  by  original 
ddcaments  and  who  were  contamporary  of  the  lastKaty  uris : 
Tho  (lia)r  Cand 


« NAUTYAL,  pp.  74-76.  CATAK,  (a),  pp.  229-230.: 


xxix 


Kalyan  Gaud 
Triloka  Cand 
Damaru  Cand 
Dharma  Cand 
Abhaya  Cand 

Garur  Jnar  Cand  (known  as  Guru  Gyan  Cand  in  the 
songs) 

Harihara  Cand 
Udyana  Cand 
Atma  Cand, 

Then  come  kings  whose  dates  can  be  established  from 
original  documents: 

Vikram  Cand  (1423*-1437) 

BharatT  Cand  (1437-1450) 

Ratna  Cand  (1450-1488) 

KTrti  Cand  (1488-1503) 

Pratap  Cand  (1503-1517) 

Tara  Cand  (1517-1533) 

Manik  Cand  (1533-1542) 

Kalyan  Cand  (1542-1551) 

Purna  Cand  (1551-1555) 

Bhlsma  Cand  (1555-1560) 

Balo  Kalyan  Cand  (1560-1568) 

Rudra  Cand  (1568-1597) 

LaksmT  Cand  (1597-1 621)i» 

There  is  no  need  to  give  the  end  of  the  list;  later  kings  are 
not  mentioned  in  the  songs.  In  the  stories  presented  by 
Gairola,  we  hear  of  Thor  Chand(n®  16,  p.  105;  n®  22,  p. 
144),  Guru  Gyan  Chand  (n'’  3,  p.  38;  n"*,  9,  69;  1 1,  p.85; 

n'^16,  p.l05),  Laksmi  Chand(n°  1,  p,31).I  have  also  found  tht 
names  of  Vikram  Chand,  Bharati  Chand  and  Ratna  Chaad 
in  the  songs  I recorded;  all  those  name  correspond  to  the 
written  genealogies.  But  the  bards  also  tell  of  other  kings 
they  place  in  between,  or  at  the  same  time  as,  Thor  CSiand 
and  Guru  Gyan  Chand,  namely  Nirmal  Chand  (n*  21, 


ATKINSON,  voL  II,  pp.  493-554.  NAUTYAL, 
pp.  64-74 


XXX 


p,  139)  and  BhagChand  (n°20,  p,  135  and  n°  22,  p.  144). 
Their  tradition  is  thus  slightly  different  from  that  of  the 
written  genealogies. 

As  for  Doti  where,  as  we  have  seen,  a branch  of  the 
Katyuri  dynasty  survived,  no  commonly  accepted  list  of 
kings  is  available.  In  the  songs,  I found  only  the  names  of 
Nag  Malta,  the  founder,  of  Kalyan  Malla  and  of  PaharT 
SahT. 

Here  again,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Katyuri  dynasty,  it  is 
useless  to  follow  Gairola  when  he  tries  to  correct  the  written 
genealogies  by  using  the  traditions  of  the  bards.  Both 
sources  are  not  as  such  historical.  But  by  comparing 
them  to  the  few  available  original  documents  we  can  safely 
conclude  that  the  bards,  most  of  the  time,  refer  to  the  early 
period  of  the  new  dynasties,  that  is  to  say  to  the  XlVth- 
XVIth  centuries. 

Some  of  the  stories  relating  to  this  period  concern  typi- 
cal characters.  They  cannot  be  properly  localized  and  are 
known  all  over  the  area,  from  Western  Nepal  to  Garhwal. 
Such  are  for  instance  Kala  BhandarT  (n""  3,  pp.  37-42), 
Ranu  Rawat  (n'"  28,  pp.  159-166)  and  Chhapila  Hyunr 
(n°  25,  pp.  150-152). 

Others  are  more  localized  and  refer  to  events  in  one 
or  the  other  part  of  the  area.  In  Garhwal,  according  to  G. 
Catak^®,  the  repertory  of  the  bards  include  Kaffu  Chau- 
han  (n®  2,  pp.  34-37),  Kali  Harpal(n°  5,  pp.  47-54),  .Baga 
Rawat  (n°  6,  pp.  54-59),  Sannu  and  Birmu  (n°  11,  pp.  83- 
89).  Bnt  there  are  also  other  stories  not  mentioned  in  the 
present  book.  G.  Cataifc  cites  the  following  subjects  : 
-Bhiau  Damada,  who  went  to  fight  the  Moghuls  in 
the  plains* 

-Madhosingh  Bhart^arh,  who  was  love  with  a girl 
caicd  RuJkipa  and  had  to  fight  the  enemies  of  Garhwal, 
-^Garhu  SumeriySI,  a herdsman  Who,  by  playing  his 
flute,  conquered  the  heart  of  a girl  call^  Surma.  He  had 

“ CATAK,  (a),  pp.  230-267. 


9.  Pratap  Dholi,  near  Dandeldhura  in  Western  Nepal,  with  one 
assistant,  dancing  and  singing  during  the  performance  of  a heroi- 
cal  ballad. 


0.  Bahadi 
the  pel 


xxxi 


to  fight  his  maternaluncleand  the  enemies  ofGarhwal. 

-Hari  Hiravan,  who  was  treacherously  killed  by  the  king 
of  Sirmaur  and  avenged  by  his  younger  brother  Hamsa. 

-Bhanu  Bhaiip>ela,  who  was  in  love  with  a girl  caJlW 
AmaravatT;  she  was  engaged  to  Guru  Gyan  Chand,  King 
of  Kumaon.  After  many  heroic  deeds,  Bhanu  defeated 
the  army  of  the  King  and  brought  the  girl  to  his  house. 

As  an  example,  we  shall  give  here  a detailed  summary  of 
another  story:  Rikhola  LodT^i, 

"'At  that  time,  Man  Shih  was  ruling  over  Garhwal,’"/ 
MauIT  Chand  over  Sirmaur,  Gyan  Chand  over  Kumaon;  / 
Akbar  was  emperor  of  Delhi.  The  kings  of  Garhwal  hadn  } 
possessed  for  generations  rice  fields  situated  near  Rishikesh; 
the  kings  of  Kumaon  and  Sirmaur  wanted  to  have  a share 
of  them.  The  latter  sent  an  ultimatum  to  Man  Shah  asking 
him  to  divide  immediately  the  rice>fields.  Main  Shih  con- 
voked the  royal  assembly,  the  counsellors  advised  him  not 
to  give  up  the  land,  the  produce  of  which  was  conscrated 
to  Bhadrinath.  The  king  sent  a messenger  to  call  his  mo^t 
famous  warrior,  Bhausingh.  As  soon  as  he  received  the 
message,  Bhausingh  took  leave  of  his  wife  saying:  “If  I 
die  in  this  war,  do  not  become  a mih  Do  not  abandon  our 
son  Rikholi.'’  The  king  sent  Bhausingh  to 
When  he  was  ready  to  attack  the  enenties,  the  hwkiya  yfho 
accompanied  the  army  told  him:  “When  I give  a aignal  wi& 
my /iwritn  by  playing  the  martial  rhythm,  throw  p^p^ 
at  the  enemies  and  start  fighting/’  So  doing,  they  easily 
defeated  the  blinded  enemies^  But  the  king  of  Sirmaur 
survived?  hid  and  treacheroudy  killed  Bhausingh  while  he 
was  taking  a bath  in  a fountain. 

When  the  king  heard  the  news  of  Bhausing’s  death?,  he 
again  Convoked  the  royal  assembly.  The  counsellors  advis- 
ed him  to  cal!  upon  RikhoII,  the  son  of  Bhausingh,  The 
messengers  sent  by  the  king  found  Rikholi  busy  transplant- 
ing rice.,  refused  to  go.  Then  his  mother  told  him: 

,CATAK?  (a),  pp.  232^^233. 


xxxii 


“Your  father  was  without  a son;  I worshipped  pipal 
trees,  gave  libations  to  the  sun  in  order  to  get  the  boon  of 
your  birth.  Do  not  shame  the  milk  I gave  you.  Go  to  Sir- 
miur.  Defeat  the  king  of  Kumaon.  Bring  back  to  Srinagar 
(capital  of  Garhwal)  the  door  of  the  palace  of  Delhi.  ”So 
did  Rikhola.  He  brought  back  as  trophies  a big  kettle- 
drum from  Sirmaur,  a princess  of  Kumaon  named  Mahgala 
Jyoti  whom  he  married,  and  the  door  of  the  Delhi  palace. 
But  the  courtiers  became  jealous  of  his  success,  and  mortally 
wounded  him  in  an  ambush  when  he  was  on  his  way  back 
from  Delhi.  At  this  precise  moment,  as  a bad  omen,  milk 
flowed  from  the  breasts  of  his  mother.  She  exclaimed: 
“Where  is  my  son  ? He  has  been  killed!”  She  rushed  to  the 
spot  and  found  him  dying.  He  expired  in  her  lap.  She 
uttered  a curse:  “From  now  on,  let  no  hero  be  born  in 
Garhwal”  and  died,  Mah^i  beemne  a sati  in  Har- 
dwar.” 

Let  us  in  the  end  quote  another  story,  the  main  persbdajge 
of  which  is  a girl,  Tilu  RautelT:  “The  Katyuri  King  Dham 
SahT  had  attacked  the  army  of  Man  Shah  of  Garwhal. 
The  fighting  went  on  for  some  time  and  one  officer  called 
Bhlpu  and  his  two  sons  were  killed.  He  had  a daughter 
called  Tilu  who  was  then  fifteen  years  old.  One  day,  she 
decided  to  attend  a fair  m Kara,  the  place  where  her  father 
and  brothers  had  been  killed.  Before  she  left,  her  mother 
raninded  her  to  ofifer  libations  to  them.  So  she  did  and, 
at  the  end  of  the  Mr,  she  swore  to  avenge  them.  She  took 
a sword  and,  accompani^  by  her  friends  and  by  Ghemaru, 
the  family  hurkiya,  shs  went  to  attack  the  Katyuris.  She 
fought  for  eight  years  and  wdn  many  battles.  On  her  way 
back  home,  she  stopped  to  bathe  in  a river.  She  was  then 
overtaken  by  an  enemy,  Raja  Rajwar  and  was  thus  killed 
treacherously  aftm-  she  had  avenged  her  father  and  her 
brothers.”  ** 

In  Kumaon*  from  the  surveys  made  by  Tr,  Panreya  and 


**  summarmed  from  BABULKAR,  (a),  pp.  188^193. 


xxxiii 


K,  N,  Josu  and  from  my  own  enquiries,  it  appears  that, 
among  the  stories  of  Gairola’s  collection,  the  following  ones 
are  currently  in  vogue : Bhagdeo  the  warrior  (n°  9,  pp,  69-78), 
Kunji  Pal  (n°  16,  pp.  105-108)  Hyunraj  Mahara  (n*^  20,  pp. 
133-137).  Asa  Rawat  (n''  20,  pp.  153-156).  In  addi- 
tion to  them,  many  other  stories  of  local  personnages  are 
in  the  repertory  of  the  bards;  we  can  cite  the  following  titles: 
RamT  Baur,  ICalu  KeherF,  Jairij  DhaunT,  Maid  Saun,  Bhima 
Ka^hayat,  Sakaram  l^rkF,  Parma  Rautela,  Pacu  Dorai, 
Ratuvl  Phartyal,  Adi  KuvarT,  Ham  Hit®* 

Let  us,  as  an  example,  give  a summary  of  the  last  one: 

*^Haru  was  very  fond  of  hunting  birds.  His  seven  sisters-in- 
law  (elder  brothers  wives)  mocked  him  saying:  ‘‘Ham, 
you  are  a fool;  you  care  only  for  birds.  If  you  were  really 
the  son  of  a hero,  you  would  prepare  a palaquin  and  bring 
home  the  beautiful  girl  named  Sisav^LalTfromSupiakot:” 
Because  of  their  taunts  he  decided  to  go  to  Supiakot.  His 
mother  tried  to  prevail  on  him  not  to  leave:  “You  are  my 
only  surviving  son  ; you  are  the  apple  of  my  cy^,  the  only 
light  of  my  eyes.  Do  not  go,  do  not  go  to  Supiakot”.  But 
he  would  not  listen  to  her.  He  rubbed  his  body,  which 
was  as  soft  as  butter,  with  grey  ashes  and  took  the  disguise 
of  a Yogi ; he  made  his  way  to  Supiakot  He  gave  ^ golden 
ring  as  a bribe  to  a maid-servant  who  introduced  him  to 
the  appartment  of  Sisava.  He  mani^ed  to  escape  with  her 
and  brought  her  home,  telling  his  sistdrs4n4aw;  “You 
will  have  to  leave  the  women’s  appartments.  I was  the  son 
of  a hero:  I brought  back  Sisavt  LalT  in  her  palanquin.  I 
am  really  the  son  of  my  mother:  I came  hack  home.”  ^ 

# ^ 

In  Western  Nqral,  the  repertory  is  not  very  extensive 
and  noi  very  different  from  that  of  Kateaon.  Wo*kii% 

*•  Titles  quotel  from  PAIjJlPLEYA,  pp.  192-194  and  lOSf 

(KrstjSnanda)  pp.  27-32, 

•*  SummarizedfromPANREYA,  p.  194. 


xxxiv 


with  bards  in  Dandeldhura  (which  was  part  of  the  former 
Doti  kingdom)  and  collecting  indirect  information  from 
Bajhang  (North  of  Doti),  I obtained  seven  stories.  Three 
of  them  are  shared  with  both  Garhwal  and  Kumaon,  namely 
Uda  Chaplia  (see  n‘'25,  pp.  150-152),  Ranu  Rawat  (see  n°28 
pp,  159-166)  and  Kala  BhandarT  (n°  3,  pp.  37-42),  the  last 
one  being  sung  only  in  Bajhang.  Two  are  shared  with  Ku- 
maon only*  Chiya  BhiyS  Kath%at  (known  in  Kumaon 
under  the  title  of  Bhima  Kathayat)  is  a story  which  tells 
of  two  brothers  who  were  subjects  of  the  Katyuris  of  Western 
Kumaon  and  won  a victory  over  Vikram  Chand.  The  other 
story  is  about  the  heroic  deeds  of  Sangram  KarkT  (known  in 
Kumaon  as  Sakaram  Kark1),  Finally  two  of  the  stories 
gathered  in  Nepal  have  not  been  traced  anywhere  else. 
The  first  tells  of  BimlS  Rawat  who  is  a mischivious  character. 
Deprived  of  his  share  of  inheritance  by  his  seven  step- 
brothers, Bimla  Rawat  goes  to  live  with  his  maternal  uncle. 
Because  of  his  misdeeds,  his  uncle  cannot  keep  him  and 
sells  him  into  slavery.  Bimla  Rawat  manages  to  run  away 
and  comes  back  to  take  a revenge  by  killing  the  whole  family 
of  his  maternal  uncle.  He  is  finally  killed  by  his  step-brothers. 
This  story  stands  alone.  It  appears  to  be  a parody  illustra- 
ting just  the  reverse  of  the  heroic  values  celebrated  in  other 
songs.  The  second  story  recorded  only  in  Nepal  is  that  of 
Bikl  Paneru,  a brahman  of  Doti. 

I shall  set  down  here  the  summary  of  two  of  those  stories: 
Sangfim  Karkf,  the  text  of  which  is  nowhere  available,  and 
Bika  Panem*  who  appears  to  be  a really  local  hero.  In  order 
to  convey  ah  idea  of  the  peeuMar  style  of  the  bards  of  Western 
Nepah  I shah  present  vdy  detailed  summaries, 

S'AgtBm  K:Srk7itTom  a recording  made  in  Dandeldhura) : 
upon  a time  Ilyed  in  Doli  a ^arrior  called  Sahg- 
ram  KirfcT^  son  of  Samnadra  KirIC  prapdson  of  PurSh, 
Karld".  He  Went  to  serve  Trimal  C3xmi  who  ruled  over 
Champawat  in  Kumaom  Ihe  king  him  to  Ight  memies 
at  Badam  GarhX  On  bis  way  to  that  place,  he  disguised 
himself  as  a RaTBha|  (genealogist  and  panegyrist)  in  order 


XXXV 


to  beg  food.  A Datta  brahman  who  accompanied  him 
cooked  his  meals.  After  a fierce  battle,  he  killed  all  the 
enemies  and  came  back  to  Champawat  with  a caravan  of 
booty  which  he  delivered  to  the  king:  elephants  loaded 
with  salt,  horses  loaded  with  precious  clothes,  goats  loaded 
with  golden  coins. 

Trimal  Chand  was  greatly  pleased;  bnt  the  courtim 
became  jealous  of  Sahgram  KarkPs  success.  In  order  to 
get  rid  of  him  they  persuaded  the  king  to  send  him  to  fight 
the  heavenly  bird  Gafura,  and  the  Naga,  the  snake  of  the 
subterranean  world,  who  were  causing  much  trouble  to 
the  people  along  the  border  of  Garhwal,  SahgiSm  KlricT 
went  there  and  set  a tmp.  One  night,  he  laid  on  the  ground 
a red-hot  iron  sheet,  the  light  of  which  attracted  the  Gamra 
and  the  N?ga.  He  easily  caught  them  and  killed  them. 

Then,  whipping  his  horse  who  flew  like  a bird,  he  pro- 
ceeded, toward  Garhwal  On  the  way,  he  met  people  who 
were  carrying  diamonds  worth  nine  lakhs.  Th^  were 
afraid  to  fight  such  a hero  and  asked  for  mercy  saying: 
‘‘Take  our  diamonds,  and  simre  our  lives.’^  Sahgrlm  Klrkl 
replied:  “As  a sign  of  your  submission,  I shaH  take  the  tip 
of  your  noses,  ears  and  tongues.”  “Do  not  take  too  much, 
they  answered,  take  just  a little  bit.”  Sangrtm  KlrKI  be- 
camcr angry : he  pulled  out  their  noses,  ears  and  tongues  and 
put  them  in  his  pocket.  They  went  to  king  Manik  Chand 
and  by  making  signs—  since  they  could  not  sp<mk—  th^ 
explained  him  that  such  a frightful  hero  was  on  Ms  way. 
Sangram  KSrkT  appeared  in  front  of  the  kiii^  who  asked 
him  who  he  was.  He  answered: 

“Up  there  my  horizontal  drum  is  resounding. 

Up  there  my  kettle-drum  is  resounding: 

I am  the  fierce  warrior  of  Trimal  Chand 
Sangrlm  KirkT  is  my  name.” 

The  king  then  told  him:  “Then  you  are  my 
Trimal  Chand  is  my  youn^r  brother  who  Ms  usurped  my 
kingdom.  That  is  why  T<^tne  to  rule  tere  over  Garhwal. 
You  have  killed  the  G^ruya  and  the  iSfaga  who  protected 
me*  Now^  will  you  work  for  me  T 


SangrSm  Karkt  accepted  this  offer.  The  king  sent  him  to 
conquer  rice  fields  situated  near  the  Indra  river  in  Garhwal. 
He  donned  his  battle  dress  and  his  weapons  and  left. 

By  this  time  news  had  reached  his  father  Samundra 
Karki  that  his  son  had  gone  to  Garhwal.  The  father  went 
there  to  try  to  persuade  him  to  stop  fighting  and  return 
home.  Samundra  KarkT  reached  the  Indra  river  and  stayed 
on  one  bank.  His  son  was  on  the  other  bank  but  he  could 
not  recognize  him.  The  father  shouted  across  asking  San- 
grlm  KarkT  who  he  was.  The  answer  came:  “I  am  Sangram 
KarkT,  son  of  Samundra  Karla,  grandson  of  Puran  Karkl” 
Then  Sangram  Karki  crossed  to  the  other  bank  to  join  his 
father,  who  told  him:  “You  have  already  won  so  many 
victories;  you  should  come  back  home!”  Sangram  K&lu 
answered:  “Up  to  now  I have  survived;  how  long  shall 
I live  ? It  would  he  a shame  for  me  to  desist  from  fighting 
with  these  despicable  Garhwalis.  Take  these  diamonds 
with  you  and  go  back  home;  I shall  join  you  in  a week’s 
time.” 

When  the  Garhwalis  heard  that  Sangrlm  Karla,  the 
famous  warrior  of  Doti  had  come,  they  gathered  an  army 
on  the  other  bank  of  the  river.  They  said: 

“Run  away,  Karla  the  WMrior,  give  way: 

We,  Garhwalis,  have  come;  run  away.” 

He  answered: 

“I  shall  not  run  away; 

You  have  to  give  way,  you,  Garhwalis; 

I shfdl  cut  off  your  heads  if  you  do  not  give  way” 
The  fight  b^n.  Stones  were  thrown  over  the  river  and  fell 
on  SafigiSm  KSrkT  until  no  more  wwe  left  on  the  iGarbw^ali 
side.  The  horse  of  San^lm  KarkT  bolted*  and  the  last 
stone  fell  on  the  Irft  attn  of  the  hwo  and  smashed  it  He 
thought:  “How  could  I,  Wiffiout  shanae,  go  back  to  my 
village  with  a paralyzed  arm?”  He  cut  off  the  wounded  arm 
and  threw  it  across  the  river.  It  fell  on  a tree  where  it  re- 
mained hanging.  The  enemies  shouted  to  him:  “We  would 
like  to  take  your  arm  as  a trophy.  How  can  we  get  it  from 


xxxvii 


the  tree  ?”  “There  is  an  easy  way”,  he  answered.  “Organize 
a ceremony  of  seven  days  daring  which  brahmans  will  read 
the  vedas.  At  the  end,  sacrifice  a goat,  and  the  arm  will 
fall  of  itself!  ” So  they  did  and,  on  the  seventh  day,  the  arm 
fell  down  and  smashed  half  of  the  enemies.  Astonished  by 
such  a prodigy,  the  survivors  thought  they  should  stop 
fighting  such  a hero  and  make  thdr  submission  to  him. 
They  started  to  cross  the  river  to  join  him. 

Sangram  Karlu  thought  th^  were  coming  to  fight  and 
said  to  himself:  “I  am  unable  to  fight  and  do  not  want  to 
suffer  an  ignominious  death:  But  on  the  other  hand,  my 
horse  has  run  away.  I cannot  leave  it  here;  a hmo  cannot 
return  home  without  his  hocse.”  He  committed  suicide 
by  cutting  his  tongue  with  his  teeth.  While  dying,  he  re- 
mmnbered  his  brothers  Sakta  and  Bhakta  Singh  who  lived 
in  thdr  castle  of  Piuli  Kot;  while  he  had  to  die  alone  in  a 
foreign  land. 

When  the  enemies  drew  near,  they  found  him  motion- 
less with  blood  flowing  from  his  mouth.  They  cut  his  head 
with  a saw  and  carried  it  to  the  king: 

“Let  the  name  of  SangrSm  Klrld  be  famous  during  the 
four  yugas. 

He  remains  famous,  the  hero  who  defeats  the  enranies. 
He  remains  famous,  the  hero  who  makes  a pilgrimage 
to  Gaya. 

He  remains  famous,  the  hero  who  (commits  suidde) 
by  biting  his  tongue. 

He  remains  famous,  the  hero  who  follows  his  ovra 
dharma” 

* 

Bits Paneru  (from  a recording  made  in  Dandddhura):' 

“Once  upon  a time,  PahSfT  ShahT,  king  of  Doti,  was 
holding  an  assembly  in  his  palace  of  AjaymirkoL' Among 
the  counsellors  was  Bika  Pandru,  who  belonged  tp  a famous 
brahmau  family  of  hereditary  ministos.  After  consddng 
his  counsellors,  the  king  said  to  BikS  Panera:  “If  you  pay 


xxxvm 


me,  as  a tribute,  a golden  cat  and  a golden  fish,  I will  allow 
you  to  enjoy  your  fief  of  Naulakot;  otherwise,  I will  not 
allow  you.”  “Son  of  an  enemy,”  he  answered,  “rather 
than  pay  you  a tribute,  I would  prefer  to  be  reincarnated 
three  times  as  a donkey,  my  mother  to  be  reincarnated  as 
a sow  and  my  father  as  a donkey He  left  the  assembly  and-, 
comming  back  home,  he  told  his  wife;  “Let  us  leave  Doti 
and  settle  in  Kumaon.” 

He  donned  his  dress  and  weapons  and  left  with  his 
family  and  servants.  When  he  had  reached  the  rice  fields 
of  Tamuin  the  king  sent  four  soldiers  to  call  him  back. 
But  he  said:  “A  hero  does  not  go  back  on  a decision.  I 
will  not  come  back.”  He  sent  with  the  soldiers  a letter  in 
which  he  wrote:  “If  I raze  to  the  ground  your  palace  and 
build  myself  a palace  with  the  stones  and  mortar  taken 
from  yours,  I am  really  Bifca  PaLneru.  If  not,  I ana  only  the 
son  of  the  untouchable  guard  who  watches  your  g^te!” 

At  the  time  when  Bika  Paneru  reached  Kumaon,  the 
astrologers  fixed  an  auspiciou';  day  for  performing  the 
irdddha  of  the  father  of  the  king  of  Kumaon.  No  local 
brahman  possessed  the  book  of  purana  which  was  to  be 
read  during  the  ceremony.  The  king  inquired  and  was  told 
that  only  Bika  Paneru  of  Doti  possessed  that  book. 
He  called  him  and,  after  the  ceremony,  he  gave  him  a shi- 
dd  full  of  golden  coins  and  a place  called  DhumsilS,  where 
he  could  settle  and  enjoy  the  revenue  of  four  villages. 

By  that  time  a warrior  called  Bijaya  Singh  Gero  came 
hwdc  from  a campal^  in  the  plains,  with  a caravan  loaded 
with  booty.  When  he  hmd  that  four  villages  had  been 
■giveB  to  BifcS  Paneru,  he  became  angry  and  said  to  the  king : 
‘'‘This  is  the  yow  spend  without  taking  my  advice  the 
money  I wih  fia:  you  in  my  campaigns.”  He  insisted  that 
Bika  Paneru  ^Uld  pay  seven  lakhs  pf  rupees  to  the  king 
and  otw  to  himself,  to  be  allowed  to  enjoy  the  revenue  of 
those  vi'lla^.  Bika  Paneru,  against  the  advice  of  his  wife, 
reused  to  pay.  There  was  no  issue  but,  a fight.  B^aya  Singh 
Oerowent  to  attack  Dhpm/iia.  Bikl  Panerfi  was  playing 


xxxix 


dice  with  his  son  Candra  Bhan,  when  his  wife  heard  the 
sound  of  drums.  It  was  the  army  of  Bijaya  Singh  Gero 
accompanied  by  drummers  playing  #0/  hurkiy^  singing 
heroic  ballads,  and  dancing  girls.  The  wife  told  : ‘"Are  you 
not  ashamed  to  play  dice  while  your  enemies  attack 

Bika  Paneru  decided  to  behave  in  a knightly  manner. 
He  told  his  son  and  his  servant  to  give  the  enemies  his  best 
goat  with  rice  and  pulse  so  that  they  might  prepare  their 
meal  near  the  fountain.  Candra  Bhan,  hidden  in  the  grass, 
watched  the  enemies  kill  the  goat.  Although  his  father  had 
told  him  to  be  patient,  he  could  not  wait.  His  dagger  in 
his  hand,  he  rushed  in  the  middle  of  the  enemies.  He  was 
surrounded,  and  his  father  who  came  to  rescue  him  was 
wounded.  Only  Candra  Bhan  remained  to  fight;  should 
he  face  the  enemies  alone  ? He  asked  advice  from  his  mother. 
She  cursed  him  saying:  “We  could  not  enjoy  our  land  in 
Doti.  We  cannot  enjoy  these  villages  in  Kumaon,  Your 
father  always  refuses  to  pay  tribute.  This  is  my  curse: 
may  your  fame  as  a warrior  remain  for  ever,  but  may  you 
have  no  descendance.”  Candra  Bhan  then  went  to  his  father’s 
sister  who  told  him:  “One  must  not  care  for  one’s  own  life. 
If  you,  your  father  and  your  uncle  cherish  your  life,  I shall 
go  myself  to  face  the  enemies.” 

Candra  Bhan  danced  with  joy.  He  assembled  his  allies, 
donned  his  battle  dress  and  weapons,  and  went  to  fight. 
All  the  enemies  were  killed  except  Bijaya  Singh  Gero  who 
managed  to  run  away.  His  father  told  him : What  you 

did  is  nothing.  You  only  cut  tender  stems  of  yam,  but 
Bijaya  Singh  Gero  who  is  Uke  a thorn  in  a bed,  like  a bit  of 
straw  in  the  eye,  like  blood  in  milk,  you  let  him  escape! 
Go  and  pursue  him,”  Candra  Bhin  borrowed  his  father’s 
swift  horse,  caught  up  with  his  enemy  at  the  other  end  of 
Kumaon  and  killed  him  in  a single  combat. 

The  Paneru  family  was  victorious,  but  th^  had  been 
cursed  by  the  mother.  Bika  Paneru  thought:  “Our  fame  will 
remain,  but  we  will  have  no  descendance.  We  have  won  a 
victory,  but  God  knows  what  may  happen.  In  the  future, 


xl 


we  may  be  defeated  and  suffer  an  ignominious  death  from 
the  hands  of  the  enemies.  Better  to  have  a glorious  death 
from  our  own  hands.”  He  ordered  his  servant  to  drown 
his  two  grandsons  Bala  and  Dhanl  in  the  fountain.  When 
their  dead  bodies  floated  in  the  fountain  like  pulse  fritters 
in  boiling  oil,  the  whole  family  lamented  on  their  death. 
A big  pyre  was  prepared  into  which  the  women  threw 
themselves  and  were  burned  alive.  Finally  Bika  Paneru 
and  Candra  Bhan  stretched  themselves  out  on  the  ground, 
and  threw  up  to  the  sky  their  daggers,  which  fell  into  their 
navels.  Thus  did  they  accomplish  their  own  fate  with  their 
own  hands.  They  prefered  their  honour  to  a comfortable 
life  of  submission  and  their  fame  will  remain  throughout 
the  ages.” 

* « 1|C 

At  the  end  of  the  XVIIIth  century,  the  Gorkha  dynasty 
which  was  building  the  new  unified  kingdom  of  Nepal, 
with  its  capital  at  Kathmandu,  extended  its  conquests  to 
the  West.  Doti  and  Kumaon  were  annexed  in  1790  and 
Garhwal  a few  years  later.  After  the  Anglo-Nepalese  war 
of  1 8 14-6,  Nepal  kept  only  Doti  while  Kumaon  and  Garhwal 
became  districts  administered  by  the  East  India  Company. 
The  political  conditions  which  had  prevailed  for  more  than 
a millenitun  were  thus  transformed.  Except  for  the  autono- 
mous prindpality  of  Tdiri  Garhwal,  the  small  kingdoms 
widi  their  courts  and  their  warriors  were  destroyed.  These 
events  tylected  unequally  the  r^rtory  of  the  bards.  Temples 
swvived;  phblio  and  private  ceremonies  continued  to  be 
hdd:  so  reli^ous  songs  have  been  rather  well  preserved. 
The  other  part  of  the  ri^ertory,  dealing  with  kin^  and 
heroes,  was  much  more  seriously  affected.  With  the  end  of 
the  wars  between  kingdoms  and  of  the  feiids  between  local 
chiefs,  the  sources  of  inspiration  dried  opt.  It  is  remarkable 
that— except  for  a few  songs  from  GarhwSd  *®—  tie  whole 
of  the  repertory  refers  to  events  whiieh  took  place  before 
the  end  of  the  XVIIIth  century.  It  was  already  stamdardlss- 

« CKtAK,  (a)  pp.  245-246. 


xli 


ed  at  that  time  and  is  gradually  dying  out. 

As  a conclusion  to  this  inventory  of  the  songs  of  the 
Central  Himalaya,  we  may  remark  that  historical  specula- 
tions about  this  area  have  tended  to  aim  either  too  far  or 
too  near.  Certain  scholars  aimed  too  far  when  they  tried  to 
find  in  the  songs  survivals  of  a pre-aryan  substratum, 
preserved  by  the  untouchables;  but  neither  in  the  heroic 
songs,  nor  in  religious  songs  is  there  any  hint  of  a pre- 
aryan  culture.  This  substratum  (if  indeed  it  existed)  hhould 
be  particularly  discernible  in  religous  son^.  In  point  of 
fact  this  is  the  part  of  the  repertory  which  owes  the  most 
to  the  pan-Indian  culture. 

Other  specularions  come  too  near  to  our  own  ttmes; 
they  try  to  explain  the  culture  of  the  area  by  an  influx  of 
Ha^uts  driven  away  from  the  plains  by  the  Muslims. 
Historical  evidence  about  the  Katyuri  dynasty  of  Kumaon 
and  the  Malla  dynasty  of  Western  Nepal  ^ows  that  the 
Hindu  culture  was  firmly  rooted  in  the  area  before  the 
Muslim  invasions.  Such  is  also  the  case  of  ten^i^e  aniiitec- 
ture  which  developed  early  in  iCumaon  and  was  imitated  k 
Western  Nqjal  An  additional  due  cm  be  derived  from  the 
repertory  of  heroic  songs:  the  main  ntu^us  deals  with  the 
Katyuri  dynasty  whkh,  by  all  evidences,  is  not  of  Rajpit 
origin.  ITie  songs  refo’  mostly  to  tite  ei»J  of  the  Katyuri 
dynasty  (XlVth  century)  and  the  early  period  oi  the  subse- 
quent dynasties  (X  V-XVIdi  centuries).  The  p^>ert<wy  a|q>eats 
to  have  been  established  at  that  time,  that  is  to  say  hile 
in  the  medieval  period.  When  we  compare  (t  to  the  repcrltety 
of  the  plains  (including  Ra|asthmi),  we  find  that  the  Ales 
are  quite  different.  Wiile  stories  tike  Dh<dS*Mlt®^  C&i.^aa 
Lorik,  Soro^  are  common  all  over  Nortlwra  India, 
Central  Himalaya  has  not  adopted  them,  b«*t  has  instead 
a repertory  <ff  its  own.  Althmigh  the  Himalaywi  tepea^my 
as  we  know  it  may  belong  to  a rather  late  period,  one 
may  surest,  as  an  hypothesis,  that  it  was  done  in  oonffmaa- 
tion  of  an  earlier  tra*htion  deeply  rooted  in  the  area. 

* e » 


xlii 


The  second  section  of  the  book  contains  sixty-five 
folk-tales  which  were  collected  by  Pandit  Ganga  Datta 
Upreti  and  Rev.  E,  S.  Oakley  (see  : preface,  p.  xi).  Little 
work  has  been  done  since  that  time  on  the  subject.  Small 
collections  of  folk-tales  have  been  published,  either  in  Ku- 
maoni^®  or  in  Hindi  translation^^.  Several  folklorists 
have  propounded  classifications  based  on  the  criterion  of 
the  subject,  i,  e.  the  nature  of  the  personages:  ghosts, 
animals,  etc.^l  Their  research  does  not  add  anything 
really  new  to  the  work  of  Oakley  and  Gairola,  a serious 
analysis  of  this  extensive  material  remains  to  be  done. 

Indian  folklorists  also  treat  in  their  research 
a third  category:  folk  sayings.  Ganga  Datta  Upreti  publish- 
ed the  first  collection  of  proverbs  (see  General 
introduction,  p.  3).  Since  then,  new  material  has  been  col- 
lected, and  published.  Candralal  Varml  edited  783  Kumao- 
ni  proverbs,  with  translation  and  commentary  inHindi^*^. 
Dr.  Konrad  Meissner  has  collected,  analysed  and 
translated  Kumaoiii  riddles^.  Krsnananda  JosF  also 
published  52  riddles  and  224  proverbs®^.  Other  folk- 
lorists have  collected  some  new  material  and  propounded 
classifications  of  proverbs  and  riddles^^  Finally  an  inte- 
resting collection  of  magical  formulae  has  been  published 
by  Krsnananda  Jos?®. 

•k -k 

^ JO^f(ICRnaBanda),  pp.  327-372. 

»»  t^iULKAR,  (b),  pp.  99-125.  CATAK,  (c).  MATIYA- 
NI,  (b)  and  (c).. 

*«  PANIJEYA.  pp.  199-215  and  table  facing  p.  160. 

'/BABytKAR,  fa),  pp.  195-252. 

^ '$en'  ;VARMA., 

MEISS^NER.,  ,(a). ' ' ' ' 

JO§l  (Kfjpa  listida),  pp.  373-400. 

PANREV;A,  ipp.  219-269.  BSbOLKAR,  (a),  pp. 
253-272;  (b),  77-98. 

JO^I  (Krsnananda),  pp.  402-412. 


xliU 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Here  is  the  list  of  the  books  and  articte  dealing  with  the 
fdklore  of  the  Himalaya  quoted  in  the  introduction.  Tlwy 
have  been  referred  to,  in  the  notes,  by  the  name  of  the  authors. 


ATKINSON  (Edwin  T.)-  The  Himalayan  districts  of  the 
North-  Western  Provinces  of  India,  forming  vol.  X, 
XI,  and  XII  of  the  Gazetteer  of  the  North-Westom 
Provinces.  Allahabad  1882-1886. 

BABULKAR  (Mohan  Lal)-(a)  GarhvalT  lok-^sSdtya  kS 
vivecnatmark  adhayan,  Allahabad,  1964,  284 
[Critical  study  of  Garhwali  folk-literature] 

(b)  Pa/cimT  pahafi  kT  up-bolt  kalok-sahitya  our 
kola,  Allahabad,  1970, 200  pp.  [Popular  literature  and 
crafts  of  a dialect  of  Western  Pahari:  about  Jaunpur 
area  in  Tehri  Garhwal.] 

CATAK  (Govinda)  (a)  GarhvalT  lok-gll.  Ek  ;mpskrtlk 
adhayan.  Delhi,  1968,  386  pp.  [Popular  songs 
of  Garhwal : a study  of  culture.]  f 
lb)  Gt^hvSl  kTlok-gdtl^,iy^TSi  Dun,  1958,  240  pp. 
[Garhwali  popular  ballads.] 

(c)  GarhvSI kllok-krnm,  2 vol..  DdW,  1961,^  and 
47  pp.)  [folk-talcs  of  Garhwtd.] 

GABORIEAU  (Marc).-  (a)  “Les  r6dts  chant6s  de  THiiaa- 
laya  et  le  contexte  ethnographiquc”,  in  FURER-HAI- 
MENDORF  (Christoph  von),  editor.-Contributioos 
to  the  anthropology  of  Nepal.  Arts  and  Phillips, 
Warmintser,  1974,  pp.  114-128. 

(b)  “Classification  des  r&its  chantds.  La  littemture 
orale  des  hindous  de  I’Hiraalaya”,  in  PoStf^,  vrri. 
19,  Paris,  1974,  pp.  49-69. 


GABORIEAU  (Marc)  et  HELFFER  (Mireille).- “A  propos 
d’un  tambour  du  Kumaon  et  de  I’Ouest  du  N6pal.  Rem- 
arques sur  Tutilisation  des  tambours  sabliers  dans  le 
monde  itidien>  le  N6pal  et  le  Tibet”,  in  Studia  Instru- 
mmtorum  Musicae  Popularis,  Festschrifts  to  E.  Ems- 
heimer  on  the  occasion  of  his  70th  birthday,  Musikhis- 
toriska  Museet,  Stockholm,  1974,  text:  pp.  75-80; 
^ photos,  pp.  268—272. 

JOST  (Krsnananda).-  Kumm  kd  hk-sdhilya.  Paricayat- 
mak  sangraha,  Bareilly,  1971,  425  pp.  [Anthology 
^ of  the  popular  literature  of  Kumaon.] 

JOSI  (Prayag).-  KumdmT  lok-gathde,  Dehra  Dun,  1971, 
278  pp.  [Kumaoni  popular  ballads.] 

MATIYXnI  (:^aile^).-  (a)  Bela  huTaber.  Delhi,  1962,116pp. 

(b)  KuniaukT  lok-katBm,  Delhi, 1958,  50pp  [Folk-tales 
of  Kumaon.l 

(c)  jQoff prades  kJ  lok-kathae.  Delhi,  no  date,  35  pp. 
[Folk-tales  of  Doti  region.! 

MEISSNER  (Konrad).-  50  ratsel  aus  Kumaon.  edlert, 
ubersetz  tmd  erklart  (with  English  translation).  42 
typed  pages  (to  be  published). 

(b)  MSlu  Said,  a Kumaoni  balladi  (to  be  published). 

NAUTYAL  (Kanti  Prasad).-  The  archaeology  of  Kumaon, 
Banaras,  1969. 

PANI^YA  (Trilocan).-  KumSu  ka  lok-sahitya,  Agra, 
1962,  414  pp.  [Popular  literature  of  Kumaon.] 

PANTH  (Deva  Kifeta).-  J^otelT  lok-scOiitya  ek  adhayan, 
iN*AS.,  Tribhuyan  Umyersity,  Kirtipur,  V.S.  2032. 

YARMX  (Cttndra  lal),  KundH^bhSsS  kTkahavate,  Almora, 
no  date,  100  and  155.  pp:  [^Kumaoni  proverbs.] 


xlv 


PREFACE 

IN  my  childbood  J was  fond  of  hearing  stories  of 
the  ancient  heroes  of  my  own  district  of 
Garhwal,  in  the  Himalayan  Hills,  from  local 
bards.  My  interest  in  those  stories  grew  into  a pas- 
sion during  my  school  and  college  days.  I used  to 
call  the  bards  or  Hur\ias,  as  Aey  are  locally  called, 
from  far  and  wide,  during  the  college  vacations, 
and  hear  their  quaint  and  thrilling  legends  and 
ballads. 

I well  remember  that  once  I related  some  of 
those  legends  to  my  Professor,  Mr.  J.  G.  Jennings  of 
the  old  Muir  Central  College,  Allahabad,  who  was 
struck  with  their  rustic  charm  and  poetry;  and 
said  that  they  were  quite  Homeric  in  spirit.  He 
advised  me  to  collect  and  publish  them. 

Owing  to  various  causes  I could  not  begin  the 
work  of  collecting  them  for  several  years.  There 
is  no  written  folklore  of  the  Himalayan  region,  com- 
prising the  districts  of  Garhwal,  Almora  and  Naini 
Tal.  It  has  come  down  through  word  of  mouth, 
the  Hurl{ias,  who  are  the  local  bards,  being  its 
chief  repositories. 


xlvi 


PREFACE 


During  the  last  ten  or  twelve  years  I have  been 
devoting  the  little  time  which  I could  spare  from 
my  professional  work,  especially  at  night,  to  hear- 
ing those  legends  and  writing  them  down- 

Owing  to  my  professional  and  other  engage- 
ments and  continued  ill-health,  the  progress  hgs 
been  slow.  I was,  however,  able  to  write  down 
about  one  hundred  legends  of  ancient  heroes  and 
ballads  during  the  period.  But,  before  I could 
digest  them,  I fell  seriously  ill ; hence,  the  work 
has  been  considerably  delayed. 

In  1920  the  Rev.  E.  S.  Oakley  of  Almora,  who 
has  made  considerable  researches  in  Himalayan 
folklore,  read  a paper  before  the  U.  P.  Historical 
Society  on  the  Folklore  of  Kumaun,  whidb  aroused 
great  public  interest  in  the  subject.  In  1924  I read 
a paper  on  the  Folklore  of  Garhwal  before  the 
same  learned  Society,  which  was  also  much 
appreciated  by  eminent  poets  and  scholars,  like 
Dr.  Rabindra  Nath  Tagore,  Professors  Sheshadri 
and  Telang.  This  encouraged  me  to  take  up  the 
work  seriously  and  i began  to  sort  and  arrange  the 
material  I had  collected; 

In  1929  I happened  to  make  the  acquaintance  of 
the  Rev.  E.  S.  Oakley,  mentioned  above,  and 
showed  him  the  MSS,  of  the  Folk-tales  which  I 


PREFACE 


xlvii 


had  translated.  He  took  a keen  interest  in  my 
work  and  very  generously  placed  all  his  valuable 
collection  on  the  subject  at  my  disposal.  The 
collection  included  his  own  notes  and  those  of  the 
late  Rai  Pandit  Ganga  Datt  Upreti  Bahadur,  the 
latter  of  whom  had  made  extensive  researches  in 
the  subject  during  his  official  career  in  the  Garhwal 
district  in  the  latter  part  of  the  nineteenth  century. 

Mr.  Oakley’s  collection  covers  a wide  range  of 
folklore  literature  of  the  Himalayan  hills  and  also 
contains  his  learned  notes  on  the  same.  The 
discovery  of  this  valuable  collection,  and  the  kind 
offer  of  help  by  Mr.  Oakley,  further  encouraged 
me  to  undertake  the  task  of  writing  a book  on  the 
subject. 

In  spite  of  my  failing  health  I have  been  able  to 
translate  and  put  into  shape  thirty-two  stories 
selected  from  my  own  collection  and  to  select  about 
sixty-five  tales  from  Mr.  Oakley’s  and  Pandit 
Ganga  Datt  Upreti’s  collections,  mentioned  above, 
which  are  presented  to  the  public  in  this  volume. 

The  work,  being  the  first  of  its  kind,  is  apt  to 
be  somewhat  crude  and  inartistic.  My  only 
apology  for  writing  the  book  is  to  create  interest  in 
this  important  branch  of  knowledge,  which  has, 
unfortunately,  been  much  neglected  in  the  past. 


xlviii 


P&EFACE 


Should  my  hope  be  realized  in  any  degree  I 
shall  consider  my  labour  amply  rewarded. 

In  conclusion,  I beg  to  acknowledge  my  deep 
debt  of  gratitude  to  the  Rev.  E.  S.  Oakley  for  his 
generously  placing  his  valuable  collection  at  my 
disposal  and  giving  me  permission  to  utilize  his 
material  in  this  book.  The  second  section  of  this 
book  contains  the  folk-tales  from  Mr.  Oakley’s  and 
Pandit  Ganga  Datt  Upreti’s  collections,  with  a 
learned  introduction  and  notes  by  the  former. 

I also  wish  to  express  my  thanks  to  Mr.  J.  M. 
Clay,  C.S.I.,  C.I.E.,  o.b.e.,  i.c.s..  Chief  Secretary  to 
Government,  United  Provinces  ; to  Mr.  D.  A. 
Barker  and  Mrs.  Barker  of  Sheringham,  England  ; 
to  Mr.  W.  F.  G.  Browne,  i.c.s..  Deputy  Commis- 
sioner, Garhwal ; and  to  Professor  P.  Seshadri, 
Principal,  Government  College,  Ajmer,  for  their 
kindly  revising  the  manuscript  of  this  book. 

TARA  DUTT  GAIROLA. 

Santiashram,  Pavw, 

G^hwal:  August  5,  i<Q4. 


Importance  of  the  subject 

“The  beliefs  of  the  people,  their  legends,  and 
their  songs  are  the  source  of  nearly  all  literatures; 
and  their  Institutions  and  customs  are  the  origin 
of  those  of  modern  times.  And  today  to  the  new 
science  of  folklore  (which,  as  Mr.  Andrew  Lang 
says,  must  be  taken  to  include  psychical  research 
or  psychical  science),  archaeology,  anthropology, 
and  comparative  anthology  and  religion  are  indis- 
pensable. Thus  folklore  offers  the  scientific  means 
of  studying  man  in  the  sense  meant  by  the  poet  who 
declared  that  the  proper  study  of  mankind  is 
man.”*  Although  folklore,  about  a century  ago, 
was  considered  beneath  the  serious  consideration  of 
scholars  in  Europe,  they  have  now  been  devoting 
their  talents  to  a scientific  study  of  the  folklore  of 
their  countries  ; and  a vast  literature  has  grown  up 
on  the  subject  But  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  very 
litde  research  work  has,  so  far,  beqi  done  in  this 
important  branch  of  study  in  India,  a sub-continent, 
inhabited  by  a grt.  at  variety  of  peoples,  with  varyiag 

* Introduction  of  Pairy  Paitk  in  the  Celtic  Countries 
by  Dr.  Evans  Wentz,  p-  XVIII. 

T. 


2 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


beliefs,  legends,  customs,  superstitions  and  tradi- 
tions. True,  some  useful  books  on  Indian  folklore 
have  been  written  by  Indian  and  European  scholars, 
such  as  Sir  Herbert  Risley’s  The  Peoples  of  India  ; 
W.  Crook’s  Tribes  and  Castes  of  Northern  India  ; 
Lai  Behari  De’s  Polhjore  of  Bengal;  The 
Romantic  Tales  from  the  Punjab  by  the  Rev.  C. 
Swynnerton  ; S.  M.  Sastri’s  Indian  Fol\'tales  ; 
M.  N.  Venkata  Swami’s  Foll^-stories  of  the  Land 
of  India.  But,  so  far  as  I am  aware,  very  little 
research  work  has  been  carried  out  either  by  the 
Government  or  private  agency  on  the  subject. 

Himalayan  Folklore 

As  regards  the  Folklore  of  the  Himalayan 
districts  of  Garhwal,  Almora  and  Naini  Tal, 
including  the  Indian  State  of  Tehri  Garhwal,  the 
subject-matter  of  die  present  inquiry,  the  earliest 
record  on  the  subject  available  is  a series  of  articles 
contributed  by  Mr.  Traill,  who  was  the  Senior 
Assistant  Commissioner  of  the  Garhwal  district  in 
the  thirties  of  the  nineteenth  century,  to  the  Journal 
of  the  Royd  Astatic  Saciety.  Some  mention  of  the 
local  folklore  is  ajso  found  in  the  Revenue  Setde- 
ment  Rqxjrt  of  Garhwal  of  1833.  In  1884, 
Mr.  G.  T.  Atkinson  compiled  the  Gazetteer  of  the 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 


3 


Himalayan  districts.  Part  II  of  that  learned  work 
contains  the  history  and  ethnology  of  the  country. 
But  it  is  a matter  of  surprise  that  even  that  great 
scholar’s  references  to  the  local  folklore  are  very 
meagre.  It  seems  his  attention  was  not  drawn  to 
this  branch  of  inquiry.  Rai  Pandit  Ganga  Datt 
Upreti  Bahadur,  who  was  for  a long  time  Senior 
Assistant  Commissioner  in  Garhwal,  made  con- 
siderable researches  in  the  folklore  of  that  district. 
His  notes  on  the  subject  have  been  preserved  by 
the  Rev.  E.  S.  Oakley.  Pandit  Ganga  Datt 
also  published  some  books  on  the  subject,  the 
most  important  being  The  Folklore  of  Kumaon, 
which  mostly  deals  with  local  proverbs  and  witty 
sayings.  But  the  most  devoted  worker  in  the  field 
of  Kumaon  folklore  is  the  Rev,  E.  S.  Oakley  of 
Almora,  who  has  given  much  of  his  time  to  a close 
study  of  the  subject  and  carried  on  research  work 
for  over  forty  years.  His  most  valuable  manuscript 
notes,  contained  in  three  volumes,  snow  tlie  amount 
or  untiring  labour  he  has  spent  in  collecting  the 
material.  Mr.  Oakley  applied  himself,  for  the  first 
time,  to  a scientific  smdy  of  the  subject,  as  will  be 
evident  from  his  introduction  and  extremely  in- 
teresting notes  on  the  stories  given  in  section  II  of 
this  book.  A close  smdy  of  his  manuscript 


4 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


Stimulated  me  to  undertake  the  present  work.  The 
work  of  Mr.  Oakley  will  remain  a landmark  in 
all  future  work  on  this  subject. 

Natural  Environment 

Western  scholars  have  propounded  various 
theories  to  explain  the  belief  in  gods,  spirits  or 
fairies  contained  in  the  folklore.  The  most  im- 
portant is  the  Naturalistic  theory,  according  to 
which,  the  folklore  of  a country  is  largely,  if  not 
wholly,  moulded  by  its  natural  environment. 
Though  it  is  true  that  the  basic  principles  under- 
lying the  folklore  of  all  countries  are  the  sanSc,  as 
shown  by  Mr.  Oakley  and  other  scholars,  natural 
environment  exercises  a great  influence  in  giving 
the  folklore  of  each  coimtry  its  peculiar  distinguish- 
ing features. 

In  discussing  the  Himalayan  folklore  it  is,  there- 
fore, necessary  to  describe  very  briefly  the  natural 
environment  of  the  country  in*  order  to  show  its 
pcaaliar  differentiating  features. 

The  Himalayas  contain  some  of  the  highest 
nknihtains  in  the  world,  die  peaks  of  which  are 
perpetually  shrouded  by  mists  and  snow.  The  two 
most  sacred  rivers  of  India,  die  Ganges  and  the 
Jumna,  take  their  rise  in  the  Himalayas.  From  the 
Vcdic  times  down  to  the  present,  die  Himalayas 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 


5 


have  been  held  in  the  highest  reverence  by  the 
Hindus.  On  the  great  Kailas  mountain  stands  the 
throne  of  Siva,  while  myriads  of  gods,  goddesses, 
fairies  and  demons  haunt  its  high  hills  and  deep 
glens.  Hindu  mythology  is  full  of  the  great  wars 
fought  between  gods  and  demons  in  these  moun- 
tains. It  was  the  glory  of  the  Himalayas  which 
made  the  ancient  sage  exclaim:  “He  who  thinks 
of  the  Himachal,  though  he  should  not  behold 
Him,  is  greater  than  he  who  performs  all  worship 
at  Kashi ; as  the  dew  is  dried  up  by  the  morning 
sun,  so  are  the  sins  of  mankind  by  the  sight  of 
Himachal.'’* 

The  Himalayas  are  the  Olympus  of  India.  The 
adventures  of  the  Pandavas,  when  they  retired  to  the 
Himalayas  and  perished  in  the  eternal  snows,  are 
sung  in  the  Mahabharat  as  well  as  in  the  local  folk- 
lore. The  Himalayas  were  mosdy  inaccessible  in 
former  times.  Only  a few  mendicants  and  adven- 
turous explorers  could  penetrate  tiieir  innermost 
recesses  and  snow  covered  peaks.  Those  high  hills 
and  deep  glens  were  believed  to  be  the  hatmts  of 
gods,  demons  and  fairies;  and  beautiful  legends  and 
myths  were  invented  to  describe  the  life  of  those 
mysterious  dwellers  in  the  Himalayas. 

* Atkinsoo’s  Himalayan  Districts,  part  2,  p.  27I. 


6 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


The  folklore  of  the  Himalayas,  apart  from  its 
mythological  legends,  has  reference  to  the  mediaeval 
period  of  its  history  and  reflects  the  social  and 
political  conditions  of  those  times.  In  fact  it  throws 
vivid  light  on  the  religious,  social,  and  political 
history  of  the  period.  Hence  the  historical  import- 
ance of  the  subject. 

As  will  be  clearer  later  on,  the  Himalayan  folk- 
lore, while  based  on  the  common  principles  of 
human  nature  and  mental  attainment,  as  explained 
by  Mr.  Oakley,  has  peculiar  characteristics  and 
charm  of  its  own,  due  to  the  natural  environment 
mentioned  above.  In  many  respects  it  is  as  sublime 
and  mysterious  as  the  Himalayas  themselves,  in 
whose  bosom  it  has  been  nurtured. 

Sub-division  of  Himalayan  Folklore 

Ifimalayan  folklore  may  be  conveniently  divided 
into  seven  parts : (i)  Legends  of  Ancient  Heroes, 
(2)  Fairy  Tales,  (3)  Ghost  and  Demon  Tales,  (4) 
Bird  and  Beast  Lore,  (5)  Magic,  (6)  Witty  Savings, 
aatd  (7)  Ballads  and  Songs.  They  have  all  been 
represented  in  the  present  volume.  There  are 
also  a number  of  local  proverbs  and  riddles 
which  have  been  published  by  the  late  Pandit  Ganga 
Datt  Upreti  in  his  book  entitled  The  Ftdl^ore  of 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  7 

Kumaon.  Hence  they  have  been  omitted  from 
the  present  volume. 

I shall  now  discuss  very  briefly  each  of  the  heads 
mentioned  above. 

Legends  of  Ancient  Heroes 

These  legends  describe  the  battles  fought  ibetWMi 
the  various  kings,  dneftains  and  heroes  dwelling  in 
the  Himalayas.  They  relate  mosdy  to  the  period 
betw^  A.D.800  and  1700.  The  writer  has  not 
come  across  any  legend  which  is  earlier  or  later 
than  that  period,  except  the  mythological  legends 
taken  from  the  Mnhahharai  or  other  works  of 
Hindu  mythology. 

TlKse  legends  of  andwit  heroes  present  a very 
vivid  picture  of  the.  social,  political  and  religious  life 
of  the  country  during  the  middle  ^s,  and  supply 
very  useful  matadal  for  the  history  of  diat 
period.  The  only  hiitory  of  thc^  Himalayan  dis- 
tricts, with  any  pretentions  to  authenticity,  is  given 
in  Atkinson’s  Htmtdayan  Districts,  part  11,  men- 
tioned above. 

But  witii  due  deference  to  that  great  scholar  I am 
constrained  to  say  that  his  desoription  arc  very 
meagre,  and  even  the  pedigrees  of  the  various 


8 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


kings  given  by  him  are  not  authentic.  He  does 
not  describe  the  political  and  social  conditions  of 
that  period  correctly  and  leaves  an  unpleasant 
impression  on  the  mind  of  the  reader  that  the 
society  was  barbarous  and  uncivilized  and  devoid 
of  all  the  noble  qualities  of  head  and  heart. 

The  legends  of'  the  heroes  given  in  this  book 
give  a truer  picture  of  society  in  those  days,  and 
they  throw  into  bold  relief  the  many  redeeming 
features  of  those  times. 

It  is  true  that  the  legends  have  conje  down  from 
mere  word  of  mouth  and  may  have  undergone  con- 
siderable changes  through  such  a length  of  time. 
Still,  it  is  remarkable  how  the  local  bards  have  pre- 
served their  spirit.  In  some  cases  they  are  able  to 
preserve  the  long  and  complicated  pedigrees  of 
princes  and  heroes,  which,  though  somewhat  differ- 
ent from  the  pedigrees  given  in  Atkinson’s  Gazetteer 
and  other  books,  are  interesting.  As  stated  above, 
the  pedigrees  given  by  Atkinson  are  conflicting  in 
many  respects  and  cannot  be  strictly  accurate.  He 
depended  mostly  bu  the  information  supplied  by 
Ideal  people  and  theit  historical  value  is  not  great. 
Another  recent  work,  on  the  history  of  Garhwal  is 
a book  written  by  Pandit  Hari  Kirishna  Raturi  of 
Tchri  Garhwal,  He  has  also  mostly  relied  on  oral 
evidence,  which  cannot  be  called  authentic. 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 


9 


Historical  Material  in  the  Legends 

I shall  now  discuss  the  historical  material  con- 
tained in  the  legends  of  heroes  given  in  this  book. 
The  earliest  legend,  No.  2,  relates  to  the  period  of 
Raja  Ajai  Pal  of  Garhwal.  Mr.  Atkinson, 
relying  on  the  authority  of  General  Cunningham, 
has  given  the  date  of  Ajai  Pal’s  reign  as  1358. 
There  is  nothing  beyond  the  date  of  his  reign  given 
in  Mr.  Atkinson’s  Gazetteer.  There  are,  however, 
inscriptions  in  the  Dewalgarh  Temple  of  Garh- 
wal district  which  show  that  grants  of  lands  were 
made  to  those  temples  on  the  biith  of  Ajai  Pal  in 
A.D.  1254  which  would  show  that  the  date  given  by 
Atkinson  is  incorrect.  The  folklore,  however, 
gives  very  interesting  information  about  Ajai  Pal 
having  subjugated  at  least  some  of  the  fifty-two 
chiefs  who  ruled  in  Garhwal  before  his  time. 
The  legend  describes  Ajai  Pal’s  war  against  a local 
chief  named  Kaffu  Chawhan. 

It  further  shows  the  chivalrous  character  of  Ajai 
Pal  in  paying  military  honour  to  the  great  hero 
Kaffu,  who  fought  against  him.  Ajai  Pal’s  name 
appears  in  many  magical  incantations  of  that 
period  which  shows  that  he  was  a very  powerful 
prince. 


10 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


The  legend  throws  a flood  of  light  on  the  heroic 
character  of  Kaffu  and  the  high  ideal  of  honour 
and  chastity  held  by  the  women  of  those  days. 

The  next  legend  is  about  Raja  Man  Sah,  who, 
according  to  Atkinson,  flourished  in  a.d.  1547, 
and  according  to  Hari  Krishna  Raturi,  ruled 
from  A.D.1591  to  i6io.  The  historians  give 
no  further  particulars  about  the  prince.  The  ins- 
criptions in  the  Dewalgarh  Temple  and  in  the 
Temple  at  Devaprayag  in  Garhwal  of  a.d.  1608 
and  1610,  respectively,  show  that  Man  Sah  made 
grants  to  those  temples  in  those  years.  There  is 
also  an  inscription  in  stone  in  a temple  near  Pauri, 
Garhwal,  of  17th  gate  Magh  1649  Sambat,  corres- 
ponding to  A.D.  1592,  showing  a grant  of  land 
made  to  that  temple  on  the  first  anniversary  of 
the  birth  of  Man  Sah.  These  facts  are  in  con- 
flict with  the  year  given  by  Mr.  Atkinson.  The 
legend,  however,  gives  an  account  of  his  war 
against  Lakshmi  Chand,  Raja  of  Champawatgarh, 
in  the  Almora  district,  who,  according  to  the  same 
authority,  ruled  from  1597  to  1620  ; this  cannot  be 
porrect,  if  the  local  legend  about  Man  Sah’s  war 
against  Lakshnfi  Chand  be  correct.  For,  accord- 
ing to  the  list  of  Garhwal  Rajas  given  on  page  447 
of  the  Gazetteer,  Mmi  Sah  must  have  died  before 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 


II 


A.D.  1580.  This  shows  that  no  reliable  history 
of  these  princes  exists.  According  Co  the  legmd. 
Raja  Man  Sah  also  subdued  most  of  the  chieftains 
and  established  a settled  govonment.  The  taking 
of  command  by  the  widow  of  Raja  Lakshmi 
Chand,  and  her  fighting  heroically  against  die 
enemy,  prove  the  heroic  charactex  of  Ac  women 
of  Aose  days. 

AnoAer  mo^  important  clwacter  in  the 
Himalayan  l^;ends  is  Guru  Gyan  Chand  of 
Champawatgarh.  The  prince,  accordmg  to 
Mr.  Atkinson,  ruled  from  1698  (Gazetteer,  page 
571).  But  on  pages  500  and  501  of  Ac  Gazetteer 
Aree  lists  of  Ae  Chand  Princes  arc  given.  Accordmg 
to  list  A Guru  Gyan  Chand  ascended  Ac  throne 
m 1431  and  ruled  for  45  years;  while  according  to 
lists  B and  C he  ascended  Ae  throne  m 1350  and 
reigned  for  13  years.  Guru  Gyan  Chand  figures  m 
many  legends  covering  a very  long  period.  In 
Kala  Bhandari’s  legend  (No.  3),  Gyan  Chand  called 
Kala  to  fight  against  Ac  four  Pahlwans  and  gave 
him  large  presents  to  reward  him  for  slaying  Acm. 

In  anoAer  legend  (No.  9,  Ajwa  Bampla),  Guru 
Gyan  Chand  called  Mani  Padyar,  Salu  and  Malu, 
and  Ajwa  Bampla  m succession,  and  at  long  mter- 
vals,  to  fight  agamst  Ac  Pahlwans.  This  must 


12 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


have  covered  a period  of  more  than  twelve  years. 
Again,  in  legend  No.  i6  after  Kunj  Pal  had  been 
murdered  at  the  instigation  of  Gyan  Chand,  the 
former’s  posthumous  son  Khetra  Pal,  at  the  early 
age  of  twelve  years,  fought  against  Gyan  Chand  and 
killed  him.  All  these  facts,  if  true,  would  make 
the  reign  of  Guru  Gyan  Chand,  as  given  in  list  A 
mentioned  above,  seem  more  probable.  Legend 
1 6 refers  to  the  oppression  of  Gyan  Chand  and  his 
brothers  over  their  \hai\ars  of  Chauras  patties  ; and 
the  revolt  of  the  latter,  headed  by  Run)  Pal,  who 
fought  against  Gyan  Chand  and  killed  him  ajid  all 
his  kith  and  kin.  This  fact  is  not  mentioned  by 
any  historian. 

Another  group  of  the  Himalayan  Princes  who 
figure  largely  in  the  Himalayan  folklore  are  the 
Katyura  Rajas.  The  original  home  of  this  house 
was  at  Joshimath  near  the  present  famous  shrine 
of  Badrinath.  A long  Une  of  illustrious  princes  of 
this  house  seems  to  have  ruled  at  Joshimath,  and 
they  extended  their  territory  right  up  to  the  Sudej. 
Stissequendy  they  migrated  to  the  Katyur  valley 
in  die  Ahnora  district  The  earliest  record  of  the 
Katyura  Princes  is  of  the  ninth  century.  The 
accmint  of  , the  Katyinra  Rajas  given  in  Atkinson’s 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 


13 


Gazetteer  is  also  very  meagre  and  their  pedigrees 
do  not  appear  to  be  quite  correct. 

From  a close  similarity  between  the  Kuriiaon 
copper  plates  of  the  Katyura  Princes  and  the 
Mughir  and  other  plates  of  Bengal,  General  Cun- 
ningham and  Mr.  Atkinson  infer  that  the  Katyura 
Rajas  were  die  descendants  of  the  Pal  dynasty  of 
Magadh.  But  there  does  not  seem  to  be  convincing 
evidence  of  this.  There  are  many  legends  of  the 
Katyura  Rajas  which  speak  very  highly  of  their 
generosity  and  heroism;  out  of  them  I have  selected 
only  five,  (legends  Nos.  13,  17,  18,  21  and  22). 
Legend  No.  17  refers  to  Jag  Deo  Panwar,  who  is 
also  described  in  this  legend  as  belonging  to  the 
Katyura  family.  His  pedigree  given  there  is  Jai 
Kand  Panwar,  Maikand  Panwar,  Daulat  Rai, 
Randhaul  and  Jag  Deo  Panwar.  In  the  pedigree 
of  the  Askot  family  in  the  Almora  district,  on 
page  531  of  Atkinson’s  Gazetteer,  we  find  Jai  Singh 
Deo  as  being  twenty-fourth  in  the  list;  while 
Pritamdeo  and  Dhamdeo  of  the  legends  Nos.  18 
and  19,  respectively,  are  Nos.  45  and  46  of  the  list. 
There  is  also  a note  opposite  No.  49,  Akhya  Pal 
of  Atkinson’s  list,  that  he  left  Katyur  for  Askot  in 
A.D.  1279.  If  this  list  be  correct,  Jai  Singh  or 
Jai  Deo  Panwar  must  have  flourished  in  the 


14 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


middle  of  the  ninth  century,  allowing  twenty 
years  for  the  reign  of  each  intervening  King. 
Pritamdeo  and  Dhamdeo  being  respectively,  three 
and  four  degrees  removed  from  Abhya  Pal,  must 
have  flourished  in  the  twelfth  century. 

In  legend  No.  22  the  pedigree  of  Brahmdeo  and 
Dhamdeo  is  given.  The  only  common  ancestors 
in  this  pedigree  and  the  pedigree  of  the  Askot 
family,  mentioned  above,  are  Asanti,  Basanti, 
Gaura  and  Pritamdeo,  It  is  difficult  to  say  which 
of  the  pedigrees  is  correct.  There  is  no  mention 
of  Malu  Sahi  of  legend  No.  13^  who  was  also  a 
Katyura  Prince,  in  Atkinson’s  Gazetteer. 

Jai  Chand’s  legend  refers  to  the  dedication  of 
half  of  his  territory  for  the  worship  of  the  goddess 
Mahakali.  This  probably  refers  to  the  grant  of 
villages  to  the  temple  of  Kali  at  Kalimath  near 
Guptashi  in  the  Garhwal  district. 

In  Pritamdeo’s  legend  there  is  mention  of  the 
Narsingh  Temple  at  Joshimath  in  Garhwal.  This 
Aovirs  Aat  these  Katyura  Princes  then  lived  at 
foshinsath. 

On  p%e  536  of  Atkinson’s  Gazetteer  a pedigree 
of  the  Katyuras  of  flic  Pali  branch  is  given.  This 
list  begins  from  Amnti  Deo,  from  whom  Pritamdeo 
is  ninth  in  descscnt,  whose  son  is  Dhamdeo,  who  is 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  1 5 

said  to  have  migrated  to  southern  Garh'wal  and 
established  himself  in  the  Patlidoon.  This  is  in 
conflict  with  the  pedigrees  of  the  Askot  Katyuras 
mentioned  above.  These  facts  go  to  show  that 
the  pedigrees  given  in  Atkinson’s  Gazetteer 
are  far  from  being  accurate  and  are  no  better  than 
the  pedigrees  given  in  the  legends  described  in  this 
book.  It  may  be  diat  the  pedigrees  given  in  these 
traditions  and  preserved  in  the  memories  of  the 
local  bards,  who  are  the  descendants  of  the  Hur^ias, 
the  family  bards  of  the  Kings  and  chieftains,  whose 
heroic  deeds  they  sang,  arc  more  likely  to  be 
accurate  than  the  pedigrees  in  the  Gazetteer. 

Legend  No,  i8  relates  to  Raja  Pritamdeo  of 
Katyuragarh,  From  this  legend  it  would  appear 
that  Dhamdeo  was  a nephew  of  Pritamdeo,  who 
succeeded  him.  Dhamdeo  asked  Amardeo  Pundit 
of  Mayapur  Hat  to  give  his  daughter  Moladei  in 
marriage  to  Pritamdeo,  which  was  resented  by 
Amardeo  cm  the  ground  of  Pritamdeo’s  social 
inferiority.  This  would  show  that  Katyuras  were 
not  high  caste  Rajputs. 

Legend  No.  21  refers  to  Brahmdeo,  a Katyura 
Prince,  who  ruled  over  Katyuragarh.  In  the 
legend  his  father’s  name  is  given  Gambhirdeo, 
while  from  the  pedigree  of  the  Askot  branch  of 


l6  HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 

Katyuras  given  on  page  531  of  the  Gazetteer  he  is 
placed  just  below  Dhamdeo.  Either  the  pedigree 
is  incorrect,  or  Brahmdeo  may  have  succeeded 
Dhamdeo  on  failure  of  the  latter’s  male  issue. 
Brahmdeo  lived  about  a.d.  1200.  Brahmdeo  had 
been  betrothed  to  Birma  Dotiali  of  Dotigarh,  a 
Khasia  Princess.  He  was  subsequently  married 
to  Bijora,  sister  of  Kalu  Kalni,  who  was  also  a 
Khasia  chief.  The  legend  further  on  says  that 
Raja  Trimal  Chand  of  Champawatgarh  asked  the 
hand  of  Birma  Dotiali  in  marriage  for  his  son 
Khadga  Singh.  Trimal  Chand  ruled  in  1625-38, 
according  to  Mr.  Atkinson  ; while  his  name  does 
not  appear  in  the  lists  of  the  Chand  Rajas  on  p.  500 
of  the  Gazetteer.  There  seems  an  error  in  the  ages 
of  these  princes.  From  the  marriage  of  Birma 
Dotiali  in  both  the  Katyura  and  tlie  Chand  families 
it  would  appear  that  the  Chands  and  the  Katyuras 
were  of  equal  social  status.  Hence  the  remark 
of  Mr.  Atkinson  on  page  503  of  the  Gazetteer  that 
Katyuras  were  of  inferior  social  status  to  the  Chands 
of  Champawatgarh  does  not  seem  to  be  correct. 
JU^end  No.  22  refers  to  the  war  between  the 
Katyura  chiefe  Dhamdeo  and  Brahmdeo  and  the 
Raja  of  Champawaigarh.  This  legend  would  show 
that,  at  that  time;,  die  Katyuras  had  been 


GENERAl.  INTRODUCTION  VJ 

subjugated  by  the  Chand  Rajas  of  Champawatgarh, 
Another  interesting  fact  mentioned  in  this  legend 
is  that  the  Katyuras,  though  they  had  been  subdued 
by  the  Chands,  considered  themselves  of  higher 
social  status  than  the  Chands.  This  legend  further 
shows  that  the  Katyuras  subsequently  succeeded  in 
throwing  off  the  yoke  of  the  Chands  and  declaring 
their  own  independence. 

From  the  above  brief  observations  it  would 
appear . ‘ that  the  principal  high  class  Rajput 
families  in  the  Himalayan  districts  of  Kumaon  were 
the  Chands  of  Champawatgarh,  the  Pals  of  Garhwal 
and  Katyura  Princes  of  Katyuragarh,  who  originally 
lived  at  Joshimath  in  Garhwal  and  subsequently 
migrated  to  the  Katyur  valley  or  Kartikaipur  in 
the  Almora  district.  All  the  other  chieftains  and 
heroes  whose  legends  are  included  in  this  volume 
belonged  to  either  inferior  Rajput  or  Khasia  castes. 
Notwithstanding  a certain  social  inferiority,  the 
latter  were  as  heroic  and  warlike  as  the  former  and 
had  social  relations  with  them. 

Political  Life  in  the  Folklore 

I shall  now  describe,  very  briefly,  the  political, 
social  and  religious  life  of  the  people  as  disclosed 
in  the  folklore  of  that  period.  The  period  between 
A.D.  800  and  1700  referred  to  in  the  legends,  given 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


l8 

in  this  volume,  may  be  called  the  heroic  age  of  the 
Himalayan  districts.  The  first  glimpse  of  the 
political  life  of  the  country  reveals  a large  number 
of  petty  chieftains  or  Thakurs,  constantly  fighting 
and  destroying  each  other  on  the  slightest  pretext. 
There  were  no  established  governments.  The  clans 
or  tribes  dwelling  in  the  glens  or  on  mountain  tops 
had  their  own  headmen  or  chieftains,  who  led  them 
in  both  offensive  and  defensive  wars.  Their  quarrels 
generally  arose  out  of  some  love  intrigue  or  some 
aggressive  behaviour  of  their  neighbours.  There 
were  blood  feuds  which  lasted  for  generations.  The 
widows  of  those  killed  in  battle  either  became  Satis 
(committed  suicide)  or  concealed  themselves  in  the 
jungle  and  brought  up  their  infant  sons  until  the 
latter  grew  up  and  were  able  to  take  revenge  on 
their  enemy.  In  some  cases  the  widows,  or  the 
daughters  of  the  heroes  killed  in  the  battle,  fought 
against  their  enemies  and  killed  them.  Sometimes 
the  widowed  mothers  exhorted  their  sons  to  go  and 
fight  against  their  enemy.  The  weapons  in  vogue 
in  those  days  were  bows  and  arrows,  daggers  and 
sword^.  Some  heroes  killed  their  enemies  with 
bambno  staves  and  vYith  logs  of  wood  and  stones 
heaped  oil  mountain  topis  which  they  rolled  down 
on  the  enemy,.  ^ ■ 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  19 

Later  on,  we  find  that  three  or  four  tribal  chiefs 
subdued  other  chieftains  and  established  some  sort 
of  government.  But  still,  those  potentates  always 
depended  upon  their  feudatory  chiefs  for  help 
against  their  enemies.  Sometimes,  when  the  kings 
oppressed  their  tenants  or  feudatory  chiefs,  the  latter 
revolted,  attacked  their  king,  and  killed  him  and  all 
his  kith  and  kin  and  asserted  their  own  indepen- 
dence. Such  were  the  blood-thirsty  Mahara  Khasias, 
who  killed  Thorchand  and  Bhiagchand  of  Champa- 
watgarh,  with  all  their  kith  and  kin.  The  women 
played  a most  heroic  part  in  the  whole  political 
history  of  that  period.  They  were  the  source  of 
inspiration  to  their  husbands  or  sons  in  all  their 
wars  against  the  enemies.  They  exhorted  their 
young  sons  to  fight  against  their  enemy  and  return 
either  with  the  shield  or  on  the  shield,  as  the  Spartan 
mother  would  have  said. 

In  legend  No.  20  (Hyunraj  Mahara)  there  is  a 
most  pathetic  scene  of  the  mother  of  Dattu  and 
Chandu,  who  had  been  killed  by  the  Maharas,  fill- 
ing a large  cauldron  with  milk  mixed  with  poison, 
which  she  gave  to  all  the  members  of  her  families 
to  drink.  She  preferred  death  to  being  touched  by 
the  Mahara  Khasias. 


20 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


Needless  to  say  that  these  noble  traits  of  character 
have  been  preserved  by  die  women  of  India  even 
up  to  the  present  day. 

Social  Ufe  in  the  Folklore 
Some  aspects  of  the  social  life  of  those  days  have 
already  been  referred  to  in  the  previous  remarks. 
The  whole  society  was  originally  divided  into  three 
castes — Brahmans,  Rajputs  (including  Khasias),  and 
Dorns.  Subsequendy  some  of  the  more  pushing 
Khasia  or  Rajpett  chiei^  brmight  the  other  chieftains 
under  their  nde.  The  number  of  Brahmans  seems 
to  have  been  very  small.  They  Were  mosdy 
magicians,  whose  services  were  requisidoned  by 
those  chieftains  for  killing  their  enemies  by  means 
of  magical  incantadons.  The  Belwals  of  Belihat  of 
legend  No.  20  are  an  instance  in  point.  Marriages 
seem  to  have  been  celebrated  according  to  ^ 
regular  Brahmanical  form.  Great  sanedty  seems  to 
have  been  attached  to  the  marriage  de.  The  men 
were  very  Jealous  of  their  wives’  dbasdty  and  were 
rca%  ni  lay  down  thdr  lives  rather  than  see  their 
women’s  honour  violated.  The  custom  of  Sati 
was  conamon. 

The  a sub-caste  of  Doms,  were  the 

family  bards  of  ah  kings  and  heroes.  They  accom- 
pmied  their  mastars  to  die  batdeftcld  and  cheered 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 


21 


them,  while  fighting,  by  singing  warlike  songs.  It 
is  these  songs  which  have  been  preserved  by  their 
descendants  up  to  the  present  day. 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  legend  No.  9 (Ajwa 
Bampla)  there  is  mention  of  two  young  heroes,  Salu 
and  Malu,  who  had  a common  wife  Dudukela. 
This  shows  that  the  custom  of  polyandry  was  also 
prevalent  in  those  days. 

Religion  in  the  Folklore 

As  regards  the  religion  of  riiose  people,  they  seem 
to  have  believed  in  ghosts,  demons,  fairies,  village 
godlings  like  Jhalimali,  Nagraja,  Narsing,  Ghan- 
dial,  Khetrapal,  Goril,  Nirankar,  etc.  But  the 
family  goddess  of  most  of  the  heroes  was  Jhalimali, 
who  figures  in  almost  aH  the  legends  of  andent 
heroes. 

Tliis  belief  in  the  supernatural  beings  or  sjarits  is 
still  the  popular  religion  of  these  hills.  The  faith 
in  supernatural  beings  is  not  confined  to  these 
Himalayan  regions.  As  shown  by  Dr.  Evans 
Wentz  in  his  Fairy  Faith  in  the  Cduc  Countries, 
such  beliefs  were  common  in  pre-historic  times  all 
over  the  world,  and  are  the  sources  of  nearly  ail 
modem  religions. 

It  will  be  evident  to  any  unbiassed  reader  of  ihe 
andent  folklore  of  the  Himalayas  that  the  people 


22 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


of  those  days,  under  the  inspiration  of  their  religion, 
compare  favourably  with  any  other  nation  of  that 
age  in  heroism  and  other  moral  qualities.  I will 
show,  later  on,  how  the  belief  of  the  Himalayan 
countries  in  fairies  and  ghosts  is  almost  identical 
with  the  beliefs  of  other  countries. 

Himalayan  Fairies 
To  quote  again  Dr,  Evans  Wentz : 

“In  ancient  and  in  modern  times,  man’s  belief 
in  gods,  spirits,  or  fairies  has  been  the  direct  result 
of  his  attempts  to  explain  to  rationalize  natural 
phenomena  ...  the  belief  in  fairfcs  often  anthro- 
pomorphically  reflects  the  natural  enviroinment  as 
well  as  the  social  condition  of  the  people  who  hold 
the  belief.”*  The  fairies  are  called  the  Acharis, 
Kechries,  Pari  or  Chancharis  in  the  Himalayas. 
According  to  Mr.  Oakley,  “They  are  fairies  or 
women  who  move  in  the  firmament — young  women 
of  surpassing  beauty,  sumptuously  clothed,  supposed 
m belong  to  the  court  of  Indra,  as  dancing  girls  and 
to  be  very  fond  of  bathing  and  playing  in  water, 
and  of  gathering  flowers  and  ferns  on  the  tops  of 
lofty  tnonntains  and  in  remote  forests,  where  are 
springs,  lakes  and  natural  ponds  of  clear  and  crystal 
* Ifttrodiictioa  page  3£XI  of  Dr.  Wentz’s  Fairy  Faith  in 
the.  Celtic  CoHitfries.- 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 


23 


water.  They  are  said  to  fly  or  float  along  the  sky 
without  any  visible  wings  . . . the  snowy  ranges 
are  supposed  to  be  their  proper  haunts.”  To  this 
description  of  the  Himalayan  fairies  I would  add 
the  following  quotation  from  my  lecture  on  the 
Folklore  of  Garhwal  mentioned  above : “They  (the 
Acharis)  are  not  like  the  malignant  spirits  of  other 
countries.  They  are  good-hearted  fairy  people, 
fond  of  young  folk  ; they  enter  into  and  ‘ possess  ’ 
young  girls.  There  are  beautiful  stories  about  their 
carrying  away  to  their  mountain  abodes  young 
warriors,  as  described  in  the  legend  of  Surju 
Kunwar.  They  returned  Surju  on  the  latter’s  pro- 
mising to  marry  them  on  his  return  from  Tibet. 
There  is  another  beautiful  ballad  of  a young  man 
having  been  carried  away  by  them,  while  sitting  on 
a ridge  facing  the  Khaint  Hill,  the  abode  of  the 
fairies,  playing  on  his  fife.  They,  however,  allowed 
him  to  go  home  to  meet  his  sweetheart,  Bhana, 
after  extorting  a promise  from  him  to  return  and 
surrender  himself  to  diem  on  the  appointed  day. 

The  Acharis  arc  the  spirits  of  young  unmarried 
girls  of  respectable  families  who  died  without  the 
due  performance  of  their  funeral  rites.  They  arc 
also  the  daughters  of  Ravan,  King  of  Lanka.  Ravan 
offered  them  to  Siva,  the  presiding  deity  of  the 


24 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


Himalayas,  who  made  them  His  Chelis.  Hence 
they  dwell  on  high  snowy  peaks.  According  to 
another  legend,  the  Acharis  went  to  a flower  garden 
and  began  to  dance  and  pluck  flowers.  There  they 
met  the  God  Krishna  and  became  his  Gopis,  and 
still  dance  the  eternal  celestial  dance  with  him.” 

The  above  description  of  Himalayan  fairies  will 
show  that  Himalayan  fairylore  is  as  beautiful  as 
that  of  ancient  Greece. 

Ghosts  and  Demons  in  Himalayan  Foll^lore 

As  regards  ghosts  arid  demons,  they  are  called 
Masan,  Bhut,  Paret,  Khabcsh  in  the  Himalayan 
folklore.  Masons  or  Khabesh  indude  demons. 
They  are  thus  defined  by  Mr.  Oakley:  “Masan 
exists  in  places  where  dead  bodies  are  burnt, 
generally  at  the  confluence  of  two  rivers.  He  is 
said  to  be  at  the  head  of  the  other  ghosts  who 
haunt  such  places  and  rules  over  them  as  a great 
king  of  genii.  The  belief  is  that  most  wicked 
people  or  persons  who  die  by  aeddents — ^such  as 
falling  from  a predpicc  or  a tree,  drowning,  bang 
bitten  by  snakes  or  killed  by  wild  beasts,  women 
who  die  in  child-birth,  or  within  four  days  of 
mensqi,  suiddes,  and  all  persons  who  die  a violent 
dpath,  or  those  whose  funeral  rites  have  been 
neglected  become  ghosts  for  a time.” 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 


25 


To  this  description  I would  add  that  young 
persons  who  die  in  foreign  countries,  leaving  dear 
ones  at  home,  also  become  ghosts,  who  enter  into 
and  “possess”  some  of  their  relatives,  who  dance  and 
send  for  and  embrace  their  dear  ones  and  weep  in 
a most  pathetic  manner.  These  ghosts,  called  Ghar- 
bhut,  are  transformed  into  spirits  and  cease  to  haunt 
their  earthly  home  when  their  images  are  placed  in 
some  temple  or  holy  place.  There  are  other  kinds 
of  Bhuts  also,  such  as  Ranbhuts,  or  those  killed  in 
batde,  Fret,  Khabes,  Aheri. 

In  former  times  during  the  internecine  wars 
among  the  various  tribes,  those  killed  in  wars  be- 
came Bhuts  and  “possessed”  the  surviving  members 
of  their  tribes.  Those  Ranbhuts  still  “possess”  and 
dance  in  several  villages  of  the  Himalayas,  periodi- 
cally, and  big  feasts  are  given  in  dieir  honour. 
Some  of  the  varieties  of  those  ghosts — such  as 
Mason,  Fret,  Khabes  and  Aheri  are  malignant 
beings  who  trouble  and  even  cause  the  deadi  of 
those  “possessed”  by  them.  They  are  driven  away 
by  means  of  magical  incantations  called  “Rakh- 
walls”  accompanied  by  elaborate  “puja”  or  religious 
ceremonies. 

The  Mason,  Khabes  or  demons,  though  generally 
malignant,  yet  have  some  redeeming  features.  In 


26 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


legend  No.  i8  of  Pritamdeo,  the  Samwa  Masan 
took  pity  on  the  youth  of  Dhamdeo,  who  had  gone 
to  kill  him,  and  disclosed  the  secret  of  his  death.  In 
the  other  ghost  stories  contained  in  Chapter  V we 
have  other  instances  of  a Masan’ s capacity  to  recipro- 
cate love,  and  to  manifest  other  virtues. 

As  regards  the  third  and  fifth  sub-divisions  of  the 
Himalayan  folklore,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the 
Introduction  of  Section  II  of  the  volume  and  to  the 
chapter  dealing  with  those  subjects. 

Magic  in  Himdaym  Foli^lore 
I shall  now  consider  the  subject  ©£  magic  as  found 
in  Himalayan  folklore.  Sir  James  Frazer  in  his 
book.  The  Golden  Bough,  abridged  edition  of 
1928,  on  page  ii,  divides  magic  into  two  parts — 
homoeopathic  magic  and  contagious  magic. 
“Homoeopathic  magic  is  based  on  the  principle  that 
like  produces  like  and  is  applied  in  the  attempt 
which  has  been  made  by  many  people  in  many 
ages  to  injure  or  destroy  an  enemy  by  injuring  or 
destroying  an  image  of  him  in  the  belief  that,  just 
as  die  image  suffers,  so  does  the  man,  and  that 
when  it  perishes,  he  must  die.”*  Contagious  magic 
is  thus  defined  on  para.  3,  page  37  of  the  same  book. 
“GoaUgious  magic  proceeds  upon  the  notion  that 
* Sr  James  Fraaser's  The  Gohekn  Bmgh,  para.  2,  p.  12, 


general  introduction 


27 


things  which  have  been  once  conjoined  must  remain 
ever  afterwards,  even  when  quite  dissevered  from 
each  other,  in  such  a sympathetic  relation  that  what- 
ever is  done  to  the  one  must  similarly  affect  the 
other.” 

Examples  of  homoeopathic  magic  are  very  num- 
erous in  Himalayan  folklore.  There  is  a vast 
folklore  literamre  on  diis  branch  of  magic,  relating 
to  charms  and  incantations  for  destroying  the 
enemy,  curing  diseases,  and  sterility,  and  exorcis- 
ing evil  spirits  When  it  is  intended  to  kill  the 
enemy  by  means  of  magic,  parings  of  his  nails  and 
hair  are  used,  and  also  his  image  made  of  barley 
flour.  I give  below  the  English  translation  of 
one  incantation  from  Mr.  Oakley’s  collection: 
Incantation  to  drive  away  evil  spirit  by  mustard 
seeds — “ Salutations  to  spiritual  guide,  to  earth, 
king  of  justice,  wind,  water,  moon  and  sun.  O 
Mustard,  O Mustard,  thou  art  my  sister  and  I 
am  thy  brodier.  Thou  gocst.  Thou  goest 
wherever  I send  thee.  T shall  sow  thee  in  the 
plains  and  reap  thee  in  the  hills.  Red  mustard, 
black  mustard,  yellow  mustard,  who  produced  dice 
or  made  thee  spring  up?  Mahadeo  created  thee 
and  Parbati  sowed  thee.  What  shall  I do  with  this 
mustard  ? Its  seeds  are  small,  but  its  fruit  like 


28 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


bel  fruit.  By  these  seeds  I shall  kill  (destroy  the 
effect  of)  great  demons,  daityas  (devils),  mar  (dead 
bodies),  Masan,  bhut  (ghosts),  paret,  chall  (a  kind  of 
ghost  who  causes  momentary  fright  but  does  no 
injury),  chhidra  (another  kind  of  ghost),  dit  (evil 
eye),  mantra  (spell,  incantation),  trap  (fear),  hun\ar 
(curse),  evil  eye  of  a black  Brahman  (much  feared), 
fair  shudra’s  Khasia’s  evil  eye.  Drive  away  effect 
of  evil  eye  of  a ragged  ascetic.  I will  drive  away 
evil  eye  of  flowing  water,  evil  eye  of  mewing  cat 
(meaning  crying),  evil  eye  of  a barking  dog,  evil 
eye  of  a blowing  wind.  I am  under  the  protection 
of  the  hero  Hanuman  who  will  curse  anyone  who 
disobeys  me.  O go  away,  by  command  of  Godl” 
Instances  of  contagious  magic  are  also  numerous 
in  Himalayan  folklore.  In  legend  No.  20  the 
Belwals  had  carried  away  the  he-buffaloes  of  Hyun- 
raj  Mahara  to  be  sacrificed  to  the  goddess  Kali,  ac- 
companied by  magical  incantations,  in  order  to  kill 
Hyunraj.  Another  instance  of  contagious  magic 
is  found  in  the  legend  of  &irju  (No.  4)  at  whose 
departorc  from  home  some  il|  omens  occurred.  The 
water  soaked  in  ashes  for  washing  his  clothes  turned 
black  instead  of  red,  and  his  pet  goat  Tila  sneezed 
and  the  hair  of  his  head  began  to  fall  out  In  the 
same  story  there  arc  other  instances  of  such  magic 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 


29 


As  soon  as  Surju  was  killed  in  Tibet  the  blade  of 
his  sword  at  Dwarka  fell,  the  flowers  withered,  and 
the  milk  turned  into  blood.  We  have  other  inf- 
stances  of  contagious  magic  in  the  ghost  and  demon 
tale  No.  3,  in  which  the  demon’s  soul  dwelt  in  the 
body  of  a parrot  in  a far  off  island  and  the  demon 
died  as  soon  as  the  parrot  was  killed.  In  legend 
No.  18  also  we  have  an  instance  of  such  magic- 
Here  the  demon’s  soul  dwelt  in  Raja  Pritamdco’s 
body,  and  no  sooner  was  the  former  killed  than  the 
latter  also  died. 

On  page  184  of  Frazer’s  Golden  Bough  are 
given  instances  collected  from  various  countries  of 
the  world  of  the  transference  of  the  human  soul 
into  animals.  Such  instances  are  in  abundance  in 
Himalayan  folklore. 

In  legend  No.  4 (Surju  Kunwar),  Surju’s  wife, 
Bijora,  transformed  her  horse  into  a bee.  We  have 
instances  of  a youth  being  converted  into  a ram  by 
measuring  his  body  with  charmed  strings.  In  the 
demon  folklore  there  are  instance  of  demon’s 
soul  being  transferred  to  a parrot  and  so  on. 

External  Soul  in  Himalayan  EolJ^ore 

Frazer  discusses  the  subj«:t  of  external  souls  in 
folk-tales : “ The  soul  of  a person  may  be  either  in 
an  animate  or  inanimate  object,  and  so  long  as  this 


30 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


object  which  he  calls  his  life  or  soul  remains  un- 
harmed, the  man  is  well  ; if  it  is  injured  he  suffers  ; 
if  it  is  destroyed  he  dies.”*  The  most  interesting 
example  of  such  external  soul  is  contained  in  the 
tale  of  the  demon  in  Chapter  V,  story  3.  As 
regards  the  external  soul  in  plants,  discussed  on 
page  681  of  the  Golden  Bough,  we  have  the 
instance  of  the  flowers  withering  on  the  death  of 
Surju  in  legend  No.  4. 

Other  Forms  of  Magic 

There  are  other  peculiar  forms  of  magic  found  in 
Himalayan  folklore  which  are  not  found  in  the 
folklore  of  other  countries. 

In  legend  No.  4 there  is  a beautiful  description 
of  Krishna  rubbing  his  right  side  and  producing  a 
swarm  of  black  bees,  who  carry  his  letter  to  Surju. 
There  is  also  the  accoimt  of  Sidwas  catching  all  the 
fairies  in  a net  by  means  of  his  magical  powers  and 
forcing  them  to  restore  the  full  beauty  of  Surju, 
which  they  had  stolen  away.  In  this  and  other 
folk-tales  we  find  a magician  restoring  a dead 
person  to  life  by  his  magical  incantations. 

The  above  account  would  show  that  Himalayan 
folklore  is  as  rich  in  magic  as  that  of  any  other 
country. 

♦ Golden  Bough,  p.  668. 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  3 1 

As  regards  the  remaining  sul>heads  of  Himalayan 
folklore,  namely,  wit  and  wisdom,  and  bird 
and  animal  lore,  dealt  with  in  Chapters  II  and  III 
of  this  book,  I refer  the  reader  to  the  Introduction 
by  Mr.  Oakley  to  section  II  of  the  book  and  the 
notes  under  each  chapter. 

I have  not  been  able  to  include  the  ballads  in  this 
volume  for  want  of  space. 

Conclusion 

The  above  brief  summary  of  Himalayan  folklore 
will  show  that  it  is  of  absorbing  interest  and  offers 
a very  rich  field  for  research  work  in  this  important 
subject  of  ethnology. 

As  remarked  at  the  beginning  of  this  Introduc- 
tion, folklore  is  the  source  of  almost  all  religions. 
Hence  a study  of  the  folklore  of  a country  is  essential 
for  the  correct  understanding  of  its  religion.  My 
own  belief  is  that  the  Puranas,  the  Mahabharat  and 
the  Ramayan  of  the  Hindus,  which  contain  their 
popular  religion,  and  the  Old  Testament  of  the 
Christians  are  really  the  folklore  of  those  times, 
which  the  sages  collected  and  arranged  in  those 
books.  It  is  also  my  belief  that  by  a sympathetic 
study  and  understanding  of  the  folklore  of  the 
various  peoples  of  the  world,  the  great  truth  will  be 


32 


HIMALAYAN  EOLKLORE 


discovered  that  all  are  closely  related,  in  spite  of 
their  accidental  differences,  and  thatj  in  the  great 
purpose  of  God,  all  nations  of  mankind  are  made  of 
one  blood,  of  one  heart  and  mind,  to  dwell  together 
on  this  earth..and  fulfil  one  united  destiny.' 

TARA  DUTT  GAIROLA. 


iSantiashram;  Pauri, 
Garhwal 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 

SECTION  I 

CHAPTER  I — Legends  of  Heroes 
I.  RAJA  MAN  SAH 

ONCE  upon  a time  a Prince  by  name  Bahadur 
Sah  ruled  in  Garhwal,  whose  capital  was 
Srinagar.  On  his  death  he  was  succeeded  by 
his  son  Man  Sah.  On  the  occasion  of  his  corona- 
tion Raja  Man  Sah  summoned  all  the  chiefs  and 
Sardars  of  his  kingdom  to  the  darbar  and  ordered 
them  to  bring  their  Sanads  and  copper  plates  (Tama 
Palra).  All  the  Sardars  attended  except  Surju 
Dangwal  who  had  filed  from  Garhwal  and  taken 
refuge  at  the  court  of  Raja  Lakshmi  Chand  of 
Champawat  in  Kumaon,  soon  after  Raja  Bahadur 
Sah’s  death.  Raja  Man  Sah  wrote  a letter  to  Surju 
ordering  him  to  return  to  Garhwal.  But  Surju 
refused  to  return  and  said  that  he  was  better  off 
at  Ghampawat.  To  a second  letter  of  Raja  Man 
Sah  he  returned  the  same  answer.  He  then  wrote 
to  Raja  Lakshmi  Chand  to  send  hadk  Surju  to 
Srinagar.  But  he  (Raja  Lakshmi  Chand)  refused 
to  do  as  he  was  requested  and  threatened  to  invade 
Garhwal  and  raze  its  capital  to  the  ground,  if  Raja 

33  • 

s 


34 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


Man  Sah  insisted  upon  demanding  Surju.  This 
enraged  Raja  Man  Sah  who  collected  a large  army 
and  invaded  Champawat.  On  reaching  Champa- 
wat,  a fierce  batde  was  fought  between  the  armies 
of  Lakshmi  Chand  and  Man  Sah,  which  raged  for 
several  days.  The  ground  was  covered  with  blood 
and  the  bodies  of  the  dead.  Jackals  and  tigers  fed 
on  the  corpses.  After  seven  days  Raja  Lakshmi 
Chand  fled  away  from  the  battlefield.  On  hearing 
this  his  Rani  reproached  him  for  his  cowardice 
and  took  over  the  command  of  the  army.  She 
fought  most  heroically  for  several  days;  but  was 
overpowered  by  the  enemy’s  forces  and  she  surren- 
dered. She  handed  over  Surju  to  Raja  Man  Sah, 
who  brought  him  back  to  Garhwal. 

2.  KAFFU  CHAWHAN 

Once  upon  a time  a Prince  by  name  Ajai  Pal 
ruled  over  Garhwal.  At  his  coronation  all  the  chiefs 
and  nobles  of  his  kingdom  attended  his  darbar 
to  pay  homage  to  him,  except  Kaffu  Chawhan 
who  lived  in  the  fort  called  Upgarh.  The  Raja 
summoned  him  to  his  darbar;  but  he  replied  that  he 
(Kaffu)  was  like  a lion  among  beasts  and  as  vulture 
among  birds  and  would  not  pay  homage  to  Ajai 
Pal.  The  Raja  warned  him  that  if  he  persisted  in 
his  disloyalty,  his  territory  would  be  invaded. 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


35 


Kaffu  replied  that  far  from  paying  homage  to  Ajai 
Pal,  he  (Kaffu)  would  invade  Srinagar,  die  capital 
of  Ajai  Pal,  and  destroy  his  palace  and  gardens. 
Ajai  Pal  could  not  bear  this  insult  and  invaded 
Kaffu ’s  territory  with  a large  army  under  his 
personal  command.  He  reached  the  banks  of  the 
Ganges  opposite  the  strong  and  high  fort  of  Upgarh. 
The  mother  of  Kaffu  saw  from  the  window  of  the 
fort  the  opposite  bank  of  the  river  covered  with  a 
huge  mass  of  men  and  asked  Kaffu  what  it  was. 
Kaffu  said  that  it  was  the  army  of  Raja  Ajai  Pal 
whom  he  had  offended  by  refusing  to  pay  homage. 
On  hearing  this  Kaffu’s  mother  wept  and  said,  “O 
my  dear  and  only  son,  thou  canst  not  possibly  fight 
against  such  odds  single-handed.  Go  and  apologize 
to  the  Raja,  who,  I am  sure,  will  pardon  thee.” 
Kaffu  replied,  "I  cannot  stoop  so  low.  I belong  to 
a true  Kshatriya  family.  My  father’s  soul  would 
curse  me  from  heaven  for  my  cowardice.”  Kaffu 
descended  from  his  fort  and  cut  the  ropes  of  the 
suspension  bridge  which  crossed  the  river.  When 
Ajai  Pal’s  army  went  to  attack  Kaffu’s  fort  next 
morning  they  found  the  bridge  broken  and  in- 
formed Ajai  Pal  about  it.  Ajai  Pal  was  much 
enraged  and  ordered  his  army  to  put  up  another 
suspension  bridge  and  surrounded  the  fort.  Seeing 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORfi 


3^ 

this  Kaffu’s  mother  was  much  frightened  and  again 
remonstrated'  with  her  son.  Kaffu  said  that  he 
would  not  yield  even  if  his  head  was  separated 
from  his  body.  Kaffu  put  on  his  armour  and 
riding  his  war  horse  rushed  out  of  the  fort  and 
attacked  the  enemy  with  the  utmost  heroism.  He 
destroyed  the  whole  army  of  the  enemy  single- 
handed.  Streams  of  blood  flowed  and  the  ground 
was  covered  with  corpses.  After  killing  the  whole 
army  of  Ajai  Pal*  Kaffu  went  to  the  river  side  to 
rest  One  of  the  offices  of  Kaffu’s  army  had 
been  fighting  with  a small  army  elsewhere.  But 
they  were  all  killed  by  the  enemy.  Kaffu’s  mother, 
seeing  this,  thought  that  Kaffu  too  had  shared 
the  same  fate.  She  preferred  suicide  to  falling 
a prey  to  the  enemy.  She,  therefore,  set  fire 
to  the  fort  and  perished  with  the  rest  of  Kaffu’s  ; 

family.  When  Kaffu  returned  home,  victorious,  ; 

he  was  stunned  by  the  terrible  sight  and  stood,  as  i 

though  turned  to  stone,  at  the  gate  of  the  fort.  In  ' 

the  meantime  some  of  Ajai  Pal’s  amfy  arrived,  and  j 

seeing  Kaffu  in  that  plight  informed  Ajai  Pal,  who  J 

was  overjoyed  and  went  himself  to  the  place.  Then  | 

Ajai  Pal  said  to  his  men,  “As  Kaffu  would  not  bow  | 

to  me  while  he  was  alive  cut  off  his  head  in  such  a 1 

way  that  it  may  fall  at  my  feet.”  : When  the  soldiers  1 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


37 


were  about  to  cut  off  Kaffu’s  head,  he  shook  with 
rage,  swallowed  two  handfuls  of  dust  and  stared  at 
Ajai  Pal  with  contemptuous  smile.  When  Kaffu’s 
head  was  separated  from  his  body,  instead  of  falling 
at  Ajai  Pal’s  feet  it  fell  towards  his  head,  Ajai  Pal 
was  so  struck  with  the  heyoism  of  Kaffu  that  he 
performed  his  funeral  .rites  with  military  honours 
on  the,  banks  of  the  river.  . 

3,  KALA  BHANDARI 

Once  upon  a time  there  lived  one  Kala  Bhandari 
at  a place  called  Lakhimpur.  His  father’s  name 
was  Biru  Bhandari.  Kala  Bhandari  was  a great 
hero  and  performed  great  feats  of  strength  while  yet 
a child.  While  twelve  years  of  age  he  saw  a girl  of 
surpassing  beauty  standing  before  him  and  making 
advances  to  him  in  a dream.  He  woke  up  in  great 
excitement.  This  girl,  Udaimala  by  name,  was  far- 
famed  for  her  beauty.  Her  father’s  name  was 
Dhamdeo  who  lived  in  Kalnikot.  Kala  Bhandari 
wandered  about  like  a madman  in  search  of  his 
love. . At  last  he  reached  Kalnikot  and  managed  to 
enter  the  apartments  of  Udaimala.  The  lovers 
lived  ip  concealment  for  some  days.  Kala  Bhandari 
then  carnc  out  and  requested  Dhamdeo  to  give  him 
Udaimala  in  marriage,.  Dhamdeo  agreed  on  con- 
dition tliat  Kala  Bhandari : paid  him  one  supa 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


38 

(winnowing  basket)  of  rupees,  which  Kala  Bhandari 
agreed  to  do. 

Kala  Bhandari  then  returned  home.  In  the 
meantime  four  warriors  of  great  fame  went  to 
Champawat,  the  capital  of  Guru  Cyan  Chand,  and 
challenged  him  to  send  a warrior  to  fight  with  them 
and  threatened  to  destroy  his  capital  if  he  failed 
to  comply.  Gimi  Gyan  Chand  was  much  troubled. 
He  called  together  his  ministers  and  courtiers  for 
advice.  They  all  said  that  the  only  man  who  could 
oppose  those  warriors  was  Kala  Bhandari,  who, 
though  only  a lad  of  twelve  years,  possessed  extra- 
ordinary strength.  A messenger  was  at  once  dis- 
patched to  Kala  Bhandari.  But  Kala  Bhandari’s 
father  would  not  let  him  go. 

At  last  he  was  persuaded  to  agree.  Kala  Bhan- 
dari reached  Champawat  and  went  to  Raja  Gyan 
Chand,  who,  on  seeing  his  tender  age,  was  dis- 
appointed. He  could  not  believe  that  so  young  a 
boy  could  defeat  those  mighty  warriors.  Kala 
Bhandari  ordered  that  the  palace  drums,  instead  of 
being  beaten  in  honour  of  the  four  warriors,  should 
thenceforth  be  beaten  in  his  honour.  The  offended 
warriors  called  for  an  explanation,  and  were  told 
by  Guru  Gyan  Chatid  that  he  had  sent  for  a warrior 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


39 


to  fight  with  Aem,  and  that  this  warrior  had 
ordered  the  drums  to  be  beaten  in  bis  own  name. 

Kala  Bhandari  now  appeared  upon  the  scene  and 
challenged  the  warriors  to  fight  with  him.  They 
all  rushed  at  him  together;  but  he  protested,  saying 
diat  it  was  unfair  that  four  men  should  attack  one. 
Then  they  selected  two  of  their  number  to  fight 
with  him.  After  a long  struggle,  Kala  Bhandari 
dashed  them  on  the  ground  and  killed  them. 

On  seeing  this  the  remaining  two  committed 
suicide. 

Guru  Cyan  Chand  was  much  pleased  at  the 
heroism  of  Kala  Bhandari  and  gave  him  rewards  in 
cash  and  kind.  Kala  Bhandari  returned  home 
laden  with  presents  and  sent  the  promised  bride- 
prince  to  Dhamdeo. 

In  the  meantime  one  Rupu  Gangsara  of  Gang- 
sarihat  had  gone  to  Dhamdeo  to  ask  the  hand  of  his 
daughter  Udaimala.  He  distributed  large  sums  of 
money  among  Dhamdeo’s  courtiers  to  win  their 
favour  and  also  gave  rich  presents  to  Dhamdeo. 
Dhamdeo  was  thus  induced  to  give  Udaimala  in 
marriage  to  Rupu.  The  marriage  day  was  fixed 
and  Rupu  went  with  a large  procession  to  marry 
Udaimala. 


40 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


When  the  day  of  marriage  approached  Udaimala 
appeared  in  a dream  to  Kala  Bhandari  and  told  him 
about  her  impending  marriage  with  Rupu,  and 
asked  him  to  come  and  take  her  away.  When  Kala 
Bhandari  woke  he  was  much  perplexed.  He  told 
his  father  about  it,  who  tried  to  dissuade  him  from 
going  and  advised  him  to  give  up  all  idea  of  marry- 
ingX>hamdeo’s  daughter.  But  Kala  Bhandari  could 
not  be  persuaded.  He  smeared  his  body  with  ashes 
and  disguising  himself  as  a sadhu  started  for  Kalni- 
kot,  and  reached  there  just  before  the  marriage  of 
Udaimala  with  Rupu.  He  managpd  to  enter  the 
apartment  of  Udaimala.  It  was  arranged  between 
them  that  she  should  not  perform  the  ninth  phera 
(step)  with  Rupu,  on  the  pretext  that  she  would  do 
so  after  seeing  her  guru.  At  the  appointed  time 
the  wedding  ceremony  began  with  much  pomp, 
and  large  gifts  were  distributed  to  Brahmans  and 
the  poor.  After  the  eighth  phera,  she  refused  to 
perform  the  ninth  phera,  which  completes  the 
marriage,  saying  that  she  would  not  perform  it 
imtd  she  had  seen  her  guru,  who  was  a sadhu. 

After  feasting  and  rejoicing  the  procession  started 
for  home.  Ihc  marriage  procession  reached  the 
banks  of  due  Oanges  and  rested  there.  Bards  enter- 
tained the  marriage  party  widi  music  and  dancing. 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


41 


In  the  meantime  Kala  Bhandari,  disguised  as  a 
sadhu,  also  arrived.  When  Udaimala  saw  him  she 
said  that  her  guru  had  arrived  and  that  he  was  well 
versed  in  dancing  with  sword  and  shield  in  hand. 
They  requested  the  sadhu  to  entertain  the  party,  and 
gave  him  a sword  and  shield  for  the  purpose.  The 
sadhu  arranged  the  bridegroom’s  party  and  the 
bride’s  party  in  separate  rows.  Then  the  sadhu 
began  to  dance  and  suddenly  cut  off  the  heads  of 
all  dje  men  of  the  bridegroom’s  party  with  his 
sword.  Only  Lula  Gangola,  younger  brother  of 
E.upu,  escaped.  He  implored  Kala  not  to  kill  him, 
and  Kala  took  pity  on  him  and  spared  him. 

After  killing  all  die  enemy  Kala  went  to  Udai- 
mala. As  Kala  felt  very  thirsty,  Udaimala  ordered 
Lula  to  fetch  water  for  him  to  drink.  Lula  fetched 
the  water  from  a spring.  He  also  brought  a large 
stone  concealed  under  his  clothes.  While  Kala  was 
drinking  water  Lula  htirled  the  stone  on  his  head 
with  such  force  that  Kala  staggered  and  died,  but 
not  before  he  had  drawn  his  sword  and  cut  off 
Lula’s  head. 

Udaimala  was  left  alone  to  bewail  her  fate. 
After  weeping  and  crying  she  regained  her  courage 
and  placed  the  head  of  Kala  on  her  right  knee  and 


42 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


that  of  Rupu  on  her  left  knee.  She  then  mounted 
the  funeral  pyre  and  became  Sati. 

4.  SURJUKUNWAR 

Once  upon  a time  a Princt,  Sonpal  by  name, 
ruled  over  Tibet.  He  had  seven  daughters,  the 
eldest  of  whom  was  named  Jotramala.  She  was  as 
beautiful  as  the  full  moon.  She  prayed  for  several 
years  to  the  goddess  Ganges  to  grant  her  a husband 
as  beautiful  as  herself.  The  goddess  granted  her 
prayer  and  said  that  the  God  Krishna  himself  would 
become  her  husband. 

After  a while  Krishna  saw  her  in  a dream  in 
Dwarka  and  fell  in  love  with  her.  He  sent  a letter 
through  the  black  bees  to  his  brother  Surju,  who 
lived  at  Bimlikot,  telling  him  about  his  love  for 
Jotramala  and  asking  him  to  go  to  Tibet  and  bring 
Jotramala  to  Dwarka.  The  bees  hovered  over 
Surju’s  head,  sat  on  bis  shoulders  and  dropped  the 
letter  on  his  lap.  Surju  read  the  letter  and  told  his 
mother  about  its  contents.  Surju’s  mother  remon- 
strated, saying  that  whoever  went  to  Tibet  never 
returned — it  being  the  land  of  magic.  But  Surju 
said  diat  he  could  not  disobey  his  elder  brother 
Krishna,  and,  so,  prepared  himself  to  start  for 
Dwatka.  Meanwhile  several  ill-omens  occurred. 
The  water  soaked  in  ashes  for  washing  Surju’s 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


43 


clothes  turned  black  instead  of  red.  Surju’s  pet 
goat  Tila  sneezed.  The  hair  of  Stirju’s  head  began 
to  fall  out.  But  Surju  did  not  mind  those  omens, 
and,  riding  on  his  horse,  started  off  for  Dwarka. 
He  reached  the  Kailash  mountain,  the  abode  of 
seven  viritches.  The  witches  invited  Suiju  to  their 
house  and  feasted  him.  After  eating  Surju  fell 
asleep.  While  asleep  they  measured  his  body  with 
a magic  thread  of  three  strands  and  converted  him 
into  a spotted  ram. 

Surju’s  wife,  Bijora,  saw  him  in  that  plight  in  a 
dream.  She  was  a witch  possessing  great  ma^al 
powers.  She  put  on  male  dress  and  riding  a Beet 
pony  and  equipping  herself  with  all  the  magical 
appliances  left  for  the  Kailash  mountain.  On 
arriving  there  she  transformed  her  horse  into  a bee, 
sat  on  a tree  and  began  to  play  upon  a flute.  The 
seven  witches,  delighted  by  her  divine  music, 
assembled  round  the  tree.  They  invited  her  to 
their  house  and  feasted  her.  Queen  Bijora  then 
charmed  them  by  her  magical  powers  and  com- 
pelled them  to  point  out  the  place  where  Surju  was 
tied.  The  Queen  recemverted  Surju  into  a man  and 
requested  him  to  return  home.  But  Surju  insisted 
on  going  to  Dwarka  and  proceeded  on  his  journey. 
On  reaching  Dwarka  Krishna  received  him  vrith 


44 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


great  honour  and  requested  him  to  go  to  Tibet  and 
bring  Jotramala.  Surju  consented;  but  begged 
Krishna  to  send  Sidwa  of  Ramoligarh  to  accompany 
him  to  Tibet. 

Krishna  sent  a letter  to  Sidwa  again,  through  his 
black  bees,  asking  him  to  come  at  once.  The  black 
bees  sat  on  Sidwa’s  shoulders  and  dropped  the  letter 
in  his  lap.  Sidwa  and  Bidwa  were  two  great  heroes 
who  lived  at  Ramoligarh.  They  wore  blankets 
weighing  nine  maimds  each  and  tiger  skins  five 
hundred  cubits  in  lea^h.  They  had  lion  shaped 
drums  hanging  round  dicir  Moulders  and  seven- 
mouthed conches.  E«:h  of  them  owned  twelve 
score  sheep  and  six  score  of  herds  of  cattle. 

Sidwa  read  the  letter  and  prepared  himself  to 
start  for  Dwarka.  He  put  on  his  helmet.  He  was 
a great  magician  and  equipped  himself  with  many 
instruments  of  magic.  He  rushed  down  from  his 
mountain  home  like  a dreadful  dragon.  He  blew 
his  seven-mouthed  conch;  the  sound  of  which 
attracted  the  fairies  who  dwelt  on  the  Khaint 
mountain.  They  hovered  round  him  and  were  at 
his  beck  and  call.  Sidwa  rode  his  fleet  horse  and 
started  for  Dwarka.  Overcoming  many  dangers  on 
the  way  he  reached  Dwarka.  He  was  received 
with  much  honour  by  Krishna. 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


45 


When  Surju  and  Sidwa  were  about  to  leave  for 
Tibet,  Surju’s  mother  wept  and  entreated  him  not  to 
go.  Surju  would  not  Hstcn,  but  told  her  to  keep 
some  milk  in  a dish,  a naked  sword  with  its  blade 
upwards  and  a garland  of  flowers.  He  said  that  if 
the  milk  turned  into  blood,  the  sword  fell  and  the 
flowers  withered  she  would  know  that  he  was' 
dead. 

The  expedition  reached  the  mountain  pass  called 
Saudan}{hd,  the  last  place  from  which  their  country 
could  be  seen.  The  next  stage  was  'Ri1{hni\hcd. 
There,  while  they  were  fast  asleep,  the  nymphs  from 
the  Khaint  mountain  carried  away  Surju  to  their 
mountain  home  leaving  Sidwa  alone. 

Sidwa  blew  his  conch  which  drew  all  the  nymphs 
back.  Sidwa  forced  them  to  restore  Surju.  They 
brought  Surju  back;  but  they  had  taken  away  hall 
his  beauty.  The  expedition  met  with  various  other 
accidents  on  the  way.  They  passed  through  the 
country  where  men  walked  on  one  foot.  The  king 
of  that  country  opposed  the  expedition;  but  was 
defeated.  They  then  reached  a ridge  called  Pipd- 
dhar.  There  Sidwa  began  to  play  upon  his  flutsc. 
Immediately  all  the  nymphs  of  Khaint  rc-appcarcd. 
Sidwa  caught  them  in  a net  and  forced  them  to 
restore  Surju  to  his  full  beauty.  They  consented  on 


46 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


condition  that  Surju  would  marry  them  on  his 
fetum  from  Tibet.  Surju  agreed  to  the  condition. 
At  last  they  reached  the  banks  of  a river  in  Tibet 
where  a large  bathing  fair  used  to  be  held  at  the 
Bikhwat  Shankrant  (April),  which  Jotramala  was 
expected  to  attend,  Sidwa  began  to  crack  jokes 
with  Surju  and  pretended  illness.  He  fell  into  a 
deep  sleep  from  which  he  did  not  awake  till  the  fair 
was  over.  In  the  meantime  Jotramala  arrived  in  a 
palanquin  with  a large  retinue.  On  seeing  Jotra- 
rnala  Surju  went  up  to  her  and  delivered  Krishna’s 
message  to  her.  On  reading  the  letter  Jotramala 
took  Surju  home.  Surju  lived  with  Jotramala  in 
the  palace.  The  other  sisters  of  Jotramala  became 
jealous  of  Surju  and  made  a plot  to  poison  him. 

One  day^hile  Jotramala  had  gone  to  the  spring 
to  wash  Surju’s  clothes,  her  sisters  invited  Surju  to 
a dinner. 

They  poisoned  his  food  and  killed  Surju  and 
buried  his  corpse  in  a cellar  full  of  salt. 

On  this  the  milk  at  Dwarka  turned  into  blood, 
the  blade  of  the  sword  fell  down  and  the  flowers  of 
the  garland  mtiaered.  Seeing  this  Krishna  knew 
that  Surju  had  been  killed. 

He  then  smt  for  Bidwa  brother  of  Sidwa  and  in- 
formed him  about  the  dcatii  of  Surju  and  requested 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


47 


to  proceed  to  Tibet  and  restore  Surju  to  life  by 
means  of  his  magical  powers.  Bidwa  disguised  him- 
self as  a sadhu  and  after  encountering  many  difficul- 
ties reached  the  place  where  Sidwa  was  still  asleep. 
He  awoke  him  and  scolded  him  for  his  lethargy. 
He  informed  Sidwa  about  the  death  of  Surju.  On 
hearing  this  Sidwa  shook  with  rage.  They  went 
to  King  Sonpal’s  palace,  caught  hold  of  his  daugh- 
ters and  threatened  to  kill  all  of  them  unless  they 
showed  them  the  dead  body  of  Surju.  Sonpal’s 
daughters  showed  them  the  place  where  the  corpse 
of  Surju  was  buried.  The  two  brothers  by  means 
of  their  wonderful  magical  powers  brought  Surju 
back  to  life.  They  killed  Sonpal  and  tus  six 
daughters  who  had  poisoned  Surju  and  plaml 
Sonpal’s  son  Ajaipal  on  the  throne  of  Tibet  They 
then  brought  Jotramala  to  Dwarka,  who  was  then 
married  to  Krishna-  Sidwa  also  brought  the  seven 
nymphs  of  Khaint  to  Dwarka  and  married  them 
according  to  his  promise. 

5.  KAU  HARPAL 

Once  upon  a time  a Prince  by  name  Kunwari  Pal 
ruled  over  Dtinagiri  Hat  He  had  a Sera  (irrigated 
land),  known  as  Ratwari  Sera,  which  produced 
twenty  \hars  of  paddy  (one  \har  equals  about  16 


48 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


maunds).  The  Sera  could  not  be  cultivated  for  a 
long  time  owing  to  the  ravages  of  a boar  called 
Kailu,  who  lived  at  Lohanigarh.  Kunwari  Pal 
once  resolved  to  reclaim  it  and  took  a large  number 
of  men  there  for  the  purpose.  They  ploughed  it, 
sowed  a paddy  crop,  and  strongly  fenced  it  round. 
As  soon  as  Kunwari  Pal’s  men  returned  home  Kailu 
dreamed  that  Ratwa  Sera  had  been  sown.  He 
collected  an  army  of  six  score  boars  and  proceeded 
to  destroy  the  Sera.  They  broke  down  the  whole 
fence  and  destroyed  the  crops. 

After  some  time  Kunwari  Pal  sent  his  men  to 
irrigate  the  fields.  They  found  all  the  crops  com- 
pletely destroyed  and  reported  it  to  Kunwari  Pal. 

Kirawari  Pal  was  very  angry  and  collected  a 
large  number  oflmen  in  order  to  kill  Kailu.  They 
went  to  Ratwai\  Sera  where  Kailu  and  his  army 
were  lying  in  th<i  fields.  On  seeing  the  Raja’s  men 
Kailu  ordered  hi^  followers  to  retire,  as  he  would 
fight  against  the  ^nemy  single-handed.  Kunwari 
Pal  ordered  his  m^  to  surround  the  field  in  which 
Kailu  was  lying,  and  threatened  to  kill  any  one 
who  allowed  him  to  escape.  When  Kailu  heard 
this  he  decided  to  make  his  escape  in  the  direction 
in  which  Kunwari  Pal  was  standing  in  order  to  save 
the  rest  from  being  killed.  Kailu  leaped  over 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


49 


Kunwari  Pal’s  head  and  escaped.  The  Raja  was 
much  vexed  and  took  a vow  not  to  rest  till  he  had 
killed  Kailu.  He  asked  his  courtiers  for  advice. 
They  said  that  one  Nandu  Mahar  lived  at  Dunagiri. 
Hat,  who  had  a daughter  by  name  Bimla,  who  was 
of  surpassing  strength  and  beauty.  And  that  if  the 
Raja  could  marry  her  a great  hero  would  be  bom 
from  her,  who  alone  could  kill  the  boar  Kailu. 
The  Raja  went  to  Dunagiri  Hat  with  a large  retinue 
to  ask  Nandu  to  give  him  Bimla  in  marriage. 
When  the  party  approached  Nandu’s  house,  the 
latter  took  them  for  an  enemy  and  loosed  his  two 
ferocious  he-buflfaloes  named  Chaunria  and  Bhaun- 
ria  upon  them.  The  buffaloes  attacked  them  and 
threatened  to  tear  them  with  their  horns.  The 
Raja  assured  Nandu  that  they  were  friends  and  not 
enemies  and  begged  him  to  call  back  the  buffaloes. 
Nandu,  who  was  himself  a great  warrior,  said  that 
his  daughter  Bimla  alone  could  catch  the  buffaloes. 
He  sent  Bimla  to  bring  back  the  buffaloes.  She 
caught  hold  of  the  buffaloes  by  the  horns,  brought 
them  home  and  tied  them  up. 

The  Raja  was  stmck  by  the  beauty  and  strength 
of  Bimla  and  requested  Nandu  to  give  her  to  him 
in  marriage.  Nandu  agreed  and  the  marriage  was 
celebrated  with  much  pomp  and  rejoicing. 

i 


50 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORL 


Kunwari  Pal  brought  Simla  home  and  lived 
happily  with  her-  Kunwari  Pal  had  six  other 
Ranis.  In  course  of  time  Simla  was  with  child. 
The  other  Ranis  of  Kunwari  Pal  grew  jealous  of 
Simla  and  made  a plot  to  kill  her  child  when  it 
was  bom.  During  her  confinement,  Kunwari  Pal 
kept  a guard  over  Simla’s  house  and  engaged  a 
clever  nurse  for  her.  The  six  Ranis  of  Kunwari 
Pal  in  coUusion  with  the  guard  and  the  nurse 
bandaged  Simla’s  eyes,  saying  tliai  it  would  not  be 
auspicious  for  her  to  sec  her  ifirst  bom  son  after 
delivery.  The  Ranis  removed  jhe  baby  and  threw 
it  in  a bush  of  nctdes  in  a garden  dbsc  by  and 
placed  a cylindrical  stone  by  the  side  of  Simla  and 
told  her  and  the  Raja  that  she  had  been  delivered 
of  a stone  instead  of  a human  being.  The 
six  Ranis  taunted  Kimwari  Pal  and  said  that  his 
most  beloved  Rani  had  brought  forth  a stone  instead 
of  a child.  The  Raja  believed  them  and  turned  out 
Simla  in  anger.  Simla  wandered  about  homeless 
in  utter,  despair.  She  chanced  to  pass  dirough  die 
place  where  the  baby  had  been  thrown  and  heard 
a ay  foom  the  bush.  On  going  near  the  bush  she 
saw  a baby  buried  undqr  the  nettles.  She  searched 
and  picked  him  up  and  was  convinced  by  his 
ronaikable  beauty  and  strength  diat  he  was  her 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


51 


own  son  and  named  him  Kali  Har  Pal.  She  ran 
back  to  the  Raja  with  the  baby.  But  the  six  queens 
of  the  Raja  again  taunted  the  Raja,  saying  that  his 
most  virtuous  Rani  had  stolen  another  man’s  baby 
in  order  to  deceive  him.  The  Raja  again  dis- 
believed Bimla  and  turned  her  out;  turning  a deaf 
ear  to  her  entreaties.  Then  Bimla  went  to  her 
father’s  house;  but  was  refused  admission,  as 
Kunwari  Pal  had  written  to  Nandu  not  to  give  her 
shelter.  Thus  rejected,  Bimla  went  into  a dense 
forest  and  made  her  home  in  a mountain  cave  called 
Dhoula  Udyar,  living  on  wild  roots  and  herbs. 
The  child  grew  up,  and,  wh^i  he  was  twelve  years 
old,  he  used  to  go  out  into  the  jungle  to  catch  deer, 
stags  and  other  game,  and  bring  them  home.  One 
day  he  came  home  riding  on  a tiger  and  killed  him 
widi  one  blow.  He  worn  the  skins  of  wild  animals, 
and  his  hair  and  nails  grew  long.  He  looked  like 
a denizen  of  die  forest 

One  day,  while  he  was  sitting  on  a hill,  some 
merchants  passed,  carrying  a large  amount  of  goods. 
The  merchants  took  him  for  some  strange  wild 
animal  and  flol  away  in  a fear.  Kali  Har  Pal 
brought  all  their  merchandize  to  his  mountain 
home.  On  another  occasion  he  chanced  to  come  to 


52 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


the  irrigated  fields  of  Nandu  where  they  were  trans- 
planting the  paddy  crop.  He  went  and  stopped 
the  water  channel.  He  then  destroyed  all  the  fields 
and  seized  the  food  which  Nandu’s  men  had  with 
them  and  brought  it  to  his  mother.  He  inquired 
from  Bimla  about  the  owner  of  the  Sera  and  also 
about  his  own  father.  Bimla  tried  to  put  him  off, 
but  Kali  persisted.  She  then  told  him  the  whole  story 
of  her  misfortune.  On  hearing  this  ELali  was  full 
of  rage  and  started  for  Nandu’s  village  with  his 
mother.  On  nearing  the  village  he  sent  for  and 
ordered  Nandu  to  come  and  receive  him  on  pain 
of  punishment  Nandu  was  much  afraid  and  came 
out  to  receive  Kali  and  his  mother  and  took  thetn 
to  his  house.  Kali  and  his  mother  lived  at  the 
house  of  Nandu  for  some  time.  But  Kali  began  to 
do  all  sorts  of  mischief. 

On  one  occasion  when  asked  to  fetch  a load  of 
fuel  from  the  forest,  he  went  to  Nandu’s  goih  (cow- 
shed) and  cut  the  legs  off  all  his  buffaloes  and 
brought  a huge  load  of  them  to  Nandu’s  house. 
This  frightened  Nandu  and  his  wife  who  wanted 
to  get  rid  of  him.  One  day  Nandu’s  wife  taunted 
Kali,  saying  that,  if  he  was  a true  hero,  he  should 
go  and  kill  the  boar,  Kailu,  of  Loharigarh  who  had 
destroyed  his  father’s  Sera.  Kali  inquired  about 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


53 


Kailu’s  whereabouts  and  at  once  started  for  Lohari- 
garh.  He  fought  with  Kailu  and  his  army  of 
boars  and  killed  them  all.  He  then  returned  to 
Nandu’s  house. 

In  the  meantime  Raja  Kunwari  Pal  began  to 
make  preparations  for  installing  his  younger  son 
Chand  Pal  on  the  throne.  Nandu  informed  KaB 
Har  Pal  about  it  Kali  was  in  a great  rage  and 
wrote  to  Kimwari  Pal  telling  the  whole  story  of 
their  exile  and  claimed  to  be  the  rightful  heir  to  the 
throne.  He  also  informed  Kunwari  Pal  that  he 
had  killed  Kailu.  On  reading  the  letter  Kunwari 
Pal  was  much  pleased.  He  went  and  brought 
Kali  Har  Pal  in  a triumphant  procession  and 
installed  him  on  the  throne.  Kah  Har  Pal 
pardoned  his  father  and  step-mothers  for  their 
misdeeds. 

But  the  six  Ranis  of  Kunwari  Pal  did  not  give  up 
their  wickedness  and  were  bent  upon  killing  Kali. 

One  day  they  told  Kah  that  one  of  his  step- 
brothers had  been  killed  by  some  enemy  in  the 
Punjab  and  that  he  should  go  and  kill  the  enemy 
and  bring  back  the  head  of  the  deceased. 

Kali  went  and,  after  killing  the  enemy,  brought 
back  the  head  of  his  step-brother.  When  Kali’s 
step-mothors  heard  about  Kah’s  triumphant  return 


54 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


home  they  made  another  plot  to  kill  him.  They 
got  a deep  trench  dug  on  the  way,  fixed  sharp 
spikes  in  it,  and  had  it  covered  with  leaves  and  mud. 
When  Kali  rode  over  the  road,  his  horse  fell  into 
the  trench  and  Kali  and  his  horse  were  wounded 
with  the  spikes  and  died.  On  hearing  about  Kali’s 
death  the  old  Kunwari  Pal  and  his  Queen  Bimla 
fainted  and  died.  Thus  was  the  career  of  a great 
hero  cut  short  by  the  treachery  and  jealousy  of  his 
step-mothers. 

6.  BAGA  RAWAT 

In  days  of  yore  a long  line  of  Princes  ruled  over 
Katyurgarh.  One  of  them  was  Baga  Rawat.  His 
grandfather’s  name  was  Kali  Nag.  Kali  Nag’s 
son  was  Gangu  Rawat  whose  son  was  Baga  Rawat. 
Baga  built  a strong  fort  at  Katyurgarh.  He  had 
five  sons,  whose  names  were  Anandu  Rawat,  Doma 
Rawat,  Kalni  Rawat  and  Adam  Khan. 

When  his  eldest  son  Anandu  became  of  marriage- 
able age  Baga  was  anxious  to  marry  him,  but  could 
not  find  a suitable  bride. 

In  a village  nearby  there  lived  three  brothers 
named  Gyanu,  Hard  Singh  and  Bhow  Singh 
who  belonged  to  a good  Patwal  Rajput  family. 
Baga  went  and  asked  Gy^u  Ho  give  his  daiighter 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


55 


ia  marriage  to  his  son  Anandu.  The  Patwals 
looked  down  upon  Baga  as  being  of  an  inferior 
caste  and  refused  his  request.  Baga  was  a great 
warrior  and  sent  an  ultimatum  to  the  Patwals  to 
the  effect  that,  if  they  refused  to  marry  their 
daughter  with  his  son,  he  would  invade  their 
territory  and  carry  away  the  girl  forcibly. 

Patwal  was  frightened  and  agreed  to  marry  his 
daughter  to  Baga’s  son,  and  the  marriage  was  per- 
formed with  due  ceremony. 

When  Gyanu’s  brothers  heard  about  the 
marriage  they  were  very  angry  and  ex-communi- 
cated Gyanu.  The  whole  village  boycotted  Gyanu’s 
family  and  stopped  all  their  supplies,  with  the 
result  that  Gyanu’s  family  began  to  starve. 

At  last  he  left  the  village  and  went  to  Baga 
Rawat  for  help.  Baga  received  him  most  cordially. 
Gyanu  told  Baga  all  about  his  trouble.  Baga  sent 
fifty  men  to  assist  him  in  ploughing  his  fidds. 
When  the  fifty  men  were  ploughing  Gyanu’s  fields 
a piece  of  clay  dropped  into  die  field  of  Hari 
Singh  lower  down.  On  this  Hari  Singh  lost  his 
temper  and  killed  forty-nine  men  of  Baga  and  sent 
away  the  remaining  one  crying  to  Baga.  The  man 
informed  Baga  of  the  death  of  his  men.  On  hear- 
ing this  Baga  was  very  angry  and  took  a vow  to 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


56 

be  revenged.  He  and  his  sons  went  in  search  of 
Hari  Singh.  On  the  way  they  met  Hari  Singh’s 
younger  brother  Bhow  Singh  who  was  returning 
home.  They  attacked  him  and  killed  him. 

When  Hari  Singh  heard  about  the  death  of  his 
brother,  he,  in  his  turn,  was  determined  to  revenge 
his  brother’s  death.  He  went  to  Katyurgarh  and 
killed  Baga’s  brother.  Baga  was  much  grieved  at 
the  dfeath  of  his  brother.  Baga  and  his  sons  then 
began  to  devise  plans  for  killing  Hari  Singh.  In 
the  meantime  M)me  Aiijis  (drummers)  belonging 
to  Hari  Singh’s  village  went  to  Katyurgarh  to  beg 
alms,  as  is  customary  during  the  month  of  Chait 
(April).  Baga  inquired  from  them  about  the 
whereabouts  of  Hari  Singh  and  was  told  that  he 
had  gone  to  Srinagar,  the  capital  of  the  Garhwal 
Raja,  and  would  be  returning  shortly. 

Baga  and  his  sons  waylaid  Hari  Singh  who  was 
returning  iti  a palanquin  from  the  darbar  of  the 
Garhwal  Raja,  accompanied  by  his  five  Ranis  and 
a large  number  of  attendants.  Baga  went  up  to 
Hari  Singh’s  palanquin  and  stabbed  him.  The 
men  of  Hari  Singh’s  party  fought  against  Baga  and 
his  sonsij  but  were  all  killed.  The  five  Ranis  of 
Hark  Singh  became  SaM. 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


57 


One  day  when  Baga  and  his  sons  were  away 
from  home,  Baga’s  Rani  was  combing  her  hair  at 
a window  of  her  balcony.  Some  evil  spirit  “pos- 
sessed” her  and  she  died  suddenly.  On  returning 
home  Baga  found  his  wife  dead  and  was  much 
grieved.  Baga  and  his  sons  first  suspected  that  her 
death  had  been  caused  by  the  enemy;  but  on 
examining  her  body  they  did  not  find  any  injuries 
and  hence  concluded  that  it  must  have  been  due  to 
the  influence  of  some  demon.  Baga’s  eldest  son 
Anandu  went  out  in  search  of  the  demon.  When 
he  had  gone  some  distance  he  came  upon  a spot 
which  was  covered  with  human  corpses.  Anandu 
heaped  the  corpses  together  and  slept  on  them  at 
night.  At  midnight  the  demon  arrived  and 
threatened  to  devour  Anandu.  Anandu  look  his 
sword  and  cut  off  the  head  of  the  demon.  But  as 
soon  as  the  head  of  the  demon  was  severed  from  the 
body  several  other  heads  sprang  up  in  its  place. 
The  more  heads  Anandu  cut  off  the  more  heads 
sprang  up.  Anandu  was  exhausted  and  prayed  to 
his  family  goddess  for  help.  He  then  heard  a 
voice  saying  that  he  should  replace  the  heads  cut 
off  on  the  body  of  the  demon.  Anandu  did  as 
ordered,  and  thus  the  demon  was  killed. 


58 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


Anandu  returned  victorious  and  performed  the 
funeral  rites  of  his  mother  on  the  banks  of  the 
Ganges. 

Once  Baga  told  his  son  Anandu  to  go  to  the 
darbar  of  the  Garhwal  Raja  and  request  him  to 
grant  them  some  irrigated  lands  where  they  could 
grow  paddy,  as  their  lands  produced  only  Jhangora 
(millet).  The  Raja  granted  them  Bansuli  Sera, 
which  lay  within  the  territory  of  the  Raja  of 
Kmnaon  as  Jagir.  Baga  and  his  sons  settled  down 
at  Bansuli  Sera.  One  day  Anandu  went  to  the 
darbar  of  the  Kumaon  Raja,  but  gave  precedence 
to  the  Garhwal  Raja  over  the  Kumaon  Raja  when 
saluting  the  latter.  The  Kumaon  Raja  was  offended 
at  this  and  offered  to  give  him  large  presents  if  he 
omitted  the  name  of  the  Garhwal  Raja  when  salut- 
ing him  (the  Kumaon  Raja).  Anandu  declined  to 
do  so  and  left  the  territory  of  the  Kumaon  Raja. 

Baga  and  Anandu  then  proceeded  to  the  Delhi 
Darbar.  On  reaching  Delhi  they  camped  in  a 
beautiful  garden  of  the  Emperor  of  Delhi  near  a 
tank  which  contained  fishes  of  various  hues.  They 
began  to  catch  the  fish  and  do  damage  in  the 
garden.  When  the  report  was  made  to  the 
Emperor,  he  sent  a great  wrestler  Akal  Khan  to 
bring  them  f©  die  darbar.  When  Akal  Khan 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


59 


approached  them  and  began  to  abuse  them, 
Anandu  pulled  out  his  tongue  and  sent  him  back 
crying.  When  the  Emperor  saw  this  he  was  much 
frightened  and  devised  means  to  kill  them.  He 
ordered  the  path  leading  to  the  darbar  to  be  dug 
up  and  fixed  sharp  spikes  all  along  the  trench  which 
was  then  covered  with  leaves  with  mud  spread  over 
them.  Then  the  King  invited  Baga  and  his  son  to 
the  darbar  promising  to  confer  a jagir  on  them. 
As  soon  as  Baga  and  Anandu  walked  over  the  path 
leading  to  the  darbar  they  fell  into  the  trench  and 
were  killed. 

7.  PANCHU  THAG 

There  was  a village  called  Bamora  of  which  the 
inhabitants  were  well-to-do.  In  the  neighbour- 
hood of  that  village  there  lived  a highway  robber 
known  as  Panchu  Thag.  He  used  to  terrorise 
the  women-foUc  of  the  neighbouring  villages  by 
robbing  them  of  theif  jewellery  and  dishonour- 
ing them.  He  used  to  assault  the  travellers  with 
his  club  and  rob  them.  In  a neighbouring  village 
of  Kailadhukri  there  lived  one  Narain  Saun.  His 
wife’s  name  was  Rikhola.  A son  was  born  to  them 
whom  they  named  Musa  Saun.  Musa  Saun  was 
a most  promising  child  and  men  predicted  his 
future  greatness.  When  he  grew  up  he  heard 


6o 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


stories  of  the  atrocities  of  Panchu  which  made  his 
blood  boil  with  indignation;  and  he  took  a vow  to 
kill  Panchu.  One  day  he  asked  his  mother  to 
allow  him  to  go  out  to  pmchase  a pair  of  bullocLs 
for  ploughing  his  irrigated  lands  which  had  been 
lying  waste  for  a long  time.  His  mother  warned 
him,  saying  that  if  he  went  out  with  money  he  was 
sure  to  be  robbed  and  killed  by  Panchu.  But  the 
more  Musa  heard  about  the  atrocities  of  Panchu 
the  stronger  grew  his  determination  to  kill  him. 
One  day  Musa  looked  into  tiie  account  books  of  his 
father,  which  showed  that  a gold  bracelet  had  been 
pledged  by  his  father  to  Panchu  and  had  not  yet 
been  redeemed.  Musa  showed  the  entry  to  his 
mother  and  said  that  he  was  going  to  Panchu  to 
redeem  the  bracelet.  His  mother  again  dissuaded 
him. 

One  day  Musa  and  his  mother  went  together  to 
grind  grain  in  their  water  mill  of  which  the  upper 
stone  was  one  prd  thick.  Musa,  in  order  to  show 
Ms  strength  to  Ms  mother,  broke  the  upper  part  of 
the  millstone  with  one  blow  of  his  fist.  He  told  Ms 
mother  that  if  he  could  break  such  a tMck  rnillstonc 
with  one  blow  of  Ms  fist,  surely  he  could  kill 
Panchu  also. 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


6l 


Being  thus  assured  of  his  strength  she  gave  him 
permission  to  go  to  Bamora  village  and  fight  against 
Panchu.  Musa  put  on  gold  bracelets  and  ear-rings, 
donned  his  armour  and  started  for  Bamora. 
He  was  accompanied  by  two  men  who  carried  his 
tiffin  basket.  Panchu  met  Musa  on  the  way  and 
exulted  on  seeing  his  jewellery.  He  hurled  a log 
of  wood  at  Musa;  but  Musa  took  no  notice  of  it. 
Then  he  threw  another  log  with  greater  force. 
Musa  looked  at  Panchu  and  asked  who  he  was  and 
why  he  had  hurled  the  log  of  wood  at  him,  an 
innocent  passer-by.  Panchu  inquired  whose  son 
he  was  and  where  he  was  going.  Musa  said  his 
mother’s  name  was  Rikhola  and  that  he  was  going 
to  Bamora.  On  hearing  this  Panchu  said,  “Ah! 
thy  mother  is  my  own  sister.  What  present  hast 
thou  brought  for  thy  aunt?”  Musa  replied,  “Uncle, 
you  seem  to  be  very  greedy.  If  my  aunt  welcomes 
me,  and  puts  vermilion  on  my  forehead,  I shall 
present  her  with  a gold  mohar.”  Panchu  said, 
“Dear  nephew,  give  me  the  gold  mohar  to  keep. 
I shall  hand  it  over  to  thee  when  thou  makest  its 
present  to  thy  aunt.”  Musa  replied,  “Uncle,  if  I 
give  the  gold  mohar  to  you  and  then  ask  it  back, 
my  aunt  will  think  that  I had  begged  the  gold 
mohar  from  her  own  husband.” 


62 


HIMALAYAN  TOLKLORE 


When  Panchu  knew  that  Musa  could  not  be 
cheated  in  that  way  he  begged  him  to  give  him 
something  to  eat,  saying  that  he  had  not  taken 
anything  for  several  days.  Musa  gave  him  some 
food  from  his  tiffin  basket.  When  they  started, 
each  wished  to  lead  the  way.  At  last  two  coolies 
who  carried  the  tiffin  basket  went  first  Musa 
followed  them  and  Panchu  walked  last.  While 
climbing  up  a high  hill  Musa  was  very  tired. 
Panchu  thought  that  it  was  good  opportunity  to 
kill  Musa  and  lifted  hw  dub  to  kill  him.  On 
seeing  this  Musa  took  out  his  dagger  and  said, 
“Uncle,  why  did  you  lift  your  dub?”  Panchu 
replied,  “Oh,  dear  nephew,  there  is  some  dust  on 
your  head,  I want  to  brush  it  off  with  this  dub.” 
Musa  said,  “Oh,  one  stroke  of  this  dub  is  enough 
to  break  my  head.”  Panchu  replied,  “ Don’t  be 
afiraid,  I use  this  stick  for  all  purposes.”  Then 
they  continued  to  dimb  up  till  the  ridge  was 
reached  from  which  the  Bamora  village  was  visible. 
Panchu  again  lifted  his  dub  to  kill  him.  Musa 
drew  his  dagger.  They  fought  for  seven  days  and 
seven  nights,  widh  varying  success.  At  last  Panchu 
threw  Musa  on  the  ground  and  sat  on  his  chest. 
Musa  pulled  out  his  dagger  and  thrust  it  into 
Panchu ’s  cheat  from  bdow.  Panchu’s  chest  was 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


63 


cut  open  and  he  soon  expired.  On  searching  his 
body  Musa  found  four  thousand  rupees  which  he 
brought  back  home. 

The  two  companions  of  Musa  had  fled  away 
home  during  the  fight  between  Panchu  and  Musa 
and  informed  Musa’s  mother  that  both  Panchu  and 
Musa  had  been  killed  in  the  fight. 

On  hearing  this  Musa’s  mother  and  the  whole 
■village  were  in  deep  mourning.  But  their  joy  knew 
no  bounds  when  they  Saw  Musa  returning  home 
triumphantly.  There  was  general  rejoicing  in  ail 
the  villages  on  the  death  of  the  robber  Panchu, 
who  had  been  a scourge  in  that  locality.  The 
people  called  their  village  bards  to  sing  songs  to 
celebrate  the  victory  of  Musa  over  Panchu.  These 
songs  are  still  sung  in  those  villages. 

8.  BHAGDEO  THE  WARRIOR 

Once  upon  a time  a great  Prince  named  Koku 
Hawat  lived  in  Kokukot  He  had  seven  queens, 
but  no  male  issue.  He,  therefore,  married  another 
wife  named  Kunjavati,  a girl  of  surpassing  beauty. 
Koku  Rawat  made  her  his  principal  Rani.  This 
aroused  the  jealousy  of  the  other  Ranis.  In  due 
course  Kunjavati  was  with  child.  In  the  ninth 
month  of  her  pregnancy  she  felt  a craving  for  deer’s 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


64 

flesh  and  requested  Koku  to  procure  it  for  her. 
Koku  Rawat  offered  to  provide  her  with  the  flesh 
of  goats,  fish,  and  fowls;  but  the  Rani  wanted 
venison  only.  Despite  his  old  age  the  Raja  could 
not  refuse  the  Rani’s  request  and  made  preparations 
for  a shooting  expedition.  He  collected  a large 
number  of  men  and  invited  his  nephew  (sister’s  son) 
Khim  Singh  from  Khimsari  Kot  to  accompany 
him.  Khim  Singh  dissuaded  Koku  from  going 
out  to  risk  his  life  in  the  jungles.  But  the  Raja 
could  not  be  persuaded.  The  party  camped  at 
Sanglana  on  the  first  day;  their  next  stage  was  Ulna 
and  the  third  at  Suyana.  They  beat  all  the  forests 
but  could  not  find  any  trace  of  a deer.  On  the 
fourth  day  the  party  became  very  tired  and  rested 
near  a spring.  The  Raja  saw  a deer  close  by. 
He  ordered  his  men  to  surround  the  deer  and  not 
let  it  escape.  The  deer  leaped  over  the  Raja’s  head 
and  escaped.  The  Raja  was  much  vexed  and 
chased  the  deer  till  it  reached  Gangoli  Hat.  At 
Gangoli  Hat  there  lived  a great  warrior  by  name 
Gauria,  who  was  eighty  years  old  and  had  seven 
sons  and  fourteen  grandsons.  His  dagger  weighed 
nine  maunds.  He  had  a hemp  rope  a hundred 
cubits  long  girded  round  his  waist.  The  deer  ran 
and  sat  on  the  lap  of  Gauria  Gangola.  In  the 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


65 


meantime  Koku  and  his  party  arrived  and  demand- 
ed the  deer  from  him.  Gauria,  out  of  compassion 
for  the  deer,  refused  to  surrender  it.  He  said  he 
would  rather  give  his  own  son  in  exchange  for  the 
deer. 

On  this  Koku  became  very  angry  and  challenged 
Gauria  to  fight  with  him.  A great  battle  ensued. 

At  last  Gauria  cut  off  Koku’s  head  with  his 
dagger.  Koku’s  men  then  attacked  Gauria;  but 
were  all  killed,  except  Khim  Singh  who  managed 
to  escape.  Khim-  Singh  went  back  home  and 
informed  Rani  Kunjavati  of  the  death  of  her 
husband.  He  pretended  to  console  Kimjavati  and 
offered  to  support  her.  He,  however,  robbed 
Kunjavati  of  all  her  property  and  reduced  her  to 
utter  destitution.  Kunjavati  was  with  child  when 
her  husband  died.  In  due  course  she  was  delivered 
of  a son  of  unusual  beauty  and  strength.  His 
eyes  shone  like  a diamond.  He  had  long  shapely 
arms  and  legs  and  was  as  strong  as  a he-buffalo. 
He  was  most  precocious  in  growth  and  people  pre- 
dicted a great  future  for  him.  He  was  named 
Ransura  Bhagdeo.  When  he  was  twelve  years  of 
age  he  inquired  from  his  mother  about  his  father. 
The  mother  replied,  with  tears  in  her  eyes,  “My 
child,  thou  wast  born  without  a father;  but  do  not 

5 


66 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


let  it  trouble  you.”  Bhagdeo  rejoined,  “Mother, 
if  it  be  so,  thou  must  have  stolen  me  from  some 
one  else.”  Bhagdeo  continued  to  press  his  mother. 
At  last  she  told  the  whole  story  of  his  father’s  death. 

On  hearing  it  Bhagdeo  was  full  of  rage  and 
broke  nine  stools  on  which  he  sat,  one  after  another. 
The  house  shook.  He  asked  his  mother’s  permis- 
sion to  go  and  fight  with  the  enemy.  The  mother 
remonstrated  and  said,  “My  son,  when  even  thy 
father  with  his  large  army  could  not  kill  the  enemy, 
how  canst  thou  kill  him  single-handed?”  Bhagdeo 
had  a step-sister  by  name  Ransula.  She  too 
possessed  great  strength.  One  day  she  took  nine 
Dons  (about  eight  maunds)  of  wheat  to  grind  at 
a watermill  in  Gangoli  Hat  village.  The  water 
channel  of  the  mill  also  irrigated  the  fields  of 
Gauria  Gangola,  known  as  Nauni  Pindi  Sera. 
When  Ransula  diverted  the  water  channel  into  the 
mill  the  crops  qf  Gauria’s  field  dried.  The  matter 
was  reported  to  Gauria.  He  went  to  the  water 
mill  to  sec  what  was  happening.  Finding  Ransula 
there  he  abused  her,  and  Ransula  retaliated.  Then 
Gangola  became  furious,  and  Ransula  caught  hold 
of  him,  and  tied  his  hands  and  feet  round  the  wheel 
of  the  mill. 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


67 


Next  morning  when  Gangola’s  seven  sons  did 
not  find  their  father  at  home,  they  went  out  to 
search  for  him  and  found  him  tied  round  the  wheel 
of  the  mill  and  unconscious.  They  untied  him  and 
squeezing  out  the  water  from  his  stomach  brought 
him  back  to  his  senses.  They  then  stripped 
Ransula  of  all  her  jewellery  and  brought  her  to 
their  home. 

When  Bhagdeo  heard  about  it  he  took  a vow  to 
take  revenge.  Bhagdeo  started  for  Gangoli  Hat. 
He  reached  the  Nauni  Pindi  Sera  of  the  Gangolas 
and  began  to  destroy  it.  On  seeing  this  Gauria 
Gangola  ordered  his  Champhu  Hurkia  to  go  and 
find  out  who  the  man  was.  Champhu  went  to  the 
chaunri  (platform)  on  which  Bhagdeo  was  sitting 
and  inquired  who  he  was.  Bhagdeo  related  his 
whole  story  to  him.  On  hearing  this  Champhu 
fell  at  Bhagdeo’s  feet  and  said,  “Sir,  I am  your 
family  bard.  I accompanied  your  father  during 
his  war  against  Gangolas.  After  his  death  I was 
made  a prisoner  of  war  by  the  enemy.  The 
Gangolas  also  captured  your  father’s  war-horse 
and  hounds.  I am  now  at  your  service.  You 
should  first  get  back  the  horse  and  the  hounds. 
Then  only  will  you  be  able  to  defeat  the  enemy.” 
Champhu  then  took  Bhagdeo  to  Gauria ’s  stables 


68 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


where  the  horse  was  tied.  The  horse  at  once 
recognized  its  old  master  and  became  quite  tame. 
Bhagdeo  also  seized  the  hounds.  The  dogs  also 
recognized  Bhagdeo  and  began  to  lick  his  hands. 
Then  Champhu  gave  Bhagdeo  his  father’s  sword 
and  other  arms,  which  had  also  been  captured  by 
Gauria.  Thus  equipped,  Bhagdeo  marched  into 
the  courtyard  of  Gauria’s  palace  before , daybreak 
and  smashed  the  floor  of  the  courtyard  with  the 
hoofs  of  his  horse.  He  then  rode  to  the  Nauni 
Pmdi  Sera  and  destroyed  the  crops. 

Gauria  recognized  the  horse  and  feared  that  some 
enemy  had  come  to  attack  them.  He  called  his 
seven  sons  and  informed  them  of  the  danger.  The 
seven  sons  of  Gangola  became  furious,  and,  put- 
ting on  their  arms,  went  towards  the  Nauni  Pindi 
Sera  and  challenged  Bhagdeo  to  fight  with  them. 
They  fought  for  several  days.  At  last  Bhagdeo 
caught  them  one  by  one  and  hurled  them  up  in  the 
air.  The  hounds  tore  their  bodies  to  pieces  as  they 
fell  on  the  ground.  Then’  Bhagdeo  galloped  into 
the  courtyard  of  Gauria’s  palace.  Champhu 
Hurkia  walked  ahead  into  Ae  palace  singing. 
Bhagdeo  tied  Gauria  to  the  pillars  of  his  balcony. 
He  then  killed  all  the  Ranis  and  the  grandsons  of 
Gauria  and  rescued  Ransula.  Bhagdeo  then  dug 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


69 


up  the  head  of  his  father  and  brought  it  home  in  a 
triumphant  procession.  On  reaching  home  Bhag- 
deo  performed  the  funeral  rites  of  his  father  and 
ruled  over  his  country  in  peace  and  prosperity. 

9.  AJWA  BAMPLA 

Once  upon  a time,  when  Guru  Cyan  Chand 
ruled  over  Champawatgarh,  four  wrestlers  from  the 
four  quarters  of  the  world  went  there  and  gave  an 
ultimatum  to  the  Raja  that  he  should  either  send  a 
Pahlwan  to  wrestle  with  them  or  they  would  turn 
him  out  of  his  kingdom.  Cyan  Chand  called  his 
courtiers  together  for  advice.  They  said  that  Mani 
Padyar  was  the  greatest  warrior  in  their  kingdom 
and  should  be  sent  for.  Four  men  were  sent  with 
a letter  to  Mani  Padyar  requesting  him  to  come 
and  defeat  the  enemy,  and  offering  him  large 
rewards.  When  the  Raja’s  men  reached  Mani 
Padyar’s  house,  he  was  smoking  in  his  balcony; 
while  his  wife  Janjali  was  cooking  food.  Mani 
Padyar  was  eighty  years  of  age.  His  hump  touched 
the  heavens;  while  his  belly  reached  the  nether 
regions.  On  reading  the  Raja’s  letter  Mani  accepted 
the  invitation  and  made  preparations  for  going  to. 
Champawatgarh.  He  asked  his  wife  to  wash  his 
clothes  and  prepare  food  for  the  journey.  His  old 


70 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


wife  tried  to  dissuade  him,  but  Mani  would  not 
listen  to  her.  Mani  Padyar  smoked  his  huqqa 
which  weighed  nine  maunds.  He  tied  round  his 
waist  nine  maunds  of  roasted  flour  isaiti)  and  the 
same  quantity  of  tobacco  for  his  journey.  He  tied 
wooden  planks  on  the  back  and  front  part  of  his 
body  in  order  to  keep  it  straight.  He  put  on  his 
armour.  His  wife  began  to  weep.  He  consoled 
her  and  said  that  heroes  and  he-goats  were  born 
to  die  an  early  death. 

On  the  way  he  met  a demon  named  Bhumnes- 
war,  who  challenged  him  to  fight  with  him.  They 
fought  for  two  days  and  two  nights.  At  last  Mani 
d.a.shed  the  demon  on  the  ground  and  killed  him. 
He  then  rested  a while,  smoked  his  huge  huqqa  and 
proceeded.  On  reaching  Champawat  he  was 
received  by  the  Raja  with  due  honours.  All  eyes 
were  turned  on  him.  But  the  people  were  aston- 
ished at  his  old  age  and  had  misgivings  about  his 
success  against  the  enemy.  Mani  Padyar  told  the 
Raja  to  stop  the  rations  of  the  four  Pahlwans. 
When  their  rations  were  discontinued  the  Pahlwans 
became  wild  with  rage.  They  threw  away  their 
caps;  their  top-knots  began  to  wave  in  the  air; 
and  they  ground  pebbles  with  their  teeth  in  rage. 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


71 


They  threatened  to  raze  the  whole  of  Champawat- 
garh  to  dust.  Early  next  morning,  Mani  Padyar 
went  to  the  Pahlwans  and,  calling  them  hungry 
jackals,  challenged  them  to  fight.  All  the  four 
Pahlwans  attacked  Mani  Padyar.  Mani  Padyar 
fought  against  them  single-handed  for  six  days  and 
six  nights.  At  last  he  fell  on  the  ground  like  a 
huge  log  of  sandal  wood  and  died.  The  Pahlwans 
then  went  to  the  Raja  and  inquired  if  he  could 
send  another  warrior  to  fight  against  them.  The 
Raja  again  called  his  courtiers.  They  said  that 
Salu  and  Malu  Negis  of  Bawalikot  alone  could 
oppose  the  enemy.  Salu  and  Malu  were  twin 
brothers  of  twelve  years  of  age.  They  had  a 
common  wife  named  Dudukela.  They  were  as 
beautiful  as  the  full  moon,  as  bright  as  the  flame  of 
a lamp.  Their  breasts  shone  like  the  sun  and  their 
back  parts  like  the  moon. 

The  Raja  sent  four  men  to  call  Salu  and  Malu. 
When  the  messengers  arrived  Salu  and  Malu  were 
playing  dice  in  their  balcony  and  predicted  that 
some  great  event  would  happen  to  them  soon.  In 
the  meantime  the  messengers  delivered  the  Raja’s 
letter.  In  the  letter  Cyan  Chand  had  promised 
them  great  rewards  of  land  and  money  if  they 
fought  against  the  four  Pahlwans  and  killed  them. 


72 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


Salu  and  Main  made  preparations  for  the  journey 
to  Champawat.  Rani  Dudukela,  who  was  as  soft 
as  a ball  of  butter  and  as  beautiful  as  the  full  moon, 
remonstrated  with  tears  in  her  eyes  and  said,  “Who- 
soever went  to  Champawatgarh  did  not  return.” 
But  they  did  not  listen  to  her  entreaties.  Dudukela 
begged  them  to  let  her  accompany  them.  But  they 
shut  her  up  in  a room  of  the  palace  and  left  for 
Champawat.  When  they  reached  Champawat  they 
were  received  with  due  honours.  The  Ranis  of  the 
Raja  cast  aside  their  veils  and  peeped  at  them  and 
wondered  how  such  raw  lads  could  fight  against  the 
formidable  Pahlwans.  Salu  and  Malu  ordered  ail 
the  supplies  of  the  Pahlwans  to  be  stopped.  The 
Pahlwans  were  again  in  a great  rage.  They  went 
to  Guru  Cyan  Chand  and  inquired  whether  he  had 
brought  any  other  warrior.  Salu  and  Malu  chal- 
lenged them  to  fight.  They  fought  eight  days  and 
eight  nights.  At  last  the  Pahlwans  threw  Salu  and 
Malu  on  the  ground  and  sat  on  their  chests  and 
killed  them.  When  Dudukela  heard  about  the 
death  of  her  husbands  she  was  mad  with  grief  and 
could  not  be  consoled.  Then  she  heard  a voice 
from  heaven  saying  that  she  should  not  despair  and 
that  a son  would  be  born  to  her  who  would  avenge 
his  father.  On  hearing  this  Dudukela  was  consoled. 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


73 


In  due  course  she  was  delivered  of  a male  child. 
Dudukcla  recalled  the  death  of  her  husbands  and 
feared  lest  her  new-born  son  should  share  the  same 
fate.  She  threw  the  baby  into  a bush  of  netdes 
in  utter  despair  and  became  blind  with  grief. 
The  baby,  who  was  a born  hero,  first  lived  upon 
the  leaves  of  the  netde.  When  he  had  eaten 
up  all  the  leaves  he  began  to  eat  its  stem;  and 
when  he  had  finished  the  stems  he  dug  up  its  roots 
and  lived  upon  them  till  he  was  six  months  old. 
Then  he  went  to  his  mother  and  said,  “Mother, 
why  didst  thou  throw  me  into  the  netde  bush?  I 
am  hungry.  Give  me  some  food  to  eat.” 
Dudukela  wept  and  replied,  “Who  art  thou,  and 
why  dost  thou  jeer  at  me?”  The  child  assured 
her  that  he  was  her  son.  The  mother  said,  “I 
shall  believe  that  thou  art  my  son,  if  thou  causest 
my  , right  breast  to  give  milk  and  restorest  my 
vision.”  The  baby  prayed  and  milk  began  to 
flow  from  Dudukela ’s  right  breast  and  the  vision 
of  her  eyes  was  restored.  She  then  saw  her  child, 
recognized  him,  and,  embracing  him,  wept  for  joy. 
She  named  him  Ajwa  Bampla.  She  took  the  child 
to  her  brother  Dham  Singh,  and  laid  the  child  at 
lus  feet  and  prayed  for  help.  She  related  to  him 
the  whole  story  of  her  adversity  and  how  the  child 


74 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


had  survived  after  having  been  thrown  into  the 
nettles.  She  requested  her  brother  to  take  the 
child  with  him  to  his  cowshed  in  the  jungle,  so 
that  he  might  not  go  back  to  his  own  home  and 
be  taken  to  Champawat  like  his  father  by  Cyan 
Chand’s  men.  Dham  Singh  took  Ajwa  to  his 
cowshed.  When  Ajwa  was  six  years  of  age,  he 
questioned  Dham  Singh  about  his  fadier.  Dham 
Singh  put  him  off  by  saying  that  his  father  had 
gone  abroad  to  earn  money.  Ajwa  now  began  to 
perform  extraordinary  feats  of  strength.  He 
would  bring  from  the  jungle  loads  of  grass  and 
fuel  which  even  six  grown  up  men  could  not  lift. 
He  would  bring  home  live  stags  and  deer  and 
jump  over  poles  a hundred  feet  high.  When 
Ajwa  was  twelve  years  old  he  once  returned  from 
the  jungle  riding  on  a big  tiger.  He  took  the 
tiger  to  his  uncle  and  to  his  mother  and  said  that  he 
had  brought  a toy  from  the  jungle.  The  mother 
wept  and  was  afraid.  When.  Ajwa  was  twelve  years 
old  he  was  taunted  by  his  playmates  who  said 
that  he  was  bom  without  a father.  He  felt  it 
keenly  and  ran  to  his  unde  and  wept  and  entreated 
him  to  let  him  know  his  father’s  whereabouts. 
Dham  Singh  gave  an  evasive  reply,  but  Ajwa 
pressed  him.  At  last  Dham  Singh  was  obliged  to 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


75 


send  him  (Ajwa)  back  to  his  mother.  As  soon  as 
Ajwa  reached  home,  four  messengers  arrived  with 
a letter  from  Raja  Gyan  Chand.  The  messengers 
delivered  the  letter  to  Ajwa.  In  the  letter  Gyan 
Chand  had  mentioned  the  death  of  Salu  and  Malu, 
and  requested  Ajwa,  who  was  reported  to  be  a 
greater  hero  than  his  father,  to  come  and  fight 
against  the  enemy  of  his  father.  Dudukela  scolded 
the  King’s  men,  refused  to  send  her  son  to  Cham- 
pawat  and  told  them  to  go  away.  But  Ajwa  was 
determined  to  go  and  would  not  listen  to  his 
mother’s  entreaties.  When  Dudukela  saw  that 
Ajwa  could  not  be  dissuaded  she  asked  Ajwa  to 
give  her  an  assurance  of  his  power  to  defeat  such 
a formidable  enemy.  Ajwa  jumped  over  a pole 
one  hundred  cubits  high  and  crushed  to  powder 
with  his  feet  the  ritha  nuts  which  were  spread 
underneath.  He  also  turned  his  father’s  clubs 
weighing  one  hundred  maunds,  threw  them  up 
in  the  air  and  supported  them  on  his  little  fingers. 
By  these  tests  Dudukela  was  assured  of  her  son’s 
success  against  the  enemy  and  gave  him  permis- 
sion to  go. 

Her  husband’s  blue-eared  war-horse  had  be- 
come wild  since  his  master’s  death.  Dudukela 
told  Ajwa  to  bring  him  back  from  the  jungle. 


76 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


He  found  the  horse  in  the  jungle.  The  horse, 
recognizing  his  former  master’s  son,  shed  tears  of 
joy.  Ajwa  brought  the  horse  home  and  rode  on 
his  back  to  Champawatgarh.  The  horse  flew  up 
to  the  clouds  and  dropped  down  on  Champawat- 
garh. 

Ajwa  was  received  by  the  Raja  and  his  people 
with  great  honours.  Ajwa  ordered  all  supplies  to 
the  enemy  to  be  stopped.  Next  morning  Ajwa  went 
and  began  to  answer  the  call  of  nature  just  in 
front  of  the  enemy’s  camp.  Seeing  this  the 
Pahlwans  became  furious  and  threatened  to  kill 
Ajwa  for  having  dared  to  insult  them.  Ajwa 
begged  their  pardon  and  said  that  he  was  a mere 
child  and  had  come  in  search  of  service.  The 
Pahlwans  asked  him  what  pay  he  would  accept. 
Ajwa  repHed  that  he  was  willing  to  serve  for  any 
pay.  He  further  enquired  whether  they  were 
cobblers  or  sweepers  by  caste.  The  Pahlwans  lost 
their  temper  and  began  to  beat  him.  Ajwa  roared 
like  a lion  and  challenged  them  to  fight  and  said 
that  he  had  come  to  revenge  his  father.  He 
caught  hold  of  all  the  four  warriors  and  killed  two 
of  them  with  his  sword.  He  pulled  out  the  eyes 
of  the  third  and  cut  off  the  nose  of  the  fourth. 
After  killing  and  mutilating  the  Pahlwans  Ajwa 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


77 


went  to  Guru  Gyan  Chand’s  Darbar  and  saluted 
the  Raja.  In  the  meantime  some  cunning  courtier 
of  the  Raja  smeared  his  own  clothes  with  the  blood 
of  the  Pahlwans  who  had  been  killed  and  hasteii.  d 
to  the  Raja  and  said  that  he  had  killed  the  enemy. 
But  Ajwa  took  out  the  eyes  and  the  piece  of  the 
cut  nose  from  his  pocket  as  a proof  of  his  having 
killed  the  enemy.  Guru  Gyan  Chand  was  con- 
vinced of  Ajwa’s  victory,  bestowed  large 
presents  and  a jagir  on  him  and  appointed 
him  as  his  Dewan.  The  courtiers  became  jealous 
of  him  and  told  the  Raja  that  Ajwa  cast  an  evil  eye 
on  the  Raja’s  Rani.  The  Raja  believed  the  courtiers 
and  ordered  four  executioners  to  take  Ajwa  to  a dis- 
tant jungle  and  pluck  out  his  eyes  and  leave  him 
there.  But  the  executioners  knew  that  the  charge 
against  Ajwa  was  false  and  that  Ajwa  had  rendered 
great  services  to  the  country.  They,  therefore, 
spared  Ajwa  and  taking  out  the  eyes  of  a goat 
showed  them  to  the  Raja. 

Ajwa  went  back  to  his  home  and  lived  there. 
In  the  meantime  the  relations  of  the  four  Pahlwans 
who  had  been  defeated  by  Ajwa  invaded  Cham- 
pawatgarh  and  began  to  give  much  trouble  to  the 
Raja  and  his  people.  Gyan  Chand  repented  of 
his  folly  in  having  punished  Ajwa.  The  cxecu- 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


78 

doners  informed  him  that  they  had  spared  Ajwa 
who  had  gone-  back  to  his  home. 

Gyan  Chand  sent  a letter  to  Ajwa,  apologized, 
and  requested  him  to  come  and  kill  the  enemy, 
and  offered  half  his  kingdom  as  a reward.  Ajwa 
went  to  Champawatgarh  and  defeated  the  enemy. 
The  Raja  gave  him  large  presents  and  half  his 
kingdom  as  a reward.  Ajwa  returned  home  in  a 
triumphant  procession  and  ruled  over  his  country 
in  happiness  and  prosperity. 

10.  BRAHMA  KUNWAR 

Once  upon  a time  Krishna  sat  with  his  friends 
at  Dwarka,  and  began  to  play  dice.  Narad  Muni, 
who  was  also  present  in  the  assembly,  said  that 
Moti  Mala,  a princess  of  surpassing  beauty,  who 
lived  at  Joula  Tal  in  Tibet,  possessed  a special  kind 
of  dice  and  advised  Krishna  to  obtain  the  dice  from 
her  and  to  marry  her.  Krishna  asked  his  generals 
one  by  one  to  go  to  Joula  Tal,  but  none  ventured 
to  go  to  the  mysterious  land  of  Tibet.  The  God 
Krishna  rubbed  his  body  and  produced  a swarm 
of  black  bees  and  ordered  them  to  carry  his  letter 
to  his  younger  brother  Brahma  Kunwar  who  lived 
at  Brahmkot.  The  black  bees  flew  like  the  wind 
and  hovered  over  the  house  of  Brahma,  They 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


79 


filled  all  the  rooms  of  his  palace,  which  frightened 
the  inmates.  Then  the  bees  sat  on  the  right 
shoulder  of  Brahma,  which  indicated  that  they 
had  been  sent  by  his  elder  brother  Krishna.  The 
bees  dropped  the  letter  in  the  lap  of  Brahma.  In  the 
letter  Krishna  had  requested  Brahma  to  come  at 
once,  proceed  to  Tibet,  and  bring  Moti  Mala  and 
the  special  dice  which  she  possessed.  On  reading 
the  letter  Brahma  got  ready  to  start  and  asked  his 
queen  to  wash  his  clothes  and  prepare  food  for 
the  journey.  The  Rani  in  vain  tried  to  dissuade 
him.  Several  bad  omens  occurred;  but  Brahma 
heeded  them  not.  He  donned  his  armour  and 
mounted  his  famous  horse  called  Raghubansi.  He 
spurred  his  horse  which  flew  up  into  the  clouds 
and  dropped  down  at  Dwarka.  He  was  received 
with  due  honours.  Krishna  requested  him  to  pro- 
ceed to  Tibet  and  bring  Moti  Mala  and  the  pair  of 
dice  which  she  had.  He  gave  a ring  as  a present  to 
Moti  Mala.  Brahma  Kunwar  agreed  and  started 
on  his  journey.  After  encountering  great  hard- 
ships on  the  way  he  reached  Joula  Tal.  While 
Br^ma  was  bathing  at  a spring,  Moti  Mala’s  maid 
servant  Swara  went  there  to  fetch  water.  Brahma 
inquired  as  to  whose  maid  she  was.  She  replied 
that  she  was  Moti  Mala’s  servant.  Swara 


8o 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


requested  Brahma  to  help  her  in  lifting  the  pitcher 
on  her  head.  While  lifting  the  pitcher  Brahma 
Kunwar  dropped  the  ring  which  Krishna  had  given 
him  into  the  pitcher.  While  Moti  Mala  was  taking 
out  water  from  the  pitcher  she  found  a ring  in  it. 
She  picked  it  up  and  saw  Krishna’s  name  engraved 
on  it.  The  very  sight  of  the  ring  caused  Moti 
Mala  to  fall  in  love  with  Krishna.  Next  morning 
she  sent  a letter  to  Brahma  Kunwar  through  Swara 
and  invited  him  to  meet  her.  Brahma  managed 
to  enter  Moti  Mala’s  apartment.  He  told  her 
that  Krishna  had  sent  him  to  bring  her;  also  the 
pair  of  dice  which  she  possessed.  Moti  Mala 
asked  Brahma  to  play  dice  with  her.  When  they 
began  to  play,  Moti  Mala  sat  towards  the  east  and 
made  Brahma  sit  facing  towards  the  west.  (East 
is  believed  to  be  auspicious,  while  west  is  inaus- 
picious.) 

Moti  Mala  first  won  Brahma’s  horse,  then  his 
jewellery  and  clothes,  and,  finally,  his  ownself. 
Brahma  was  perplexed.  He  pondered  and  sus- 
pected some  trick  on  the  part  of  Moti  Mala.  He 
feigned  to  be  thirsty  and  asked  Moti  Mala  to  fetch 
water  for  him.  When  she  had  gone  to  fetch 
water  Brahma  asked  Swara  to  disclose  to  him  the 
secret  of  Moti  Mala’s  success.  She  told  him  that 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


8l 


he  should  exchange  places  with  Moti  Mala  and 
then  play  the  dice.  When  Moti  Mala  returned 
Brahma  sat  in  Moti  Mala’s  place  and  asked  her 
to  sit  in  his  place.  The  play  was  then  resumed. 
Moti  Mala  began  to  lose  and  Brahma  recovered  all 
that  he  had  lost  and  finally  won  Moti  Mala  and 
her  maid,  Swara.  Brahma  asked  her  to  accom- 
pany him  to  DwMka.  But  Moti  Mala  replied,  with 
a taunt,  that  he  should  first  convince  her  of  his 
power  to  take  her  safely  to  Dwarka,  by  going  to 
Chandangarh  and  bringing  her  sister  Pathar  Mala, 
who  was  married  to  the  Serpent  King  of  that  place. 

Pathar  Mala’s  place  was  strongly  fenced  round 
with  bamboo  hedges,  and  its  revolving  gates  were 
guarded  by  dragons.  Brahma  Kunwar  accepted 
the  challenge  and  flew  back  to  Dwarka  to  consult 
Krishna.  Krishna  encouraged  Brahma,  assured  him 
of  success,  and  requested  him  to  go  to  Chandangarh 
and  encounter  all  the  dangers  like  a true  KLshattriya. 
Thus  encouraged  by  Krishna,  Brahma  again  flew 
to  Chandangarh  on  his  famous  horse  and  dropped 
down  near  the  gate  of  the  Serpent  King’s  fort  at 
Chandangarh.  The  fort  was  strongly  fenced  with 
bamboo,  hedges,  and  with  deep  trenches.  The 
palace  inside  where  Pathar  Mala  lived  was  all  nude 
of  glass.  Brahma  spurred  his  horse,  which 

6 


82 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


jumped  over  the  fence  and  the  trenches  and 
dropped  down  on  the  courtyard  of  the  palace. 
He  managed  to  enter  the  apartment  of  Pathar  Mala 
and  met  her  there.  Pathar  Mala  was  charmed  by 
his  beauty  and  fell  in  love  with  him.  Her  hus- 
band, the  Serpent  King,  was  away  from  home. 
Brahma  slept  on  Pathar  Mala’s  bed  and  fell  into 
deep  sleep.  In  the  meantime  the  Serpent  King 
arrived  and  scented  a human  being  inside  his 
palace.  He  rushed  into  Pathar  Mala’s  room  in 
great  fury,  and,  finding  Brahma  sleeping  in  Pathar 
Mala’s  bed,  stung  him  and  killed  him  instan- 
taneously. 

The  Serpent  King  buried  Brahma’s  corpse  in  a 
cellar  full  of  salt. 

As  soon  as  Brahma  died  Krishna  dreamt  about 
his  death.  He  at  once  sent  a letter  through  his 
black  bees  to  Bidwa,  the  younger  brother  of  Sidwa, 
who  lived  at  Ramoligarh,  and  requested  him  to 
proceed  to  Chandangarh  at  once  and  bring  back 
Brahma  Kunwar.  Bidwa,  like  his  brother  Sidwa, 
was  a great  hero  and  magician.  He -was  dreadful 
like  a lion  or  like  a vehomous  cobra.  He  wore  a 
blanket  vveighing  nine  maunds.  He  had  a belt 
one  hundred  cubits  long.  Cb  reading  Krishna’s 
letter,  Bidwa  put  on  ins  armour  and  equipped 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


83 


himself  with  all  the  magical  appliances  and  at  once 
Tushed  to  Dwarka  like  a storm.  Krishna  told  him 
about  Brahma’s  death  and  requested  him  to  pro- 
ceed to  Chandankot,  kill  the  Serpent  King  there; 
restore  Brahma  to  life  and  bring  Pathar  Mala. 

Bidwa  started  for  Chandankot  and,  encounter- 
ing many  difficulties  in  the  way,  reached  there. 
He  went  straight  to  the  Serpent  King’s  palace  and 
challenged  him  to  fight  with  him.  After  a long 
and  severe  struggle  Bidwa  killed  the  Serpent  King. 
He  then  went  to  Pathar  Mala  and  asked  her  to 
show  him  the  place  where  Brahma’s  body  was 
buried.  He  dug  up  the  corpse  and  by  means  of 
his  supernatural  powers  restored  Brahma  to  Hfc. 

Bidwa  and  Brahma  then  took  Pathar  Mala  to 
Joulagarh,  and  from  there  brought  Moti  Mala  and 
Pathar  Mala  with  the  pair  of  dice  to  Dwarka,  in  a 
triumphant  procession.  Moti  Mala  was  married 
to  Krishna  while  Pathar  Mala  was  married  to  his 
younger  brother  Brahma  Kunwar. 

II  SAUNU  AND  BIRMU 

Once  upon  a time  there  lived  two  brothers  named 
Saunu  and  Birmu  in  Kalavatikot  The  name  of 
Saunu’s  wife  was  Kunjavati.  Birmu,  who  was  older 
than  Saunu,  was  very  cunning.  He  did  not  want 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


84 

to  give  Saunu  any  share  in  the  ancestral  property 
He  complained  to  Saunu  that  Kunjavati  had  caused 
their  cattle  to  damage  the  crops  of  the  other  vil- 
lagers and  made  them  their  enemies.  He  advised 
Saimu  to  kill  his  wife.  Saunu  believed  his  brother 
and  went  in  search  of  his  wife  in  order  to  kill  her. 
He  found  her  tending  cattle.  When  he  raised  his 
dagger  to  kill  her,  she  fell  at  his  feet  and  prayed 
for  mercy.  She  said  that  she  would  go  and  live 
at  her  father’s  house  and  remain  faithful  to  her 
husband.  Saunu  was  moved  by  her  entreaties 
and  spared  her.  She  went  to  live  at  her  father’s 
house.  Saunu  returned  home  and  told  Birmu 
that  he  had  killed  his  wife  and  asked  him  to  find 
him  another  wife.  Birmu  told  his  four  sons, 
whose  names  were  Gaja,  Gaje  Singh,  Uddi  and 
Udai  Singh,  to  drive  Saunu  out  of  Kalavatikot. 
Saunu  wandered  about  and  at  last  settled  down 
in  a deserted  village  called  Banjakot.  He  then 
brought  his  wife  from  her  fadier’s  house,  reclaimed 
some  waste-land  and  became  prosperous.  One 
day  he  went  out  shooting  in  the  Hariali  jungle, 
where  his  brother  Birmu  had  also  gone  to  shoot 
with  his  attendants. 

Saunu  shot  four  deer  and  sent  one  to  his  brother. 
Birmu  became  jealous  of  Saunu’s  success.  He 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


85 

sent  the  deer  to  Guru  Cyan  Chand,  King  of  Cham- 
pawat,  with  a letter  in  which  he  reported  against 
Saunu  for  his  disloyalty  to  the  King,  and  his 
shooting  wild  animals  against  the  King’s  orders. 
Guru  Gyan  Chand  was  very  angry  and  sent  a large 
army  to  punish  Saunu.  When  Saunu  saw  the 
King’s  army  approaching  he  committed  suicide, 
leaving  behind  his  Rani  Kunjavati.  When  Birmu 
heard  about  Saunu’s  death  he  went  to  Banjakot 
and  feigned  much  sympathy  with  Kunjavati. 
He  cunningly  robbed  her  of  all  her  property,  offer- 
ing to  support  her  if  she  went  to  live  with  him.  But 
Kunjavati  knew  his  wickedness  and  refused  to  go. 
She  was  reduced  to  extreme  poverty  and  was 
obliged  to  support  herself  by  begging.  Kunjavati 
was  with  child  when  her  husband  died.  In  due 
course  twin  sons  were  bom  to  her,  Sheo  Ram  and 
Maya  Ram.  She  feared  lest  Birmu  should  kill 
them  also  and  took  them  to  the  dense  forest  called 
Sampani  and  lived  in  a grotto  called  the  Dhoula 
cave.  The  twins  were  bom  heroes  and  performed 
extraordinary  feats  of  strength  even  in  their  child- 
hood. One  day,  when  going  out  to  fetch  herbs 
and  roots,  she  forbade  them  to  leave  the  grotto,  and 
tried  to  frighten  them  by  telling  them  that  a 
certain  demon,  called  ‘Ghogar,’  lived  in  the 


86 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


neighbourhood.  The  boys,  who  were  then  six 
years  old,  felt  a great  curiosity  to  see  ‘Ghogar’  and 
went  out  to  a neighbouring  ridge  in  search  of  it. 
They  came  across  a big  tiger  and,  taking  him  for 
‘Ghogar,’  caught  him  and  brought  him  to  their 
grotto  and  tied  him  there  to  show  to  their  mother. 
When  their  mother  returned,  both  of  them  ran  out 
to  meet  her  and  said  that  they  had  caught  ‘Ghogar,’ 
she  had  mentioned,  and  brought  him  to  show  to 
her.  On  seeing  the  tiger,  Kunjavati  was  frightened 
and  told  her  sons  to  untie  it.  She  prayed  to 
the  tiger,  calling  him  the  king  of  the  forests,  and 
offered  him  her  own  person  if  he  spared  her  sons. 
The  tiger  went  back  into  the  jxmgle.  On  another 
occasion  Kunjavati  had  prohibited  her  sons  from 
crossing  a certain  ridge  from  which  Kalavatikot 
was  visible.  But  the  boys,  out  of  curiosity,  crossed 
the  forbidden  ridge  and  from  there  saw  Kalavati- 
kot. They  went  near  the  village  and  saw  Birma 
and  his  four  sons  ploughing  their  Sera  (irrigated 
land)  called  Stra.  They  approached 

Birmu;  and,  on  being  questioned,  told  him  all 
about  themselves.  Bkmu  feigned  great  affection 
for  them,  praised  their  heroic  demeanour,  and 
said  that  he  would  like  to  see  them  wrestle  with 
his  four  sons.  Sheo  Ram  and  Maya  Ram  agreed 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


87 


and  dashed  two  of  them  on  the  ground  with  such 
force  that  they  died.  On  seeing  this,  Birmu  said ; 
“My  dear  nephews,  I don’t  blame  you  for  killing 
my  two  sons,  it  was  a mere  accident.  Come  to 
my  house  and  have  a dinner.  You  must  be  feel- 
ing very  hungry.”  Birmu  asked  their  permission 
to  go  ahead  to  order  a meal  for  them.  On  reach- 
ing home  he  informed  the  widows  of  his  deceased 
sons  that  Sheo  Ram  and  Maya  Ram  had  killed  their 
husbands,  that  he  had  invited  them  to  a dinner, 
and  he  suggested  that  they  should  mix  poison  in 
the  food.  When  the  two  widows  saw  Sheo  Ram 
and  Maya  Ram  they  were  charmed  by  their  beauty 
and  did  not  poison  the  food.  Birmu  was  extreme- 
ly disappointed.  After  partaking  of  the  meal 
Sheo  Ram  and  Maya  Ram  went  back  to  their  forest 
home  and  related  the  story  to  their  modicr.  The 
mother  wept  and  rdatcd  to  them  her  whole  story. 
Sheo  Ram  and  Maya  Ram  were  much  enraged  and 
brought  their  mother  bade  to  their  home  Banja- 
kot.  Sheo  Ram  and  Maya  Ram  then  went  in 
search  of  Birmu’s  surviving  sons  in  order  to  kill 
them.  Gaja  and  Gaje  Singh,  the  surviving  sons 
of  Birmu,  were  rcturmng  on  elephants  from  an 
e2S^)cdition  to  the  Doon  with  a large  booty,  followed 
by  a large  number  of  attmdants.  Sheo  Ram  and 


88 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


Maya  Ram  met  them  on  the  way,  saluted  them, 
and  told  them  how  their  two  brothers  had  been 
killed  by  them  in  a wrestling  match.  Maya  Ram 
and  Sheo  Ram  further  demanded  their  father’s 
half  share  in  the  ancestral  property;  failing  which 
they  would  kill  them  also.  Gaja  and  Gaje  Singh 
were  much  enraged  and  refused  to  give  Maya  Ram 
and  Sheo  Ram  the  least  share  in  the  property.  On 
this  a fight  ensued  between  cbem,  lasting  for  nine 
days  and  nine  nights.  At  last  Maya  Ram  and 
Sheo  Ram  killed  Gaja  and  Gaje  Singh  with  all 
their  attendants  and  carried  oflE  all  the  booty. 
Maya  Ram  then  went  to  his  maternal  aunt  who 
lived  with  her  husband  at  Sidakot  He  took 
presents,  and  was  accompanied  by  a large  number 
of  attendants.  On  seeing  the  party  approach- 
ing Sidakot,  the  husband  of  Maya  Ram’s  aunt 
suspected  that  some  enemy  had  come  to  invade  his 
territory.  He  took  a large  army  to  oppose  them 
and,  without  making  an  inquiry,  killed  Map  Ram. 

In  the  meantime  Sheo  Ram  invaded  Kialawati- 
kot,  killed  Birmu  and  brou^t  the  four  widows 
of  the  four  sons  to  Banjakot.  On  learning  of  the 
death  of  his  dear  brother  Maya  Ram,  Sheo  Ram 
was  ovarpowered  by  grid  and  killed  himsdf  with 
a dagger.  On  hearing  dwt  the  dotth  of  her  sons 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


89 


Kunjavati  too  fainted  away.  Only  the  four 
widows  of  Birmu’s  sons  survived.  Thus  was  the 
whole  family  ruined  through  the  wickedness  of 
Birmu. 

12.  HANSA  KUNWAR 

Once  upon  a time  a Prince  named  Jhalu  Rai 
ruled  in  Khimsari  Hat.  His  queen’s  name  was 
Dhungawati,  by  whom  he  had  seven  sons.  Their 
names  were  Chhani  Kunwar,  Mani  Kunwar,  Sal 
Kunwar,  Mai  Kunwar,  Had  Kunwar,  Hansa 
Kunwar  and  Bhagdeo  Kunwar.  They  owned 
several  villages.  Jhalu  Rai  was  very  old.  His 
htunp  touched  the  heavens  and  his  belly  was 
as  deep  as  the  nether  lands.  There  was  a great 
famine  in  Khimsari  Hat  and  Jhalu  Rai’s  family 
began  to  starve.  The  daughter  of  Trimal  Chand, 
a Prince  of  Chainpawat  Hat,  name  Sara,  had  been 
Betrothed  to  Hank  Kunwar.  Jhalu  Rai  told  his 
sons  to  go  to  Trimal  Chand  for  help.  When  they 
reached  Trimal  Chand’s  house,  he  loosed  his 
hoimds  to  scare  them  away.  Thus  disappointed 
they  returned  home.  When  they  could  not  get 
food  from  anywhere  diey  sold  their  brother  Hati 
Kunwar  to  Kunjai  Pal,  King  of  Nandnikot,  for 
twenty  ^hars  (cme  \h(ir  is  about  sixteen  maunds) 


90 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


of  jhangora  (millet)  grain,  which  they  brought 
home.  Jhalu  Kunwar  inquired  about  Hati  Kun- 
war.  They  replied  that  he  had  got  employed 
under  Kunjai  Pal.  On  hearing  this  old 
Jhalu  Rai  was  much  pleased.  When  about 
to  die  he  called  his  other  sons  to  his  side, 
blessed  them  and  expired.  When  Trimal  Chand 
saw  the  house  of  Kdiimsari  Hat  reduced  to  such 
extreme  poverty,  he  hit  upon  a plan  to  avoid 
the  marriage  of  his  daughter  to  Hansa  Kunwar. 
He  wrote  a letter  to  Ghoga,  the  warrior  of  Biral 
Nagar,  in  which  he  said  that  he  would  give  his 
daughter  in  marriage  to  him  if  he  killed  die  seven 
sons  of  Jhalu  Rai,  who  wanted  to  carry  her  away  by 
force,  and  also  promised  him  a big  jagir.  At  the 
same  time  he  also  wrote  another  letter  to  Hansa 
Kunwar  to  the  effect  that  Ghoga  was  about  to 
dope  with  his  daughter  Sam,  who  had  been  be- 
trothed to  him  (Hansa),  and  that  he  should  come 
and  fight  against  Ghoga.  On  receiving  the  letters 
Ghoga  and  his  fourteen  comrades  on  the  one  htod, 
and  Hansa  and  his  seven  brothers  <hi  the  odier, 
proceeded  to  Champawa^rh  to  fight  against 
each  other.  Raja  Trimal  Chand  received  Ghoga 
and  Ms  party  witii  gr^t  hononrs,  wMle  Hansa  and 
his  brothers  remaim^  nnnotmed  and  camped  near 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


9^ 


a spring.  When  the  men  of  Ghoga  went  to  fetch 
water  from  the  spring  Hansa  did  not  allow  them 
to  fill  their  water  pots.  They  returned  without 
water  and  reported  the  matter  to  Ghoga.  Ghoga 
and  his  fourteen  comrades  were  furious,  went  to 
the  spring  and  challenged  Hansa  to  fight  with 
them.  They  fought  for  two  days  and  two  nights 
with  varying  success.  Trimal  Chand  wimessed 
the  fight  from  the  balcony  of  his  palace.  Chhani 
Kunwar  engaged  with  Ghoga;  but  was  killed 
after  a most  heroic  fight.  Then  Hansa  Kunwar 
fought  against  Ghoga  and  killed  him  and  his 
other  comrades.  On  hearing  about  the  death 
of  Ghoga  and  his  party,  Kunjai  Pal  of  Kunjnikot 
collected  a large  army  and  attacked  Hansa  and 
his  brothers.  Hansa  fought  against  Kunjai  Pal’s 
army  for  two  days  and  two  nights.  At  last  Kunjai 
Pal  cut  off  the  head  of  Hansa  Kunwar.  Saru  too 
was  wimessing  the  battle  in  breathless  suspense 
and,  when  Hansa  Kunwar  fell  on  the  ground  she 
fainted.  The  earth  shook  like  an  earthquake 
when  Hansa  Kunwar  fell  on  the  ground. 

When  Hati  Kunwar  saw  that  Hansa  and  the 
other  brothers  had  been  killed  he  rushed  into  the 
battlefield  and  killed  Kunjai  Pal  and  his  army. 
He  then  entered  Trimal  Chand’s  palace  and  killed 


92 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


iiim  and  his  sons,  and  razed  his  palace  to  the 
ground.  When  Sana  recovered  her  senses,  she 
prayed  to  Had  Kunwar  to  let  her  become  Sati  with 
her  lord  Hansa  Kunwar.  Had  Kunwar  prepared 
a funeral  pyre.  Saru  mounted  it  and,  placing 
Hansa’s  corpse  on  her  lap,  was  burnt  to  ashes. 
After  performing  the  funeral  rites  of  the  deceased, 
Had  Kunwar  went  to  bathe  at  a spring.  In  the 
meantime  two  sons  of  Kunjai  Pal  by  name  Bighni 
and  Bijai  Pal  arrived.  While  Had  Kunwar  was 
bathing  they  shot  arrows  at  his  naked  body,  which 
pierced  him  through  and  through  and  killed  him. 
Thus  did  the  house  of  Khimsari  Hat  become 
exdnct  through  the  treachery  of  Trimal  Chand. 

13.  MALU  SAHI  AND  RAJULA 
Once  upon  a time  Raja  Dham  Sahi,  son  of 
Pithora  Chand,  reigned  in  Katyuragarh.  His 
Rani’s  name  was  Dharmavati.  The  Raja,  who  was 
very  old,  had  no  issue.  They  prayed  for  twelve 
years  to  their  family  God  for  a son,  who,  at  last, 
granted  their  prayer.  A most  beaudful  son  was  born 
to  them,  who  was  named  Malu  Sahi.  Malu  Sahi 
was  a most  precocious  child  and  was  a born  hero. 
Simul^eously  with  the  birth  of  Malu  Sahi,  a 
daughter  was  also  born  to  Raja  Saunpati  Sonk  of 
Saunkot,  who  was  named  Rajula.  It  scem^  as 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


93 


if  Providence  had  wedded  Main  Sahi  and  Rajula 
even  before  their  birth.  When  Main  Sahi  was 
twelve  years  of  age,  his  father,  Dham  Sahi,  married 
him  to  two  beautiful  princesses  named  Hansia  and 
Kausia.  In  tlie  meantime  Rajula  also  grew  up  and 
was  of  marriageable  age.  Princes  from  far  and 
wide  went  to  seek  the  hand  of  Rajula.  Saun  PaL 
agreed  to  marry  her  to  Guna  Pal,  Prince  of  Jalander. 
An  auspicious  day  was  fixed  for  their  marriage. 
When  the  marriage  day  approached,  Rajula.  saw 
Malu  Sahi  in  a dream  and  was  charmed  with 
his  beauty.  At  the  same  time  Malu  Sahi  also  saw 
Rajula  in  a dream,  telling  him  about  her  impend- 
ing marriage  with  Guna  Pal  and  inviting  him  to 
come  and  take  her  away.  On  awaking  Malu  Sahi 
became  uneasy  and  told  his  mother  about  his 
dream  and  expressed  a strong  desire  to  go  and 
fetch  Rajula. 

All  remonstrances  by  his  mother  failed  and 
Malu  Sahi  started  for  Saunkot.  He  passed 
through  the  country  of  the  Durials  where 
lived  seven  witches.  On  seeing  Malu  Sahi  the 
witches  fell  in  love  with  him  and  tried  all  their 
wits  to  entrap  him.  But  Malu  Sahi  overpowered 
them  by  his  super^magical  powers  and  proceeded 
furtha:.  He  then  reached  the  Tiijugi  peak,  the  ‘ 


94 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


abode  of  Siva.  There  he  prayed  to  the  God  to  help 
him  in  his  enterprise.  Then  he  proceeded  further 
and  at  last  reached  Saunkot.  He  disguised  him- 
self as  a sadhu  and  sat  in  front  of  Raja  Saunpati’s 
palace.  Saunpati  was  much  impressed  with  the 
saintly  look  of  the  sadhu  and  ordered  his  servants 
to  take  him  inside  the  palace  and  to  look  after  his 
comforts.  Malu  Sahi  met  Rajula  in  the  palace 
and  told  her  all  about  his  dream.  The  two  lovers 
Hved  happily  until  the  marriage  day  of  Rajula  with 
Guna  Pal  approached.  Thai  Rajula  began  to 
grow  anxious  and  besought  Malu  Sahi  to  take  her 
away. 

On  the  eve  of  her  wedding  Rajula  ran  away  with 
Malu  Sahi.  As  soon  as  Guna  Pal  came  to  know 
about  it,  he  pursued  them  with  a large  number  of 
followers  and  saw  them  crossing  a rope  bridge  over 
a river. 

While  Guna  Pal’s  men  were  crossing  the  bridge 
Malu  Sahi  cut  the  ends  of  the  rope  and  caused  them 
to  be  drowned  in  the  river.  Malu  Sahi  thai 
priumphandy  carried  Rajula  to  his  home  in 
Katyuragarh  and  married  her  with  great  eclat. 

There  was  great  rejoicing  in  Katpragarh  and 
» Malu  Sahi  lived  happily  with  his  queen. 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


95 


14.  GANGU  RAMOLA 

The  genealogy  of  the  house  of  Ramolas  of  Ramo- 
lihat  is  as  follows : 

(i)  Jainu,  (2)  Birmu,  (3)  Kripa,  (4)  Pirtu, 
(5)  Saktu,  (6)  Bhaktu,  (7)  Asa,  (8)  Musa,  (^) 
Jagdeo,  (lo)  Bhagdeo,  (ii)  Aila,  (12)  Gaila, 
(13)  Joga,  (14)  Ghoga,  (15)  Gangu. 

Gangu  had  two  sons,  Sidwa  and  Bidwa. 
Sidwa’s  son  was  Kharak  Singh. 

Gangu  lived  at  Ramolihat.  He  owned  ten 
jyulas  of  lands  as  jagir.  His  wife’s  name  was 
Mainavati.  Gangu  was  one  hundred  years  of  age. 
He  had  riches  like  stones  and  grain  like  heaps  of 
dust;  but  had  no  issue. 

Gangu  was  a lieretic  and  did  not  believe  in 
gods.  He  was  also  very  proud  and  did  not  salute 
anybody.  He  used  to  take  away  forcibly  the 
sacrificial  goats  of  his  subjects  and  levied  taxes  on 
unmarried  girls  and  dry  buffaloes. 

God  Krishna  wanted  to  chastise  him  for  his 
heresy.  One  day  Krishna  went  to  Ramolihat 
disguised  as  a Brahman.  Gangu  had  gone  to 
Haryali  forest  to  tend  his  ten  score  flocks.  His 
Rani  and  the  otiber  people  of  Ramolihat  were  sur- 
prised at  die  supernatural  appearance  of  the 


96 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


Brahman.  On  being  asked  by  the  Rani  the 
Brahman  replied  that  he  was  Gangu’s  family  priest, 
and  had  come  to  consult  his  horoscope  to  find  out 
whether  Gangu’s  stars  were  propitious  enough  to 
bestow  on  him  a male  issue.  The  Brahman  saw 
Gangu’s  horoscope  and  then  suddenly  disappeared. 
Gangu  returned  home  soon  after  and  was  told 
about  the  Brahman.  But  Gangu  rebuked  his  Rani 
and  did  not  believe  in  astrology.  Suddenly  Gangu 
began  to  feel  a severe  pain  in  his  back.  All  his 
wealth  was  reduced  to  dust  and  the  grain  of  his 
granaries  was  all  eaten  up  by  ants.  His  flocks 
began  to  die  and  his  crops  to  wither.  Gangu 
enquired  from  his  wife  what  the  cause  of  their 
misfortune  might  be.  She  replied  that  it  was  due 
to  the  wrath  of  the  Brahman  who  had  lately  visited 
their  home.  The  whole  family  of  Gangu  began 
to  starve;  but  stiU  Gangu  did  not  give  up  his  heresy 
and  repent.  Then  God  Krishm  called  out  to 
Gangu  from  the  high  peak  of  Kalma  mountain. 
Gangu  enquired  who  he  was.  The  God  replied, 
“ I am  thy  family  God  and  will  restore  all  thy  lost 
wealth,  if  fliou  wilt  build  a temple  for  me  at 
Baruni  Serna.”  Gangu  said,  “I  will  believe  in  you 
if  you  can  recount  my  pedigree,’*  Ihe  God  gave 
Gangu’s  pedigree  all  right  Still  Gangu  could 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


97 


not  be  converted  from  his  scepticism  and  said,  “ Ah, 
perhaps  you  might  have  learnt  it  from  others.  I 
will  believe  that  it  was  the  voice  of  my  family  God 
if  you  could  kill  a demon  who  dwells  in  this  neigh- 
bourhood.” 

The  God  blew  his  trumpet  and  the  demon 
suddenly  appeared  before  him.  The  demon’s 
name  was  Heramba.  On  seeing  tlie  Brahman, 
Heramba  said,  exultingly,  that  she  had  been  with- 
out food  for  a long  time,  and  had  found  a victim  at 
last.  Krishna  replied,  “ Let  us  first  sit  on  the 
swing  by  turns  and  try  each  other’s  strength  and 
then  you  may  devour  me.”  Krishna  first  sat  on 
the  swing  and  asked  Heramba  to  lift  it.  She  tried 
her  utmost  but  could  not  lift  the  swing.  Then 
Krishna  got  down  and  asked  the  demon  to  ascend 
the  swing.  When  Heramba  had  ascended  the 
swing  Krishna  gave  it  such  a push  that  the  swing 
rose  up  to  the  clouds  and  Heramba  fell  down  from 
it  and  was  killed.  Her  head  fell  into  the  Masi 
forest.  The  whole  of  Ramoligarh  shook  when  the 
demon  fell  to  the  groimd.  Gangu  sent  two  mutes 
to  sa  what  had  happened.  When  the  mutes 
approached  Krishna  they  recovered  their  speech. 
They  returned  home  and  told  Gangu  that  the 
demon  had  been  killed  by  the  God  and  that  he  had 

7 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


98 

restored  their  speech.  Still  Gangu  would  not 
believe  in  the  God.  He  said  that  the  demon  must 
have  been  killed  by  accident,  as  none  could  kill  her. 
Then  God  Krishna  went  to  Gangu’s  house,  dis- 
guised as  a sadhu,  and  begged  for  milk  and  curds. 
Gangu  pushed  him  out  and  ordered  his  wife  to  give 
the  sadhu  only  coarse  grains  as  aims.  But  Maina- 
vati  gave  him  fine  rice  instead.  The  sadhu  blessed 
Mainavati  and  cursed  Gangu,  saying  that  he  would 
become  a leper.  Gangu  immediately  became  a 
leper  and  was  in  a great  agony.  Still  Gangu  would 
not  give  up  his  heresy.  Then  the  God  became  a 
serpent  and  a scorpion,  in  turn,  and  sat  on 
Gangu’s  bed.  But  Gangu  threw  them  away  and 
did  not  heed  the  warning.  At  last  the  God  caused 
all  the  water  springs  in  Ramolihat  to  dry  up.  The 
people  began  to  die  of  thirst.  Gangu  ordered  water 
to  be  brought  from  the  Ganges.  But  it  was  changed 
into  blood  as  soon  as  Gangu  lifted  it  to  his  lips. 
There  was  itoiversal  distress  in  Ramolihat  Maina- 
vati advised  Gangu  to  <x>nsult  the  Brahmans  as  to 
the  eauac  of  dieir  calamity.  At  last  Gangu  was 
persuaded  to  go  to  consult  the  Brahmans.  While 
going,  Gangu’s  path  was  crossed  by  a servant.  The 
Brahmans  told  Gangu  that  his  misfortune  was  due 
to  the  wradi  of  his  fanaily  God  Krijhna  and  that  he 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


99 


should  go  on  a pilgrimage  to  Dwarka  and  appease 
the  God’s  wrath.  At  last  Gangu  repented  and 
went  on  a pilgrimage  to  Dwarka  and  prayed  to 
God  Krishna  and  begged  to  be  forgiven.  Krishna 
was  pleased  with  Gangu  and  ordered  him  to  build 
a temple  at  Sem  and  dedicate  it  to  him.  Gangu 
built  a large  temple  at  Sem,  but  it  disappeared  as 
soon  as  it  was  completed.  Then  Gangu  built  more 
temples  at  Asin  Sem,  Barasin  Sem,  Gupt  Sem, 
Luka  Sem,  Bhuka  Sem,  Mukhem  and  Prakat  Sem. 
On  building  these  temples  prosperity  returned  to 
Ramolihat  and  Gangu  was  restored  to  his  former 
health  and  good  fortune.  Two  sons  were  born  to 
Gangu,  whose  names  were  Sidwa  and  Bidwa,  who 
became  great  heroes. 

15.  BIGHNfl  AND  BlfAI  PAL 

Once  there  lived  a Prince  named  Kunj  Pal  at 
Kalavatikot.  He  had  many  villages.  His  large 
granaries  were  over-full  of  grain.  He  possessed 
large  herds  and  flocks  and  was  very  rich.  He  had 
two  sons  named  Kirti  Pal  and  Chand  Pal. 

He  liked  his  younger  son  Chand  Pal  better  than 
Kirti  Pal  on  account  of  his  noble  qualities.  When 
Kunj  Pal  grew  old  and  was  about  to  die,  he  called 
his  two  sons  to  his  side  and  divided  his  property 


100 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


between  them.  He  gave  a much  larger  shire  of  his 
property  to  Chand  Pal,  which  offended  Kirti  Pal 
extremely,  so  much  so  that  when  Kunj  Pal  died 
Kirti  Pal  did  not  take  part  in  Kunj  Pal’s  funeral 
rites. 

Chand  Pal  was  a great  warrior.  His  chest  was 
three  cubits  broad  and  roimd  like  a ritha  nut.  His 
forehead  was  broad,  and  his  moustaches  were  long 
and  thick.  His  eyes  were  beautiful  like  those  of  a 
gazelle. 

After  the  death  of  Kunj  Pal,  Kirti  Pal  became 
still  more  envious  of  his  brother  and  hatched  a plot 
to  kill  him  and  take  possession  of  his  property.  He 
wrote  to  the  Raja  of  the  Doon  that  Chand  Pal 
had  made  a conspiracy  to  kill  him  (the  Raja  of 
Doon)  and  that  he  should  come  and  punish  Chand 
Pal.  On  hearing  this  the  Raja  of  the  Doon 
collected  a large  army  of  Harwals  and  invaded 
Chand  Pal’s  territory. 

On  seeing  the  enemy  approaching  Chand  Pal 
thought  that,  perhaps,  they  had  come  to  attack  his 
brother  Kirti  Pal.  He  told  his  Rani,  Anna  Mala, 
about  it  and  expressed  a wish  to  go  to  help  his 
brother  against  the  enemy.  Anna  Mala  replied, 
“Your  brother  Kirti  Pal  owes  you  a grudge,  be- 
cause of  the  unequal  distribution  of  the  property 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


lOI 


by  your  father.  I fear  he  has  brought  the  enemy 
to  take  his  revenge  upon  you.”  But  Chand  Pal 
was  too  generous  to  listen  to  his  wife's  advice. 
He  went  to  Kirti  Pal,  and,  informing  him  of  the 
danger,  offered  his  services  to  him.  The  cimning 
Kirti  Pal  feigned  great  affection  for  Chand  Pal 
and  thanked  him  for  the  offer,  and  said,  “ Dear 
brother,  I am  too*  old  to  fight.  I am  afraid  thou 
wilt  have  to  fight  the  enemy  single-handed.  But 
I am  confident  thou  wilt  gain  victory  over  the 
enemy  and  vindicate  the  honour  of  our  house.” 
Chand  Pal  readily  consented.  He  called  Cham- 
phu,  his  family  bard,  and  asked  him  to  accompany 
him  to  the  batdefield.  He  donned  his  helmet 
and  armour,  rode  his  famous  war-horse  and 
galloped  towards  the  enemy’s  camp,  while  Cham- 
phu  danced  ahead,  playing  on  his  \ur]^i  (a  small 
drum)  and  singing  stirring  songs  in  praise  of  his 
master’s  prowess.  The  Harwals  were  cooking 
their  food  in  their  camp  when  Chand  Pal  arrived. 
Chand  Pal  rode  into  their  kitchen  and  polluted 
dieir  food.  He  then  challenged  the  Harwals  to 
fight  against  him.  A big  batde  ensued.  Chand 
Pal  soon  killed  the  whole  army  of  Harwals.  The 
ground  vras  covered  with  the  corpses  of  the  enemy, 
and  streams  of  blood  began  to  flow.  One  of  the 


102  HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 

Harwals,  however,  managed  to  escape  and 
brought  Moguls  for  help.  A large  army  of  the 
Moguls  arrived  and  fought  against  Chand  Pal. 
Chand  Pal  killed  them  too,  after  a severe  battle. 

Chand  Pal  then  returned  home  in  a triumphant 
procession,  and,  approaching  his  brother  Kirti  Pal, 
related  how,  through  God’s  grace,  the  whole  army 
of  the  enemy  had  been  killed,  and  congratulated 
Kirti  Pal  on  the  victory.  The  treacherous  Kirti 
Pal  feigned  to  be  pleased  and  ordered  a sumptuous 
feast  for  Chand  Pal.  He  then  asked  Chand  Pal 
to  go  to  bathe  at  the  spring  close  by.  When 
Chand  Pal  put  oflE  his  clothes  and  was  bathing, 
Kirti  Pal  stealthily  went  and  stabbed  Chand  Pal 
from  behind,  inflicting  mortal  wounds.  While 
dying,  Chand  Pal  looked  back  towards  his  assassin 
and  said,  “Oh  thou  traitor!  Is  this  the  reward 
for  my  services?  O villain  I God  will  punish  ihee 
for  thy  foul  deed.”  So  saying,  Chand  Pal  gave 
up  the  ghost.  Kirti  Pal  dicn  went  to  Chand 
Pal’s  house  and  plundered  all  his  property,  leaving 
his  widow  Aima  Mala  utterly  destitute.  Aima 
Mala  wept  bitterly,  but  the  rascal  was  unmoved. 
Anna  Malia  was  with  child  when  her  husband 
died  and  was  soon  delivered  of  tmn  sons  Bighni 
(ominous)  and  Bijai  Pal  (victorious).  She  wept 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES  IO3 

when  the  children  were  bom,  as  she  feared  that 
Kirti  Pal  would  kill  them  also  as  soon  as  he  heard 
about  their  birth. 

She  took  them  into  a jungle  and  brought  them 
up  there,  living  upon  wild  roots  and  fruits. 
Bighni  Pal  and  Bijai  Pal  were  giants  and  began 
to  perform  great  feats  of  strength  from  their  very 
childhood.  They  brought  live  tigers  and  rode  on 
them.  When  they  were  twelve  years  of  age,  they 
enquired  from  their  mother  about  their  father. 
The  mother  wept  and  gave  evasive  replies;  and 
scolded  them  for  their  inquisitiveness.  But  the 
boys  would  not  rest  content  and  pressed  their 
mother  to  tell  them  about  their  father.  At  last 
she  related  the  whole  story  of  her  adversity  and 
how  their  uncle  Kirti  Pal  had  killed  their  father. 
On  hearing  this  Bighni  Pal  and  Bijai  Pal  were 
much  enraged  and  took  a vow  not  to  rest  tmtil 
they  had  wreaked  vengeance  on  Kirti  They 
went  straight  to  Kirti  Pal’s  house  and  enquired 
horn  him  about  their  father.  The  treacherous 
Kirti  Pal  pretended  to  be  much  grieved  about  the 
death  of  his  brother,  embraced  his  nephews,  and 
shedding  crocodile  tears,  told  them  that  thdr 
father,  his  dear  brother,  had  been  killed  by  the 
enemy.  He  pretended  to  receive  than  Hndly 


104  HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 

and  offered  them  milk  to  drink.  At  the  same 
time  he  secretly  sent  word  to  his  wife  to  mix 
poison  in  the  milk  and  bring  two  cups  for  Bighni 
and  Bijai  Pal.  The  two  brothers  drank  the 
poisoned  milk  and  became  unconscious.  Kirti 
Pal  was  overjoyed,  thinking  them  to  be  dead,  and 
he  ordered  their  bodies  to  be  thrown  into  a river. 
The  bodies  floated  for  a long  distance  and  were 
eventually  thrown  by  the  current  on  the  bank. 
On  reaching  the  bank  they  revived  and  recovered 
consciousness.  Bighni  and  Bijai  Pal  then  went 
home  and  related  the  story  to  their  mother,  Anna 
Mala.  Anna  Mala  was  overjoyed  and  thanked 
God  for  having  saved  her  sons  from  the  enemy. 
She  then  gave  them  strict  orders  not  to  stir  out  of 
their  den.  But  Bighni  and  Bijai  Pal’s  blood 
boiled  with  rage  against  Kirti  Pal.  They  went 
to  Kirti  Pal’s  house,  and,  dragging  him  and  his 
treacherous  wife  out,  dashed  them  on  the  ground 
and  killed  them.  Kirti  Pal  had  five  sons,  Runki, 
Khunki,  Bhanu,  Kamla  and  Mod,  who  were  great 
warriors.  They  fought  most  ferociously  against 
Bighni  and  Bijai  Pal  for  one  day  and  one  night. 
At  last  Bighni  and  Bijai  Pal  killed  them  all. 
Then  the  whole  army  of  Kidi  Pal  went  to  fight 
against  Bj^hni  and  Bijai  Pal;  bnt  Aey,  too,  were 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES  IO5 

killed  by  them.  Then  the  victors  entered  the 
palace  of  Kirti  Pal  and  found  the  five  v?idows  of 
Kirti  Pal’s  sons  there.  The  widows  craved  for 
mercy.  But  they  killed  them  also;  saying  that 
they  would  not  leave  a single  seed  of  the  tyrant 
Kirti  Pal  alive.  They  destroyed  and  plundered 
the  palace  of  Kirti  Pal  and  brought  the  booty  to 
their  home.  Then  they  brought  their  mother 
from  the  jungle  and  reigned  over  their  kingdom 
in  peace  and  happiness. 

16.  KUNJI  PAL  AND  KIRTI  PAL 

Once  upon  a time  Guru  Gyan  Chand  was  the 
King  of  Champawatgarh.  He  had  two  brothers, 
Thor  Chand  and  Trimal  Chand,  who  owned  many 
villages  in  jagir.  They  exacted  various  kinds  of 
illegal  taxes  from  their  Khaikars  of  Chauras  Pattis, 
who  were  as  numerous  as  mustard  seeds.  The 
Khaikars  were  sore  distressed  at  the  illegal 
exactions  of  Thor  Chand  and  Trimal  Chand  and 
in  vain  appealed  to  Guru  Gyan  Chand  for  redress. 
At  that  time  there  lived  two  brothers,  Kirti  Pal  and 
Kunji  Pal,  at  Thati  Silakot.  Kunji  Pal  was  a great 
hero  and  called  all  the  Khaikars  together  and 
resolved  to  stop  payment  of  all  such  illegal  taxes. 
When  Guru  Gyan  Chand  heard  of  this  he  was 


I06  HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 

furious  and  determined  to  punish  the  Eihaikars 
and  their  ring-leaders  severely.  He  called  his 
brothers  and  courtiers  for  advice;  who  all  decided 
that  a large  army  should  be  sent  to  punish  the 
recalcitrant  Khaikars. 

Guru  Cyan  Chand  then  ordered  his  pahris 
(watchmen)  to  proclaim  by  beat  of  drum  among 
his  subjects  that  they  should  all  collect  together  and 
be  ready  to  invade  the  territory  of  the  Khaikars, 
Twelve  thousand  troops  soon  paraded  in  the 
chmdni  chau\  (courtyard)  of  Guru  Gyan  Chand’s 
palace  and  all  other  preparations  for  the  invasion 
were  in  full  swing.  Then  Raja  Gyan  Chand  sent 
a letter  to  Kunji  Pal  offering  him  a large  plot  of 
irrigated  land,  yielding  twelve  \hars  (about  200 
maunds)  rice  per  crop  as  a reward,  if  he  persuaded 
the  Khaikars  to  pay  up  the  arrears  of  the  taxes; 
and  if  he  failed  to  do  so.  Guru  Gyan  Chand 
threatened  to  invade  his  Thati  Silakot  and  raze  it 
to  the  ground. 

Kunji  Pal  was  a great  warrior.  His  breast  was 
six  cubits  broad,  his  feet  were  one  and  a quarter 
cubits  in  length,  his  head  alone  weighed  five 
maunds.  On  reading  the  Raja’s  letter  his  blood 
boiled  widi  rage.  The  hair  on  his  arms  stood  on 
end  and  the  strings  of  his  coat  burst  asunder. 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


107 

He  showed  the  letter  to  his  elder  brother,  Kirli 
Pal.  But  the  latter  was  indifferent  and  said  that 
he  was  too  old  to  fight.  Kunji  Pal  wrote  on  the 
back  of  the  letter  challenging  Cyan  Chand  to 
come  and  fight  against  him.  Cyan  Chand  then 
invaded  Thati  Silakot  with  a large  army.  The 
enemy  surrounded  the  fort  of  Thati  Silakot  at 
night  and  set  fire  to  it.  When  the  whole  fort  was 
on  fire  Kunji  Pal  awoke  and  went  to  Kirti  Pal  for 
help.  But  the  treacherous  Kirti  Pal  did  not  stir 
out  of  his  bed  and  began  to  curse  Kunji  Pal  for 
having  courted  the  trouble.  Kunji  Pal  then  went 
out  and  saw  the  fort  surrounded  by  the  enemy  and 
on  fire.  Kunji  Pal  reproached  Cyan  Chand  for 
having  attacked  him  stealthily  at  night  Kunji 
Pal  extinguished  the  fire  and  then,  putting  on  his 
armour,  rushed  into  the  midst  of  the  army  of 
Cyan  Chand  and  mowed  down  the  whole  army 
with  his  shining  dagger.  Raja  Cyan  Chand  and 
his  two  brothers  escaped  and  fled  to  Champawat- 
garh.  The  battlefield  was  covered  with  corpses 
and  streams  of  blood  flowed. 

Kunji  Pal  then  brought  all  the  booty  home. 
He  offered  half  the  share  of  the  booty  to  his 
brother  Kirti  Pal.  But  the  greedy  Kirti  Pal 
refused  and  demanded  a double  share.  The 


I08  HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 

generous  Kunji  Pal  granted  his  this  unreasonable 
request. 

Though  Kunji  Pal  had  defeated  Gyan  Chand, 
still  he  was  in  constant  fear  of  Gyan  Chand  and 
became  anxious  of  his  wife  Ganga  Mala,  who  was 
with  child.  He  went  to  his  wife  with  a heavy 
heart  and  warned  her  of  the  possible  danger.  In 
order  to  save  his  wife  and  his  unborn  child  he 
scooped  a deep  hollow  on  the  side  of  a mountain 
and  stocked  it  with  provisions  sufficient  for  twelve 
years.  He  consoled  his  wife,  took  her  there  and 
placed  her  in  the  grotto.  Bidding  farewell  to 
his  wife  he  said,  “ I have  roused  the  wrath  of  Raja 
Gyan  Chand,  who  is  sure  to  leave  no  stone  un- 
turned to  kill  me.  I shall  fight  him  to  the  bitter 
end  and  will  not  peld.  I have  made  sufficient 
provision  for  you  for  twelve  years.  I hope  a son 
will  be  born  to  you  who  will  take  you  out  of  this 
grotto  and  wreak  revenge  on  the  enemy.”  Ganga 
Malla  wept  bitterly  and  entreated  Kunji  Pal  to  go 
and  apologize  to  the  King.  But  the  hero  would 
not  stoop  to  apologize  and  was  prepared  for  the 
worst  He  embraced  his  wife  and,  putting  a huge 
stone  on  the  entrance  of  the  grotto,  returned  to 
Thati  Silakot. 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


109 

After  a while  Gyan  Chand  again  sent  a letter  to 
Kunji  Pal  in  which  he  said  that  the  tenants  of 
Kumoli  village  in  the  Doon  had  revolted  against 
him  and  stopped  paying  taxes.  He  requested 
Kunji  Pal  to  go  and  quell  the  disturbance  and 
offered  to  give  his  daughter  Leela  Vati  in  marriage 
to  his  son  and  to  grant  a jagir  of  several  villages  as 
a reward. 

Kimji  Pal  showed  the  letter  to  his  brother  Kirti 
Pal  and  asked  him  to  accompany  him.  Kirti  Pal 
again  declined.  At  last  Kunji  Pal  persuaded  him 
to  go.  They  rode  on  two  fleet  horses  and  reached 
a ridge  called  Tama  Dhonda,  from  where  the 
Doon  was  visible.  From  there  they  saw  the 
beautiful  Doon,  with  its  teeming  population  and 
prosperous  villages.  They  also  saw  the  village  of 
Kumoli  where  the  enemy  lived.  On  seeing  the 
enemy’s  village  Kirti  Pal  became  extremely 
nervous  and  refused  to  proceed  further.  He 
thrust  his  head  into  a hollow,  with  his  back  turned 
outwards,  like  a coward. 

Kunji  Pal  galloped  towards  the  enemy’s 
country.  His  horse  flew  up  in  the  clouds  and 
then  dropped  down  on  the  borders  of  die  Doon, 
where  the  enemy  had  placed,  by  way  of  challenge, 
a heavy  drum  and  a club  weighing  a hundred 


110 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


maunds,  Kunji  Pal  struck  the  drum  with  such 
force  that  its  sound  reached  Kumoli,  where  the 
enemy  resided.  He  also  lifted  up  the  huge  club 
and,  hurling  it  up  in  the  air,  held  it  on  his  shoulders 
and  then  threw  it  towards  Kumoli.  The  club  fell 
over  the  gate  of  the  enemy’s  fort  with  a terrible 
sound  and  smashed  it.  The  village  folk  were 
panic-stricken  and  ran  away  to  the  jungle. 
Kunji  Pal  marched  on  and  reached  the  village  of 
Silori.  On  the  way  he  met  a group  of  village 
girls  who  were  going  to  fetch  water  from  a spring. 
The  girls  rebuked  Kunji  Pal  for  not  salaaming 
them.  Kunji  Pal  enquired  who  they  were. 
They  replied  that  they  hailed  from  the  village 
which  had  refused  payment  of  rents  to  Raja  Gyan 
Chand.  On  hearing  this  Kunji  Pal  broke  their 
pitchers  with  his  club  and  wait  on  his  way. 
When  he  had  gone  a litde  distance,  the  enemy 
(Asurs)-  attacked  him  with  spears  and  arrows. 
But  as  Kunji  Pal  was  wearing  a steel  coat  and 
helmet,  the  arrows  had  no  effect  on  him.  Kunji 
Pal  Hlled  twelve  thousand  men  of  the  enemy  with 
his  dagger.  The  enemy  then  surrendered  and 
paid  up  all  the  arrears  of  the  rents  to  Gyan  Chand. 
Kunji  Pal  brought  a large  booty  from  the  Doon, 
and  reached  the  place  where  Kirti  Pal  lay  hid  in 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES  IH 

the  hollow.  Kunji  Pal  told  his  brother  about  his 
victory  and  asked  him  to  accompany  home. 
When  Kirti  Pal  saw  Kunji  Pal  bringing  a large 
amount  of  booty,  Kirti  Pal  began  to  beat  his 
breast  and  cry,  saying  that,  while  Kunji  Pal  was 
taking  so  much  booty  home,  he  (Kirti  Pal)  would 
return  empty-handed.  Kunji  Pal  generously 
ofFered  to  give  him  half.  But  Kirti  Pal  would  not 
take  less  dian  double  the  share.  Kunji  Pal 
enquired  why  he  had  not  returned  home.  Kirti 
Pal  replied,  “ How  could  I leave  my  dear  brother 
alone?  When  I saw  you  fighting  against  the  enemy 
I wished  I could  lift  up  this  mountain  and  hurl 
it  on  the  enemy.  O brother,  on  going  home  you 
should  tell  the  people  that  you  could  not  have 
defeated  the  enemy  if  I had  not  helped  you.” 
Kunji  Pal  readily  agreed.  On  reaching  home, 
Kunji  Pal  told  the  people  as  desired  by  Kirti  Pal, 
and  sent  a double  share  of  the  booty  to  Kirti  Pal’s 
house.  Kirti  Pal’s  wife  was  overjoyed  to  hear 
of  her  husband’s  achievements  and  sang  songs  in 
praise  of  his  heroism. 

Kimji  Pal  then  wrote  to  Cyan  Chand  informing 
him  about  his  victory  over  the  enemy  and  asking 
for  the  promised  reward.  Cyan  Chand  was  at 
his  wits’  end  and  did  not  know  how  to  reply. 


112  HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 

Kunji  Pal  then  wrote  to  him  again  that  he  was 
coming  to  Champawatgarh  and  that  he  (Gyan 
Chand)  should  make  preparations  for  his  reception. 

On  hearing  this  Gyan  Chand  shook  with  rage. 
He  called  his  brothers  and  courtiers  and  said  that 
the  marriage  of  their  daughter  to  Kunji  Pal’s  son, 
their  Khaikar,  would  be  a great  disgrace  to  their 
family.  Gyan  Chand’s  brothers  and  courtiers  advised 
him  not  to  be  too  anxious  as  they  would  set  matters 
right  when  Kimji  Pal  arrived.  Soon  afterwards 
Kunji  Pal  and  Kirti  Pal  arrived  at  Champawat- 
garh and  went  straight  into  Gyan  Chand’s  palace. 
They  were  received  by  Gyan  Chand  and  his 
brother  with  a show  of  honour  and  were  taken  to 
the  palace.  A smoke  was  prepared  for  the  guests. 
But  they  treacherously  mixed  poison  with  the 
tobacco.  Kunji  Pal  suspected  foul  play  and 
warned  his  brother  not  to  smoke.  Kunji  Pal  had 
greater  regard  for  his  brother’s  life  than  even  for 
his  own.  They  both  declined  to  smoke.  When 
Kirti  Pal  knew  that  his  life  was  in  danger  he  began 
to  tremble  with  fear.  But  Kunji  Pal  cheered  him 
up  and  said  that  such  cowardice  did  not  become 
a hero. 

Then  a sumptuous  feast  was  prepared  for  the 
guests.  But  Kunji  Pal  agjain  begged  to  be  excused, 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


”3 


saying  that  they  were  accustomed  to  cook  their 
own  food.  Then  Raja  Gyan  Chand  ordered  rations 
to  be  supplied  to  them  and  also  sent  some  servants 
for  fetching  water  and  doing  other  menial  work. 
But  Kunji  Pal  again  suspected  danger,  sent 
away  the  servants,  asked  his  brother  to  cook 
the  food  and  went  himself  to  fetch  water.  But 
Kirti  Pal  said  that  it  would  be  derogatory  to  his 
honour  to  do  the  cooking.  On  this  Kunji  Pal 
became  angry  with  Kirti  Pal  and  cooked  for  him- 
self alone,  leaving  Kirti  Pal  to  starve.  Kirti  Pal  got 
much  offended  with  Kunji  Pal.  When  Gyan 
Chand  heard  about  the  quarrel  between  them,  he 
called  Kirti  Pal  to  his  house  at  night  and  promised 
to  give  his  daughter  Lecla  Vati  in  marriage  to  his 
son  if  he  killed  Kunji  Pal  while  he  was  asleep. 

At  first  Kirti  Pal  hesitated;  but  at  last  he  agreed. 
At  night  when  Kunji  Pal  was  fast  asleep,  the 
villainous  Kirti  Pal  tied  his  hands  and  feet  with 
chains  and  stabbed  him  with  the  dagger  given  to 
him  by  Gyan  Chand.  Kunji  Pal  received  a mortal 
wound.  He  looked  towards  Kirti  Pal  and  said, 
“ O thou  traitor,  whom  I loved  more  than  myself 
and  to  whom  I have  shown  so  many  favours. 
Thou  hast  not  scrupled  to  kill  thy  own  brother 
with  the  enemy’s  dagger;  yet  I forgive  thee. 

8 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


1 14 

Remember  me  to  my  wife  and  be  kind  to  her  and 
her  child  when  it  is  born.”  But  the  villain  was 
unmoved  and  cut  off  Kunji  Pal’s  head  and  took  it 
to  Cyan  Chand. 

Next  morning  Kirti  Pal  went  to  Cyan  Chand 
and  asked  him  to  redeem  his  promise  and  to  marry 
his  daughter  to  his  son.  But  Cyan  Chand  refused 
and  ordered  him  to  leave  the  palace.  Kirti  Pal 
continued  to  remonstrate.  Cyan  Chand  loosened 
his  ferocious  dogs  upon  him.  Kirti  Pal  fled  and 
jumped  into  a river  to  save  his  life,  and,  at  last, 
reached  home.  He  told  the  people  that  Cyan 
Chand  had  killed  Kunji  Pal  and  that  he  (Kirti  Pal) 
had  narrowly  escaped.  But  the  truth  was  soon 
found  out. 

In  the  meantime  Kunji  Pal’s  wife,  Ganga  Mala, 
was  delivered  of  a male  child  in  the  mountain  cave. 
The  baby  was  a giant.  His  back  was  one  cubit 
broad.  Ganga  Mala  wept  and  threw  away  the 
baby  in  a comer  of  the  grotto,  saying  that  it  was 
better  that  he  should  die  at  the  very  birth  than  be 
killed  by  the  enemy  like  his  father.  The  baby 
crawled  bac^  to  his  mother’s  side  and  began  to  cry. 

Ganga  Mala  was  charmed  by  the  beauty  of  the 
baby  and  began  to  suckle  him  and  named  him 
Khetra  Pal.  On  the  third  day  after  his  birth 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


115 


while  Gangadei  was  warming  him  at  fire,  he  kicked 
at  the  iron  tripod  lying  near  and  broke  it.  When 
Khetra  Pal  was  twelve  years  of  age  he  heard  some 
sound  outside  the  grotto  and  enquired  from  his 
mother  what  it  was.  Ganga  Mala  told  him  not  to 
bother  about  the  outside  world.  But  Khetra  Pal's 
curiosity  could  not  be  overcome  and  he  continued 
questioning  his  mother.  At  last  Ganga  Mala  told 
him  that  the  sound  was  of  the  hoofs  of  the  horses 
of  the  sons  and  grandsons  of  Kirti  Pal,  who  was 
his  uncle.  She  wept  and  related  the  whole  story 
of  their  exile,  his  fa.ther  Kunji  Pal’s  enmity  with 
Gyan  Chand,  and  how  Kirti  Pal  had  killed  Kunii 
Pal.  On  hearing  this  Khetra  Pal’s  blood  boiled 
with  rage.  He  kicked  against  the  rock  placed 
against  (he  entrance  of  the  grotto  and  threw  it 
open. 

He  dien  brought  nis  mother  out  and  asked  her 
to  show  him  their  home  and  that  of  Kirti  Pal. 
Ganga  Mala  took  him  to  a high  mountain  peak  and 
from  there,  showed  him  their  home,  Silakot, 
and  the  house  of  Kirti  Pal.  Khetra  Pal  then  went 
straight  to  his  house  and  found  it  in  ruins.  Then 
he  went  to  Kirti  Pal’s  house  and  found  him  very 
prosperous.  He  then  returned  to  his  mountain 


Il6  HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 

home,  made  another  grotto  in  the  forest,  and 
removed  his  mother  into  it, 

Khetra  Pal  used  to  kill  wild  animals  and  live 
upon  their  flesh.  He  also  made  garments  of 
leaves  for  himself  and  his  mother. 

One  day,  while  he  was  going  out  in  search  of 
game,  he  came  across  the  flocks  belonging  to  Guru 
Cyan  Chand,  which  his  shepherd  Nandu  was 
tending.  Khetra  Pal  killed  all  of  them  and 
carried  them  in  a huge  load  to  his  cave.  Nandu 
pursued  him.  Khetra  Pal  hid  himself  in  the 
bushes  and  remained  concealed  for  nine  days  and 
nights.  There  Guru  Gorakh  Nath  and  the  other 
nine  Sidhas  appeared  before  him,  and,  taking  pity 
on  him,  gave  him  a magical  coat,  called  jhar  jhar 
\hanta,  and  a flute,  saying  that,  by  putting  on  the 
robe,  the  wearer  would  become  invisible,  and,  by 
playing  on  the  flute,  his  enemy  would  dance  to 
death.  They  blessed  Khetra  Pal  and  disappeared. 
Khetra  Pal  was  overjoyed  and  taking  the  robe  and 
the  flute  proceeded  straight  to  Champawatgarh. 
On  the  way  he  met  one  hundred  coolies  who  were 
carrying  slates  for  Guru  Gyan  Chand.  The 
coolies  began  to  crack  jokes  with  Khetra  Pal,  who 
was  wearing  a coat  of  leaves  and  looked  like  a wild 
animal.  Khetra  Pal  played  on  the  flute,  when 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


II7 

all  tlie  coolies  began  to  dance  and  died.  Then 
Khetra  Pal  arrived  at  Champawatgarh.  In  the 
meantime  Cyan  Chand  had  already  heard  of  the 
death  of  his  men.  He  had  posted  one  thousand 
soldiers  to  guard  his  palace.  On  reaching  the  gate. 
Khetra  Pal  put  on  the  magical  coat  which  made 
him  invisible.  He  thus  passed  through  the  palace 
gate  unnoticed  He  then  entered  the  apartments 
of  Cyan  Chand’s  daughter,  Leek  Vati,  and  related 
to  her  his  whole  story.  They  lived  together  for 
several  days.  When  Cyan  Chand  came  to  know 
about  Khetra  Pal’s  presence,  he  sent  a large  army 
to  arrest  him.  But  as  soon  as  the  troops  approach- 
ed, Khetra  Pal  played  on  his  magical  flute,  when 
all  the  soldiers  began  to  dance,  and  died  one  by  one 
Cyan  Chand  was  extremely  frightened  at  this, 
called  Khetra  Pal  to  him,  prayed  for  mercy, 
and  offered  to  give  his  daughter  in  marriage  to 
him.  The  marriage  was  celebrated  in  a right 
royal  manner.  Khetra  Pal  then  asked  Cyan 
Chand  to  give  back  his  (Khetra  Pal’s)  father’s 
head  to  him.  As  soon  as  Kunji  Pal’s  head  was 
dug  up,  it  flew  up  in  the  sky  and  immediately 
bullets  showered  down  on  Cyan  Cliand’s  palace, 
destroying  it  completely,  and  killing  all  the 
inmates. 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


Il8 

Then  Khetra  Pal,  with  his  queen,  brought  Kunji 
Pal’s  head  on  a palanquin  in  a triumphant  proces- 
sion to  his  home.  He  then  brought  his  mother 
from  the  forest..  Khetra  Pal  then  went  to  Kirti 
Pal's  house,  killed  him  and  all  his  family,  and 
razed  his  palace  to  the  ground. 

Having  revenged  himself  on  his  enemies,  Khetra 
Pal  celebrated  his  victory  with  great  pomp  and 
lived  happily  with  his  wife  and  mother. 

17.  JAG  DEO  PANWAR  (KATYURAJ 

The  pedigree  of  Jagdeo  Pan  war  is  as  follows : 

Jaikand  Panwar,  Maikand  Panwar,  Daulat 
Rai,  Randhaula  Pan  war,  and  Jagdeo  Pan  war. 

Jagdeo  Pan  war  and  his  cousin,  Jai  Singh  Pan  war, 
ruled  in  Dharanagari.  While  Jagdeo  was  famous 
for  his  generosity,  Jai  Singh  was  a great  miser. 
There  lived  one  Chanchu  Bhat  of  Malsigarh,  who 
had  one  daughter  named  Mahakali;  while  one 
Betal  Bhat  of  the  same  place  had  four  sons. 
Chanchu  Bhat  was  much  grieved,  as  he  had  no  sons 
who  co'uld  beg  alms  and  support  him  as  Betal 
Bhat’ s sons  did.  When  his  daughter  Mahakali,  who 
was  the  Goddess  Kali  incarnate,  came  to  know 
this,  she  consoled  Chanchu  Bhat  and  said  that  she 
could  earn  much  more  by  begging  than  all  the  four 


LEGENDS  OP  HEROES 


II9 

sons  of  Betal  put  together.  On  hearing  this  Chan- 
chu  Bhat  asked  Mahakali  to  go  to  Dharanagari  to 
beg  alms.  Mahakali  took  her  begging  bowl  in 
hand  and  first  went  to  Jai  Singh’s  house.  Jai 
Singh,  in  order  to  deceive  Mahakali,  made  all  his 
courtiers  put  on  the  same  kind  of  dress  as  he  himself 
was  wearing.  Mahakali  could  not  find  out  which 
was  Jai  Singh.  Mahakali  cursed  Jai  Singh  for 
deceiving  her.  When  Raja  Jagdeo  saw  this,  he  was 
much  annoyed  with  Jai  Singh,  He  invited  Maha<' 
kali  to  his  palace  and  offcared  to  give  her  whatever 
she  should  ask.  On  this,  by  way  of  retort,  Jai 
Singh  promised  Mahakali  double  the  amount  of 
presents  which  Jagdeo  would  give.  Then  Maha- 
kali went  to  Jagdeo’s  house  to  beg  alms.  Jagdeo 
consulted  his  ministers  as  to  what  present  he  dtould 
give  to  her.  Some  suggested  elephants,  some 
lands,  some  money,  but  Jagdeo  was  not  satisfied. 
He  wished  to  offer  the  head  of  one  of  his  seven 
Ranis  as  a sacrifice  to  Mahakali,  He  went  .‘and 
asked  each  one  of  his  Ranis  if  they  were  willing. 
Six  of  them  declined.  The  seventh  Rani,  called 
Chauhani,  whom  the  King  had  discarded  ever  since 
her  marriage  at  the  age  of  seven,  expressed  her 
willingness  to  sacrifice  herself  for  die  sake  of  her 
husband.  She  attired  herself  in  her  best  garments. 


120 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


as  if  she  were  going  to  meet  her  Lord,  and  begged 
Jagdeo  to  cut  off  her  head  as  a sacrifice  to  Maha- 
kali,  saying  that  there  could  be  no  greater  honour 
for  a woman  than  to  offer  herself  as  a sacrifice  to 
please  her  husband.  As  soon  as  Jagdeo  lifted  his 
sword  to  kill  Chauhani,  Mahakali  stopped  him, 
and  said  that  she  would  not  accept  the  sacrifice  of  a 
woman;  but  that  he  should  offer  his  own  head  as 
a sacrifice  to  her.  The  Raja  pondered  and,  at  last, 
ordered  his  own  head  to  be  cut  off  as  a sacrifice. 
Mahakali  returned  home  with  Jagdeo’s  head  and 
related  the  story  to  Chanchu  Bhat.  Chanchu 
Bhat  was  greatly  moved  by  Jagdeo’s  magna- 
nimity and  requested  Mahakali  to  go  back 
and  restore  Jagdeo  to  life.  Mahakali  went  and, 
placing  the  bead  on  the  body  of  Jagdeo, 
sprinkled  nectar  on  the  corpse  and  restored  it  to 
life.  Then  Mahakali  went  to  Jai  Singh  and  asked 
him  to  redeem  his  promise.  Jai  Singh  was  at  his 
wits’  end  and  did  not  know  what  to  do.  He  had 
not  die  courage  eidier  to  offer  himself  or  his  son 
as  a sacrifice  to  Mahakali,  and  hid  himself  in  a 
dark  room  of  his  palace  in  shame.  Mahakali  cursed 
him  and  returned  to  Jagdeo’s  house.  Jagdeo 
Panwar  by  deed,  engraved  upon  a copper  plate, 
dedicated  half  of  his  territory  for  the  worship  of 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


I2I 


Mahakali.  This  copper  plate  still  exists,  thus 
immortalizing  jagdeo’s  name. 

i8.  RAJA  PRITAMDEO 

In  days  gone  by,  a long  line  of  illustrious 
Princes  ruled  over  the  fair  Kingdom  of  Katyur. 

The  following  is  the  pedigree  of  those  Princes : 

Umi  Kunwar,  Jat  Kunwar,  Sat  Kunwar, 
Aichand,  Baichand,  Hunga  Dawar,  Changa 
Dawar,  Gorabadal,  Pirthu,  Gangadeo,  and 
Pritamdeo. 

Pritamdeo  possessed  immense  wealth  and  large 
territories.  But  he  had  no  issue.  When  he  be- 
came old  he  longed  for  a son.  One  day  he  shut 
himself  in  a dark  room  and  lay  on  a broken  bed  in 
despair.  The  palace  drums  ceased  to  beat  and  die 
court  was  not  held.  He  did  not  eat  or  drink  be- 
cause of  his  extreme  grief.  He  had  a nephew 
named  Brahmdeo.  On  hearing  about  Pritam 
Deo’s  distress,  Brahmdeo  approached  him,  tried  to 
console  him,  and  said  that  a man  should  not  despair 
of  progeny  until  he  has  married  seven  wives,  and 
that  he  (Brahmdeo)  would  arrange  a marriage  for 
him.  Pritamdeo  agreed. 

A Prince  named  Amardeo  Pundir  ruled  over 
the  neighbouring  country  of  Mayapur  Hat 


123 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


His  pedigree  is  given  thus: 

Asa  Teg  Pundir,  Bhag  Teg  Pundir,  Nur 
Teg  Pundir,  Saldeo  Pundir,  Balti  Pundir,  Air- 
deo  Pundir,  Bairdeo  Pundir,  Asal  Teg  Pundir, 
Asram  Pundir,  Bharti  Pundir,  Kartan  Pundir, 
and  Amardeo  Pundir. 

Amardeo  Pundir  had  a queen  named  Jamola, 
but  no  issue.  Jamola  performed  great  penances 
and  prayed  to  God  Siva  for  issue.  Siva  was 
pleased  with  her  and  granted  her  prayer. 
In  course  of  time  a daughter  was  born  to  Ranti 
Jamola,  who  was  named  Moladei.  Moladei  was 
exceedingly  beautiful.  When  she  was  seven  years 
of  age,  Brahmdeo  sent  a letter  to  Amardeo 
Pundir  requesting  him  to  give  his  daughter  Mola- 
dei in  marriage  to  Pritamdeo,  On  reading  the 
letter  Amardeo  Pundir  was  full  of  rage.  He  wrote 
back  to  say  that  the  proposal  was  preposterous.  In 
the  first  place,  Pritamdeo  was  not  of  equal  social 
status  with  him*,  secondly,  he  was  like  a grand- 
father to  the  girl.  Brahmdeo  sent  another  letter  to 
Amard^  threatening  to  invade  his  territory  if  dxe 
latter  did  not  comply  with  his  request.  Amardeo 
was  Mghtened  and  consented  to  give  his  daughter 
to  Pritamdeo.  The  bcttothal  ceremony  was  per- 
formed and  an  auspicious  day  was  fixed  for  die 
marriage.  On  the  appointed  day  Pritamdeo  was 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


123 


taken  in  a silver  palanquin  in  a great  procession  to 
Mayapur  Hat.  When  the  marriage  ceremony  was 
being  performed,  and  before  the  ninth  step  was 
taken,  which  completes  the  marriage-tie,  Moladei 
taunted  Pritamdeo  in  these  terms : “Thou,  whose 
head  and  beard  are  as  white  as  whey,  whose  back 
is  bent  like  a hook,  should  be  ashamed  of  marry- 
ing me,  a girl  of  seven  years  of  age;  who  am  like 
a grand-daughter  to  thee.”  Hearing  these  words 
Pritamdeo  was  much  distressed  and  left  the 
marriage  altar  and  returned  home  with  his  men. 
But  Amardeo  Pundir  felt  it  a great  disgrace  that 
the  bridegroom  should  leave  the  bride  at  the 
marriage  altar.  He  called  the  blood-thirsty 
Maharas  of  Kotligarh  and  sent  Moladei  in  a palan- 
quin to  the  house  of  Pritamdeo.  Pritamdeo  was 
forced  by  the  Maharas  to  keep  Moladei  as  his  wife, 
by  threatening  to  kill  him  if  he  ever  ill-treated 
Moladei.  After  some  time  Pritamdeo  jeeringly 
told  Moladei  to  go  back  to  her  father’s  house  and 
conceive  a son.  Moladei  took  it  as  an  insult  and 
replied  that  she  would  prefer  to  go  on  a pilgrimage 
to  various  holy  places  and  pray  for  a son.  She 
accordingly  went  on  a pilgrimage  to  Badrinath  and 
performed  severe  penances  at  the  various  places  of 
worship.  On  returning  to  Joshimath  she  prayed 


124 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


most  fervently  in  the  temple  of  Narsingh  for  a son. 
The  god  was  pleased  with  her  and  caused  the  rays 
of  the  sun  to  penetrate  her  womb,  by  the  heat  of 
which  she  became  pregnant.  In  due  course  a son 
of  extraordinary  beauty  and  strength  was  born  to 
her,  who  was  named  Dula  Dhamdeo.  In  order  to 
purify  herself  on  the  eleventh  day  after  the  birth  of 
the  son,  Moladei  went  to  bathe  in  the  river.  A hair 
from  her  head  dropped  in  the  water  and  was  swal- 
lowed by  a fish.  A fisherman,  Bhana  by  name,  of 
Bhanikot,  had  cast  his  net  lower  down  in  the  river. 
The  fish  was  caught  in  the  net  The  fisherman 
brought  the  fish  home  and  presented  it  to  his 
master  Bhaga  Turank,  Raja  of  Bhanikot.  On 
cutting  open  the  fish’s  stomach,  a long  and  beauti- 
ful hair  was  found  in  it.  Bhaga  was  charmed  by 
its  beauty  and  enquired  from  Bhana  as  fo  where  he 
had  caught  the  fish  and  asked  him  to  take  him 
there.  The  fisherman  took  Bhaga  to  Nagni  Ghat. 
There  he  saw  Moladei  bathing  in  the  river  and  was 
charmed  by  her  beauty.  Bhaga  pitched  his  tent 
on  the  banks  of  die  river  nearby  and  ordered  his 
men  to  bring  Moladei  to  him.  On  seeing  the  men, 
Moladei  was  much  frightened  and  prayed  to  her 
family  goddess  to  save  her  honour.  As  soon  as 
Bhaga ’s  men  approached  Moladei  they  all  lost  their 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


125 


eyesight.  She  again  prayed  that,  if  she  was  a truly 
virtuous  woman,  the  enemy  might  die.  When  lo ! 
a shower  of  thunderbolts  fell  from  the  sky  on 
Bhaga  and  his  men  and  they  all  perished.  Then 
Moladei  returned  with  her  child  to  Katurgarh.  On 
seeing  her  son,  the  other  Ranis  of  Pritamdeo  became 
envious  of  her;  and  told  Pritamdeo  that  she  had 
given  birth  to  a bastard  son.  But  Pritamdeo 
was  so  much  struck  by  the  likeliness  and  beauty 
of  Dhamdeo  that  he  could  not  disown  him.  But 
the  other  Ranis  of  Pritamdeo  continued  to  poison 
his  mind  against  Moladei  and  her  son. 

When  Dhamdeo  was  twelve  years  of  age,  Pritam- 
deo, at  the  instigation  of  his  other  Ranis,  ordered 
Dhamdeo  to  go  and  kill  a demon,  called  Samwa, 
who  lived  in  a deep  lake  nearby,  and  had  carried 
off  seven  score  of  Pritamdeo’s  buffaloes  and  drown- 
ed them  in  the  lake.  Dhamdeo  went  and 
challenged  Samwa  to  fight  with  him.  Samwa  was 
struck  by  the  beauty  and  youth  of  Dhamdeo  and 
advised  him  not  to  risk  his  life.  But  when  Dham- 
deo would  not  listen,  the  demon  said,  “My  boy, 
my  soul  dwells  in  the  body  of  your  father,  Pritam- 
deo. If  you  are  determined  to  kill  me  you  should 
first  kill  Pritamdeo.  Dhamdeo  then  went  back 


126 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


and  killed  Pritamdeo.  No  sooner  did  Pritamdeo 
die  than  the  demon  also  expired. 

Dhamdeo  then  ascended  the  throne  of  Katyur- 
garh  and  ruled  over  his  kingdom  in  peace  and 
prosperity. 

19.  SUMERU  RAUTELA  AND  RANI  SURMA 

Once  two  Princes,  Chand  and  Badal,  lived  at  a 
place  called  Chandikot.  Their  pedigree  is  given 
thus: 

Loki  Pal  and  Triloki  Pal,  Than  Chand, 
Bhan  Chand,  whose  sons  were  Chand  and 
Badal. 

Badal  was  the  elder  brother.  They  were  very 
powerful  chieftains,  owning  several  villages  and 
were  very  rich.  Each  of  them  had  seven  Ranis,  but 
bad  no  issue,  which  made  them  very  anxious.  In 
course  of  time  Badal’s  eldest  Rani,  name  Kunjavati, 
was  with  child  and  felt  a great  craving  for  the 
flesh  of  a deer,  and  requested  her  husband  to  pro- 
cure die  same.  Badal  offered  her  mutton,  fowls 
and  other  kinds  of  flesh,  but  she  would  have  none 
of  diese.  Being  dius  pressed  by  his  Rani,  Badal 
collected  a large  number  of  men  and  went  on  a 
footing  expedition.  They  beat  the  whole  forests 
of  Khjuma  and  Dhoulana,  but  saw  no  trace  of  a 
deer.  When  tired  and  thirsty  diey  camped  near 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


127 


the  irrigated  fields,  known  as  Jabli  Sera.  The  land 
belonged  to  Chand  and  Badal;  but  the  Dewan  of 
Delhi  laid  claim  to  it  and  did  not  allow  it  to  be 
cultivated. 

On  seeing  the  fine  plot  of  land  lying  waste,  Badal 
enquired  about  it  and,  on  being  told  the  reason, 
was  much  enraged  and  said,  “ How  dare  the 
Dewan,  a Khasia,  prevent  us  from  cultivating  our 
own  land?”  He  called  his  brother  Chand,  with  a 
large  number  of  men,  and  ordered  the  land  to  be 
ploughed.  The  men  repaired  the  water  channel 
which  irrigated  the  lands  and  diverted  all  the 
water  of  the  stream  into  it. 

When  the  Dewan  heard  about  it,  he  shook  with 
rage.  He  was  eighty  years  old  and  had  seven  sons 
and  fourteen  grandsons-  He  took  a large  scythe 
with  him  and  went  and  sat  at  the  head  waters  of 
the  irrigated  charmel.  He  broke  the  channel  and 
stopped  its  water.  When  the  water  of  the  chan- 
nel dried  up,  Chand  and  Badal  thought  that, 
perhaps,  their  buffaloes  Chauria  and  Bhaunria  had 
broken  the  channel.  Badal  asked  Chand  to  go 
and  drive  away  the  buffaloes  and  repair  the  water 
channel.  No  sooner  had  Chand  reached  the  spot 
than  the  Dewan,  who  lay  in  a bush,  rushed  out 
and  cut  off  Chand’s  head  wifh  the  scythe  and 


128 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


threw  it  into  the  water  channel.  The  whole  water 
of  the  gul  became  red  with  blood.  Badal  thought 
that,  perhaps,  Chand  had  killed  the  buffaloes  and 
himself  went  to  see  what  had  happened.  As  soon 
as  Badal  went  near  the  place  where  Chand  had 
been  killed,  the  Dewan  again  rushed  out  and  killed 
Badal,  too,  with  the  scythe.  When  the  men  of 
Chand  and  Badal  saw  this  they  returned  home  and 
informed  the  Ranis  of  Chand  and  Badal  about  the 
death  of  their  husbands.  The  whole  Chandikot 
was  in  deep  mourning.  The  thirteen  Ranis  of 
Chand  and  Badal  became  satis.  But  Kunjavati, 
the  fourteenth  Rani  of  Badal,  who  was  with  child, 
was  prevailed  upon  not  to  commit  suicide.  In  due 
course  Kunjavati  was  delivered  of  a son.  There 
was  great  rejoicing  in  Chandikot.  Brahmans  were 
called  to  prepare  the  child’s  horoscope.  The 
Brahmans  named  the  baby  Sumeru  Rautela  and 
declared  that  the  child  could  only  survive  if  he  was 
married  on  the  fifth  day  after  his  birth.  On  hear- 
ing this,  four  Brahmans  were  immediately  dis- 
patched in  four  quarters  in  search  of  a bride: 
They  searched  far  and  wide,  but  could  not  find 
any  suitable  gid.  At  last  they  learnt  that  King 
Sarang  of  Sarah  Mandal  bad  a daughter  named 
Surma,  who  was  jtwelvc  years  of  age.  Princes 


tEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


129 


from  far  md  near  had  gone  to  ask  her  hand,  but 
she  had  rejected  them  all.  The  Brahmans  of 
Chandikot  went  to  Raja  Saran  and  requested  him  to 
give  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  their  Prince,  who 
was  represented  to  be  a youth  of  marriageable  age. 
The  Brahmans  prevailed  Upon  Surma  and  her 
father  to  agree  and  an  auspicious  day  was  fixed  for 
the  marriage  pf  Siarma  with  Sumeru.  Raja  Sata.11 
asked  the  Brahmans  to  bring  the  bridegroom  with 
a marriage  procession  on  the  appointed  day-  But 
the  clever  Brahmans  begged  to  be  excused  and  said 
that,  according  to  the  rime-honoured  family  custom 
of  the  Chandikot  Princes,  the  bridegroom  never 
went  to  the  bride’s  house  ; but  that  their  marriage 
was  performed  with  a dagger.  After  much  discus- 
sion Sarang  yielded  and  the  marriage  of  Surma  wa& 
celebrated  with  a dagger  with  much  pomp  and 
show.  When  the  marriage  procession  returned  to 
Chandikot,  Sumcm,  who  was  a baby  of  five  days, 
was  made  to  lie  on  the  bed  with  Surma-  The  baby 
began  to  cry.  At  first  Surma  thought  that  the 
child  was  her  stepson.  But  she  was  shocked  to 
learn  that  he  was  her  own  bridegroom.  At  last 
Surma,  with  the  instinct  of  true  womanhood,  recon- 
ciled herself  to  her  lot  and  began  to  nurse  her 
husband  and  cherish  dreams  of  future  matrimonial 

9 


130 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


bliss,  when  the  child  would  grow  up.  Sumeru 
was  a born  giant.  When  five  years  of  age  he  per- 
formed extraordinary  feats  of  strength  and  looked 
like  a lad  of  sixteen.  In  the  meantime  the  old 
Dewan  learnt  of  the  birth  of  Sumeru  and  his 
romantic  marriage  with  Surma  and  of  her  sur- 
passing beauty.  The  old  hatred  against  Surma’s 
jfather  rankled  in  his  breast  and  he  resolved  to 
kidnap  Surma.  He  sent  a clever  \utni  (go- 
between)  to  Rani  Surma.  When  the  \utni  reach- 
ed Surma’s  house  she  embraced  Surma  and  said 
that  she  was  Surma’s  aunt  (father’s  sister)  and  had 
been  sent  by  her  father  to  look  after  her  and  her 
baby  husband.  Rani  Surma  believed  her;  and 
treated  her  with  great  hospitality.  One  day  the 
\uini  asked  Rani  Surma  to  accompany  her  to  a 
water  spring.  Surma  consented.  It  had  been 
arranged  between  the  Dewan  and  the  }{titn't  that 
she  should  bring  Surma  to  the  spring  on  the 
appointed  day,  where  the  Dewan  would  wait  for 
them. 

As  soon  as  Rani  Surma  reached  the  spring,  the 
Dewan  saw  her  and  was  diarmed  with  her  beauty. 
He  rushed  forward  with  his  men  and  forcibly 
carried  away  Rani  Siirma,  in  spite  of  her  cries  and 
wailing.  On  reaching  home  the  Dewan  wanted 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


I3I 

to  marry  her  immediately;  but  Rani  Surma  said 
that  she  had  taken  a vow  of  celibacy  for  twelve 
years,  after  which  she  would  marry  him,  and  that, 
if  he  forced  her  to  marry  earKer,  she  would  commit 
suicide.  All  persuasions  of  the  Dewan  failed.  At 
last  the  Dewan,  thinking  that  none  could  take 
away  Surma  from  his  custody,  kept  her  under  a 
strong  guard  and  allowed  her  to  live  in  separate 
apartments. 

In  the  meantime  Kunjavati,  mother  of  Sumcru, 
sent  men  in  all  directions  in  search  of  Rani  Surma. 

At  last  she  heard  that  the  Rani  had  been  carried 
off  by  the  Dewan,  but  she  could  do  nothing. 
When  Sumeru  WaS  fiye  years  of  age  he  enquired  of 
his  mother  about  his  wife.  Kunjavati  wept  and 
replied  that  she  had  gone  to  her  father’s  house. 
When  Sumeru  was  twelve  years  old  he  brought 
live  tigers  home  and  uprooted  big  trees.  He  again 
enquired  from  his  motha-  about  the  whereabouts 
of  bis  wife.  At  first  Kunjavati  gave  evasive  replies, 
but,  on  Sumeni’s  pressing  her,  she  told  him  that  she 
had  been  forcibly  taken  away  by  the  Dewan.  She 
also  told  him  how  the  Dewan  had  kiUed  Sumeru ’s 
father  and  uncle.  On  hearing  this  Sumcni  was 
on  fire  with  rage  and  took  a vow  not  to  rest  till  he 
had  killed  the  enemy.  He  went  to  Delhi,  where 


132  HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 

the  Dewari  lived,  and,  disguising  himself  as  a 
sadhu,  stopped  near  the  water  spring  from  which 
water  was  taken  to  the . Dewan’s  house.  One 
morning  a maid-servant  of  Surma  went  to  the 
spring  for  water.  The  sadhu  enquired  whose  maid 
she  was.  She  replied  that  she  was  taking  water 
for  Rani  Surma. 

On  further  questioning,  she  told  him  that  she 
had  taken  a vow  of  chastity  for  twelve  years. 
Sumeru  then  sent  a letter  to  Surma  through  the 
maid-servant.  Rani  Surma’s  joy  knew  no  bounds 
on  reading  the  letter.  She  pretended  to  scold  the 
maid  for  having  brought  the  letter  from  a strariger, 
wrote  a reply  on  its  back  and  ordered  the  maid  to 
take  back  the  letter  to  the  man  who  had  given  it. 
In  reply  she  told  him  all  that  had  befallen  her  and 
requested  Sumeru  to  come  and  take  her  away. 
On  reading  the  letter  Sumeru  thought  it 
would  be  very  cowardly  on  his  part  to  steal  away 
his  wife  from  another’s  house.  He  therefore 
decided  to  go  and  fight  with  the  enemy,  and  then 
take  his  wife  openly. 

One  day  Rani  Surma  requested  the  Dewan  to 
allow  her  to  feast  all  the  sadhus  of  the  town.  The 
Dewan  gave  her  permission.  All  the  sadhus 
assembled,  including  Sumeru.  After  the  feast 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES  1 33 

umeru  stayed  in  Rani  Surma’s  apartment  and 
fived  there  unnoticed  for  a long  time. 

One  day  some  men  of  the  Dewan  saw  a man 
sleeping  in  Surma’s  bed  and  informed  the  Dewan. 

The  Dewan  was  much  enraged  and  surrounded 
Surma’s  room  with  a large  number  of  troops. 
Sumeru  was  fast  asleep;  but  was  aroused  by  the 
noise  of  the  men  outside.  Rani  Surma  began  to 
weep  and  clasped  Sumeru  in  despair. 

Sumeru  roared  like  a lion  and  challenged  the 
enemy  to  fight.  He  rushed  into  the  army  of  the 
Dewan  and  soon  mowed  them  down  with  his 
dagger  like  blades  of  grass.  Then  he  caught  hold 
of  the  Dewan  and  plucked  out  his  eyes,  plundered 
his  house  and  took  away  Rani  Surma  in  a trium- 
phant procession.  When  they  returned  home 
there  was  great  rejoicing  in  Chandikot  and  Sumeru 
ruled  over  his  people  happily. 

20.  HYUNRAJ  MAHARA 

Once  upon  a time  a great  warrior  named  Hyun- 
raj  MaJhara  lived  at  Kodigarh.  He  had  six  bro- 
thers. His  pedigree  is  as  follows : 

Hirambh,  Birambh,  Dfdi,  Tcgraj,  Saunraj 
Sardar,  Hu  Mahara,  Tilu  Mahara,  Sejaki 
Mahara,  and  Hyunraj  Mahara. 

The  Maharas  were  a blood-diirsty  and  ferocious 


134 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


race  who  applied  human  blood  instead  of  vermilion 
on  their  foreheads.  They  were  Khaikars  of  the 
Raja  of  Champawatgarh.  The  pedigree  of  the 
Champawatgarh  Rajas  is  given  thus:  Hardeo> 
Virdeo,  Phonjdeo,  Bhirchand,  Bachand,  Tarachand, 
Nirmalchand,  Thorchand,  and  Kharak  Singh. 

The  Rajas  of  Champawatgarh  exacted  various 
illegal  dues  from  the  Ediaikars;  such  as  one  seer  of 
ghee  per  milch  buffalo,  one  leg  of  each  goat  killed, 
twenty  per  cent,  of  the  money  received  as  bride 
price,  taxes  on  disused  water-mills.  Hyunraj 
Mahara  stopped  these  illegal  dues.  On  this 
Kharak  Singh,  Raja  of  Champawatgarh,  sent  an 
ultimatum  to  Hyunraj  Mahara  ordering  him  either 
to  pay  the  dues  or  to  leave  Kotligarh.  ‘ On  reading 
the  Raja’s  order  the  Mahara  replied  that  the  Raja 
could  do  what  he  liked.  The  Maharas  had  a large 
plot  of  irrigated  land  known  as  jawari-]{a-sera. 
Eiharak  Singh  and  his  brother  went  with  a large 
army  to  destroy  jawari-J{a-sera,  Hyunraj  and  his 
elder  brother  Sejki  were  in  the  jungle,  tending 
their  catde,  while  their  old  mother  Singola  alone 
was  at  home.  On  seeing  the  enemy  Singola  sent 
word  to  her  sons  informing  them  of  the  destruction 
of  their  fields  by  the  Raja’s  men.  The  two  bro- 
thers were  much  enraged  and  returned  home  and 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


135 


made  preparations  for  opposing  the  Raja’s  men. 
Their  mother  Singola  remonstrated  and  advised 
them  not  to  quarrel  with  the  Raja,  and  warned 
them  of  the  danger.  But  the  seven  brothers  re- 
buked their  mother  for  her  cowardice.  They  took 
out  their  swords  and  marched  into  the  enemy’s 
camp.  The  Maharas  cut  down  the  whole  army  of 
Thorchand  and  Bhagchand  and  brought  thdr 
heads  home  and  offered  them  to  their  family 
goddess  Jhalimali  as  a sacrifice.  When  the  news 
of  Thorchand  and  Bhagchand’s  death  reached 
Champawatgarh,  the  whole  country  was  in  great 
mourning.  Then  the  surviving  brothers  of  Thor- 
chand hit  upon  a plan  to  kiU  the  Maharas.  The 
Belwals  of  Gauri  Gujrant  were  the  family  priests 
of  the  Maharas.  They  were  great  magicians. 
The  brothers  of  Thorchand  sent  for  the  Belwals 
and  offered  to  give  them  large  rewards  if  they 
killed  Hyunraj  and  his  brothers  by  means  of  their 
magical  powers.  The  Belwals  agreed  and  went 
to  Kotligarh,  and  found  the  old  mother  of  Hyun- 
raj at  home.  The  Mahara  brother?  had  gone  to  the 
jungle.  The  widted  Belwals  did  not  even  return 
the  greetings  of  the  lady.  They  tied  her  to  a post 
and  carried  away  her  two  male  buffaloes,  named 
Chandu  and  Bendu,  in  order  to  offer  them  as  a 


136 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


sacrifice  to  their  goddess  in  connexion  with  the 
magic  rites.  . When  the  Maharas  returned  home 
and  saw  their  mother  tied  hand  and  foot,  they  en- 
quired who  had  done  it.  She  told  them  that  their 
own  priests,  the  Belwals,  had  tied  her  up  and  taken 
away  Chandu  and  Bendu.  The  Maharas  shook 
with  rage.  They  took  out  their  swords  and  went 
to  Gauri  Gujrant  where  the  Belwals  lived.  The 
pedigree  of  the  Belwals  is  as  follows: 

Asha  Bhat,  The!  Bhat,  Alu  Bhat,  Thalu 
Bhat,  Daya  Rai  Bhat,  Maya  Rai  Bhat,  and 
Bhawanand.  Bhawanand  had  three  sons — 
Ishwari  Datt,  Kashi  Ram  and  Keshi  Ram. 

When  the  Maharas  reached  Gauri  Gujrant, 
Kashi  Ram  was  engaged  in  magical  incantations 
against  them  in  the  temple  of  the  Goddess  Kali, 
where  the  male  buffaloes  Chandu  and  Bendu  were 
to  be  sacrificed.  The  Maharas  went  and  caught 
hold  of  Kashi  Ram  then  and  there.  They  then 
killed  the  other  brothers  also.  Only  two  kinsmen 
of  Kashi  Ram  escaped.  Their  names  were  Battu 
and  Chandu.  Battu  had  a wife  named  Dangwalia 
and  Chandu’s  wife  was  named  Mainavati 
Bughania.  Dattu  and  Chandu  had  a sister  whose 
son  was  Hindua.  In  the  month  of  Chait,  Dattu  and 
Chandu  were  sowing  paddy  in  their  fields  with 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


137 


twelve  yokes  of  bullocks.  Hidua  was  also  with 
them.  Hindua  took  the  bullocks  to  a spring. 
When  Hindua  reached  the  spring,  Pingla,  the 
mother  of  the  Maharas,  was  filling  her  pitcher. 
Hindua  told  Pingla  to  remove  her  pitcher  and  let 
the  bullocks  drink.  A quarrel  ensued  and  Hindua 
broke  Pingla’s  pitcher.  Pingla  came  home  weep- 
ing and  told  her  sons  about  it.  The  Maharas  were 
much  enraged  and  went  to  the  fields  of  Dattu  and 
Chandu.  They  unyoked  the  bullocks,  broke  their 
legs,  and  threw  them  into  the  spring  from  which 
Dattu  and  Chandu  drank  water.  Dattu  and 
Chandu  collected  a large  army  of  Kurmals. 
Bhutuyals,  Saunds  and  Padyirs  and  attacked  the 
Maharas.  But  the  Maharas  killed  all  of  them. 
When  the  mother  of  Dattu  and  Chandu  saw  that 
her  sons  had  been  killed,  she  filled  a large  cauldron 
with  milk  and  mixed  poison  in  it.  Then  she 
called  all  her  family  together  and  told  them  that  it 
was  much  better  to  commit  suicide  than  let  their 
bodies  be.  touched  by  the  Mahara  Khasias.  They 
all  drank  the  poisoned  milk  and  died.  Thus  the 
whole  line  of  the  Bclwals  became  extinct.  The 
Maharas  set  fire  to  the  houses  of  the  Bclwals  and 
reuimed  home  triumphantly. 


138 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


21.  BRAHMA  DEO  AND  BIRMA  DOTIALI 

Once  a great  Prince  Brahmdeo  ruled  over  the 
fair  fort  of  Katyurgarh.  His  father’s  name  was 
Gambhirdeo.  He  was  very  beautiful  and  strong. 
His  moustaches  were  like  those  of  a lion,  his  eyes 
were  as  beautiful  as  of  a deer,  and  his  chest  was 
broad.  At  that  time  three  Dotiyal  chiefs  named 
Mah  Singh,  Iswaru  and  Raghurai  ruled  in  Doti- 
garh.  Iswaru  had  a daughter  named  Birma 
Dotiali.  She  was  a most  beautiful  girl;  her  breast 
shone  like  the  sun;  her  back  part  was  as  fair  as 
the  full  moon;  her  body  was  soft  like  butter;  her 
forehead  was  broad  and  full.  Birma  had  been 
betrothed  to  Brahmdeo  while  she  was  seven  years 
of  age.  Gambhirdeo,  however,  fell  ill  and  before 
his  death  hurriedly  married  his  son  Brahmdeo  to 
Bijora,  sister  of  the  Princes  of  Kalunikot,  whose 
names  were  Kalu  Kaluni,  Melu  Kaluni  and  Mahi- 
deo  Kaluni.  In  course  of  time  Brahmdeo  had 
seven  daughters  from  Rani  Bijora.  But  he  had  no 
son.  The  names  of  the  daughters  were  Naranga, 
Saranga,  Phulavati,  Narangdevi,  Sarangdevi, 
Indradevi  and  Gangavati.  Raja  Brahmdeo  was 
anxious  to  get  a son  to  continue  his  line,  as  the 
daughters  Were  like  a fruit  without  Seeds.  When 
Dotiali  Birma  was  of  a marriageable  age.  Princes 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


139 


from  far  and  wide  went  to  seek  her  hand;  but  her 
father  did  not  give  her  to  any  of  them.  At  last 
Raja  Nirmal  Chand  of  Champawatgarh  asked 
her  in  marriage  for  his  son  Khadag  Singh.  Her 
father  Iswaru  agreed.  An  auspicious  day  was 
fixed  for  the  wedding  and  preparations  were  made 
for  the  same.  When  the  marriage  day  was  near 
at  hand,  Dotiali  Birma  sent  a letter  to  Brahmdco 
saying  that  she  had  been  betrothed  to  him  while 
she  was  a child  of  seven  years  of  age  and  that  she 
had  committed  no  fault  to  cause  him  to  desert  her. 
She  also  informed  him  of  her  impending  marriage 
with  Khadag  Singh,  Prince  of  Champawatgarh, 
and  invited  him  to  come  and  take  her  away 
On  reading  the  letter  Brahmdco  was  perplexed 
and  went  to  his  mother  and  brother  Dhamdeo  for 
advice,  who  warned  him  against  the  danger.  But 
Brahmdco  made  up  his  mind  to  go  and  marry 
Birma  Dotiali.  He  was  a great  magician,  and,  as 
Doti  was  a land  of  magic,  he  equipped  himself 
with  all  the  instruments  of  magic  and  left  for  Doti- 
garh.  When  he  arrived  near  Doti,  he  stopped  at 
a water-mill  to  smoke.  Iswaru  Dotial’s  men  had 
brought  a large  quantity  of  grain  to  grind  at  the 
mill  for  Burma’s  wedding.  He  enquired  from 


140 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORJE 


them  about  Birmans  marnage.  Brahmdeo  dis- 
guised himself  as  a Brahman  and  reached  Iswaru 
Dotial’s  house,  just  when  Khadag  Singh  and  his 
marriage  party  arrived.  After  the  reception  of  the 
bridegroom’s  party,  Brahmdeo,  in  the  guise  of  a 
musician,  vj^ent  v^rhere  the  marriage  party  were 
seated,  and,  bowing  down  before  them,  asked  their 
permission  to  entertain  them  with  his  music.  He 
went  round  dancing  and  playing  on  his  musical 
instrument  and  made  them  unconscious  by  means 
of  his  magical  incantations.  Then  Brahmdeo 
went  up  to  the  balcony  where  Birma  was  seated 
and  introduced  himself  to  her  and  told  her  of  his 
magical  powers.  Princess  Birma  was  much  pleased 
and,  embracing  Brahmdeo  as  her  true  lord,  advised 
him  to  take  her  away  before  the  bridegroom’s  party 
regained  consciousness.  Brahmdeo,  by  another 
magical  feat,  made  the  gaterkeepers  and  all  the 
other  inmates  of  Iswaru’s  house  also  unconscious. 
Then  Brahmdeo  carried  Birma  safely  to  the  banks 
of  the  Rajan  River.  After  crossing  the  river  they 
reached  Devali.  From  there  they  went  to  the 
Mori  hill  where  they  stopped  for  the  night 
Brahmdeo  was  very  tired,  and,  resting  on  the  lap  of 
his  Ram,  f^  into  a deep  slumber.  Brahmdeo  did 
not  wake  till  after  sunrise  next  morning. 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


I4I 

When  Khadag  Singh  and  his  party  recovered 
consciousness  next  morning,  they  searched  for  the 
bride,  but  could  not  find  her  in  Iswaru's  house.  A 
great  confusion  arose  and  people  ran  in  all  direc- 
tions in  search  of  the  bride.  At  last  they  suspected 
the  strange  magician  who  had  also  mysteriously 
disappeared.  They  also  learnt  about'  Birma’s 
betrothal  to  Brahradeo.  They  suspected  that  he 
might  have  eloped  with  Birma.  Khadag  Singh 
and  his  men  pursued  Brahmdeo  and  found  him 
asleep  in  Birma’s  lap  on  the  Mori  hill.  When 
Birma  saw  Khadag  Singh  she  began  to  weep,  but 
did  not  dare  awaken  Brahmdeo.  At  last  her  hot 
tears  fell  on  Brahmdeo ’s  cheeks,  which  made  him 
start  up.  It  was  considered  a sin  in  olden  times 
to  awaken  a sleeping  person.  Brahmdeo  scolded 
Birma  for  having  awakened  him.  But  when  she 
told  him  of  the  impending  danger,  he  rose  and 
saw  the  enemy  coming  towards  them.  Brahmdeo 
and  Birma  mounted  their  horses  and  rode  off  to 
Katyurgarh.  But  on  reaching  home  Brahmdeo 
was  extremely  exhausted  and  shut  himself  up  in  a 
room.  When  his  seven  daughters  saw  the  enemy 
approaching,  they  went  to  their  father  and  urged 
him  to  go  and  fight  against  the  enemy.  But 
Brahmdeo  expressed  his  inability  to  fight,  taunted 


142 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


them,  and  said,  “If  I had  only  one  son,  instead  of 
you  seven  daughters,  he  would  go  and  fight  the 
enemy  and  save  my  honour.”  His  daughters  felt 
much  humiliated  and  consoled  their  father  and 
hegged  his  leave  to  go  and  fight  the  enemy.  But 
Brahmdeo  rebuked  them  and  said,  “ How  could 
weak  girls  like  you  dare  oppose  the  formidable 
enemy?”  The  daughters  replied,  “Father,  if 
we  be  thy  true  daughters  we  will  surely  conquer 
the  enemy.”  Brahmdeo,  in  order  to  test  their 
strength,  erected  a pole  thirty-two  cubits  high  and 
asked  his  daughters  to  jump  over  it  one  by  one. 
They  all  succeeded.  Then  they  requested  their 
father  to  give  them  soldiers’  uniforms  to  wear. 
Brahmdeo  gave  them  steel  helmets  and  armour 
and  swords.  The  seven  girls  prayed  to  their  family 
goddess,  bowed  down  before  their  parents  and 
mounted  their  war-horses.  They  reached  the 
banks  of  the  Raj  an  River  where  the  army  of  the 
enemy  was  encamped.  The  Routelis  drew  their 
swords  and  rushed  into  the  army  of  the  enemy  and 
began  to  cut  off  iheir  heads  like  so  many  plantain 
trees.  The  groxmd  was  covered  with  the  dead 
bodies  of  the  enemy  and  streams  of  blood 
flowed.  They  soon  killed  the  whole  army  of  the 
enemy,  but  the  old  Mrmaichand  concealed  himself 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


143 


in  the  hollow  of  an  oak  tree.  The  Routelis  were 
quite  exhausted  and  sat  down  near  a spring  to  rest. 
Nirmalchand  pursued  them.  All  the  seven  sisters 
went  to  the  spring  to  drink  water;  and  the  youngest 
began  to  wash  her  face.  In  the  meantime  Nirmal- 
chand collected  his  surviving  men  and  surrounded 
the  Routelis  and  challenged  them  to  fight.  The 
Routelis  had  put  their  swords  and  arrows  aside  and 
were  helpless.  They  ran  in  different  directions. 
But  Nirmalchand’s  men  chased  them  and  killed 
them  like  so  many  wild  gourds.- 

Then  Nirmalchand  collected  more  men  and  in- 
vaded Katyurgarh.  On  seeing  the  enemy,  Brahm- 
deo  closed  the  gates  of  his  fort  and  ordered  Bhikan, 
the  porter,  to  guard  it.  The  enemy  managed  to 
enter  the  fort  by  bribing  the  gate-keeper.  In  the 
meantime  Brahmdeo  prayed  to  his  family  goddess 
Jhalimali  for  help.  The  goddess  granted  his  prayer 
and  caused  the  enemy  to  lose  their  sight  They 
began  to  fight  among  themselves.  A great  confu- 
sion arose,  in  which  they  killed  each  other.  Thus 
was  Nirmalchand  and  his  whole  army  destroyed. 
Brahmdeo  then  performed  the  funeral  rites  of  his 
daughters,  whose  heroic  deeds  are  still  sung  in 
Katyurgarh 


144  HIMALAYAN  FOLKLCHIE 

22.  RAJA  BRAHMDEO’S  WAR  AGAINST  THE 
CHAMPAWAT  RAJAS 

The  pedigree  of  Dhamdeo  and  Brahmdco 
Princes  of  Katyurgarh  is  as  follows : 

Brahm  Kvuiwar,  Jot  Kumar,  Sat  Kiunar, 
Umi  Kumar,  Dham  Kumar,  Asand,  Basand, 
Gora  Sabla  Rai,  Milchaunri  Rai,  Milchauri 
Ujjan,  whose  sons  were  Dhamdeo  and 
Brahmdco. 

Dhamdeo  and  Brahmdco  were  feudatory  chichi 
under  the  Kings  of  Champawatgarh.  Owing  to 
the  various  illegal  exacdons  of  the  Rajas  of  Cham-* 
pawatgarh,  Dhamdeo  and  Brahmdco  stopped  their 
tribute  and  declared  their  independence.  Rajas 
Thorchand  and  Bhagchand,  who  ruled  over  Cham- 
pawatgarh, were  much  enraged  and  sent  .an  ulti- 
matum to  Dhamdeo  and  Brahmdco  cither  to  send 
their  tribute  or  leave  Katyurgarh.  Dhamdeo 
treated  the  letter  with  contemptuous  silence.  In 
order  to  further  annoy  and  insult  Thorchand  and 
Bhagchand,  they  collected  a large  heap  of  small 
broken  pieces  of  car&cn  pots  to  represent  the  cash 
presents  and  put  them  in  a box.  They  also  filled 
a pitdicr  with  wasps  and  closed  it  to  represent 
presents  in  kind  and  sent  them  to  Champawatgarh. 
Thorchand  and  Bhagchand  were  pleased  on  receiv- 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


145 


ing  the  tribute  and  ordered  the  presents  to  be  taken 
inside  their  house.  They  closed  the  doors  of  the 
room  and  first  opened  die  pitcher.  As  soon  as  the 
lid  was  removed  a large  swarm  of  wasps  rushed 
out  and  stung  Thorchand,  Bhagchand  and  their 
Ranis.  Thorchand  and  Bhagchand  were  much, 
enraged  at  the  effrontery  of  Brahmdeo  and  Dham- 
deo.  They  sent  another  letter  to  Brahmdeo  asking 
him  to  give  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  Thorchand, 
failing  which,  his  territory  would  be  invaded  and 
his  fort  razed  to  the  ground.  On  reading  the  letter 
Dhamdeo  and  Brahmdeo ’s  blood  boiled  with  rage. 
They  said,  “How  dare  the  Chands  of  Champawat- 
garh,  who  are  inferior  to  us  in  social  status,  ask  the 
hand  of  our  daughter  in  marriage?”  They  replied, 
refusing  eidier  to  pay  any  tribute  or  to  give  their 
daughter  in  marriage  to  Thorchand.  They  chal- 
lenged the  Chands  to  come  with  all  their  forces  to 
a place  called  Jawari  Sera  and  fight  against  them. 
The  Chand  Rajas  accepted  the  challenge  and 
brought  a large  army  of  Mughals,  Pathans  and 
Kumaonis  to  Jawari  Sera.  The  whole  valley  of 
Jawari  was  covered  with  the  enemy’s  army,  and 
looked  as  white  as  the  frost  in  winter  or  guiral  trees 
in  full  bloom  in  spring.  The  enemy  destroyed  the 
paddy  crops  of  Jawari  Sera.  The  women  of  Katyur 

10 


146 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


began  to  weep  and  cry  Uke  the  Meluri  bird;  and  the 
whole  city  was  in  a great  panic.  Brahmdeo  and 
Dhamdeo  put  on  their  armour,  and,  drawing  their 
swords,  rushed  into  the  army  of  the  enemy,  which 
was  under  command  of  Thorchand.  They  killed 
the  whole  army  of  the  enemy.  Thorchand  was 
killed  by  Brahmdeo.  Dhamdeo  and  Brahmdeo 
then  returned  to  Katyurgarh  triumphantly.  There 
was  great  rejoicing  in  Katyurgarh.  Dhamdeo  and 
Brahmdeo  proclaimed  their  independence  and  ruled 
in  peace. 

23.  ADHAPATI  CHAUHAN  AND  DHAMDEO 
CHAUHAN 

Once  upon  a time  there  lived  seven  brothers  of 
the  Chauhan  clan  of  Rajputs  at  Khailapur,  the 
eldest  of  whom  was  named  Dhamdeo.  Their 
pedigree  is  given  thus : 

Urmi  Nag,  Kurmi  Nag,  Rai  Mangal,  Afati, 
Mafati,  Dhamdeo  and  his  six  brothers. 

One  day  Dhamdeo  and  his  brothers  collected  a 
large  number  of  men  and  went  out  shooting  in  the 
Guptj  Fatal  forest.  After  beating  the  forest  for  a 
whole  day  they  found  a deer  and  chased  it,  but  it 
escaped.  At  last  they  came  upon  a partridge  and 
shot  at  it  but  the  partridge  flew  away  into  the  neigh- 
bouring territory  of  Mayapur  Hat  where  lived  seven 
brothers  of  the  Pundir  clan.  Their  names  were 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


147 


Jaiteg  Pundir,  Asal  Teg  Pundir,  Alti  Pundir,  Badi, 
Kaituri,  Aurati,  Burati.  As  soon  as  the  partridge 
reached  Mayapur  Hat  the  blood-thirsty  Pundirs 
caught  and  shut  it  in  a room. 

The  Chauhans  pursued  it  and  on  reaching  Maya- 
pur Hat  requested  the  Pundirs  to  give  up  the  part- 
ridge. But  Asal  Teg  Pundir  said  that,  as  the  bird 
had  crossed  into  his  territory,  he  would  keep  it  even 
at  the  cost  of  his  life.  Adhapati  Chauhan  remon- 
strated with  the  Pundirs  and  advised  them  not  to 
risk  their  lives  for  the  sake  of  a bird.  But  they 
would  not  yield.  Then  Adhapati  Chauhan  broke 
open  the  door  of  Asal  Teg’s  room  where  the  part- 
ridge was  hid.  As  soon  as  the  partridge  began  to 
fly  Asaldeo  caught  it  and  cut  its  head  off  with  his 
sword  and  hung  it  over  the  door  of  his  room. 
Adhapati  attempted  to  seize  the  partridge,  but  the 
Pundirs  resisted  and  challenged  them  to  fight.  A 
severe  battle  ensued  between  them.  The  Pundir 
brothers  killed  all  the  Chauhans  one  by  one. 
Adhapati  Chauhan  had  seven  sons  by  his  wife 
named  Chaurura.  Their  names  were  Jit  Singh, 
Bhup  Singh,  Kedar  Singh,  Uttam  Singh  and 
Bhopal  Singh.  On  hearing  about  the  death  of  her 
husband  and  his  brothers,  Chaurura  Chauhani 
exhorted  her  sons  to  go  and  wreak  vengeance  on  the 


148 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


Pundirs.  The  Pundirs  had  hung  the  head  of 
Adhapati  Chauhan  over  the  door  of  their  house  in 
place  of  the  head  of  the  partridge.  Jit  Singh  and 
his  brothers  took  a vow  to  fight  against  their  enemy 
and  bring  back  the  head  of  their  father.  The 
seven  brothers  went  and  challenged  the  Pundirs  to 
fight.  After  a long  struggle  the  Pundirs  killed  all 
the  Chauhan  brothers.  Chauhani  pronounced  a 
curse  against  the  Pundirs  and  fainted  away. 

Thus  the  whole  family  of  the  brave  Chauhans 
perished  for  the  sake  of  a partridge. 

24  BELWALS  OF  BELIHAT 

The  pedigree  of  Belwals  of  Belihat  is  as  follows ; 

Nagu,  Bagu,  Kagdas,  Bagdas,  Chhuri- 
jantar,  Bharimal,  Raghudipati,  Khundajeet. 
Khundajeet  had  eight  sons — Bhawa  Nand, 
Kashi  Ram,  Salig  Ram,  Ishwari  Datt,  Hari 
Datt,  Nathi  Ram,  Rewat  Ram  and  Moti 
Ram. 

Once  a great  calamity  befell  the  Belwals  of 
Belihat  They  sowed  grain  which  produced 
nothing  but  -husk.  Their  families  gave  birth  to 
daughters  only;  their  sbe-buffaloes  bore  bull  calves; 
their  goats,  he-goats;  their  cows  gave  bir&  to  bulls. 
The  Bdiwais  prayed  to  dieir  family  gods  in  vain. 
They  then  constilted  an  astrologer  of  repute  as  to 


3LEOENDS  OF  HEROES 


M9 

the  cause  of  iheir  misfortunes.  The  astrologer 
said  that  it  was  due  to  the  wrath  of  Badrinath  and 
that  they  should  propitiate  him  by  going  on  a 
pilgrimage  to  his  shrine. 

The  Belwals  then  went  on  a pilgrimage  to  Badri- 
nath. They  reached  a place  called  Bhatwa-\a- 
Sain  and  pitched  their  tents  there.  While  halting 
there,  they  saw  a lady  of  surpassing  beauty,  who 
was  also  going  on  a pilgrimage.  Her  name  was 
Jusyani.  The  Belwals  were  charmed  by  her 
beauty  and  forcibly  dragged  her  into  their  tent. 

When  their  old  mother  Dangwalia,  who  had 
accompanied  them,  heard  about  it  she  scolded  them, 
and  warned  them  of  the  danger  of  taking  another 
man’s  wife.  But  the  wicked  Belwals  would  not 
listen.  They  gave  up  the  pligrimage  and  returned 
home  widi  Jusyani.  They  camped  at  a place 
called  Amrika  Sain.  While  their  mother  was 
cooking  food  Chhotu  Budera,  the  husband  of 
Jusyani,  arrived  and  began  to  play  with  a ball  near 
their  kitchen  and  threw  it  into  the  kitchen.  The 
old  lady  abused  him,  saying  that  he  had  polluted 
her  food.  Chhotu  Budera  retaliated  and  a quarrel 
ensued.  She  then  called  her  eight  sons  who 
chalicnged  Chhotu  to  fight  with  them.  A severe 
fight  ensued  between  die  Belwals  and  Chhotu 


150  HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 

Budera.  At  last  Chhotu  killed  all  the  Belwals  and 
took  away  his  wife. 

The  mother  of  the  Belwals  wept  bitterly  and 
returned  home.  Her  eight  daughters-in-law,  thus 
widowed,  wrote  to  Dhamdeo  and  Brahmdeo,  Rajas 
of  Katyurgarh,  who  were  their  jajmans,  informing 
them  about  the  deaths  of  their  husbands.  On 
hearing  this  Dhamdeo  and  Brahmdeo  went  to 
Belihat.  The  widows  related  the  story  of  their 
bereavement  and  requested  Dhamdeo  and  Brahm- 
deo  to  wreak  vepgeance  on  Chhotu. 

Brahmdeo  and  Dhamdeo  went  with  their  armies 
to  Amri  Sera,  where  Chhotu  Budera  was  camping. 
On  meeting  Chhotu  Budera  they  rebuked  him  for 
having  Jcilled  the  Brahmans  and  challenged  him  to 
light  with  them.  After  a severe  battle  Chhotu 
Budera  with  his  large  army  of  Moghals  and  Pathans 
was  killed. 

Then  Dhamdeo  and  Brahmdeo  returned  home 
in  triumphant  procession  and  celebrated  their 
victory  over  the  enemy  of  their  priests  in  a suitable 
manner, 

25.  CHHAPUAHYUNR 

Once  upon  a time  a Prince  named  Chhaplia 
Hyimr  ruled  at  Ujain  Na^,  He  sent  out  chal- 
lenges to  all  die  Princes  far  and  near  for  a trial  of 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


I5I 

Strength.  He  sent  one  challenge  to  Asa  Rawat, 
who  lived  at  Bhagotikot,  and  another  to  Bhowan 
Singh  of  Maili  Jawari.  All  the  warriors  who 
accepted  the  challenge  assembled  at  Padi  Doon, 
Phondu  Mandrawal  of  Manduka  Sain  informed 
Chhaplia  of  the  arrival  of  those  warriors.  Chhaplia 
went  out  to  fight  against  them.  A great  warrior, 
name  Rudri  Kathait  of  Bamsu  Bangar,  was  also 
amongst  them.  Chhaplia  first  challenged  Rudri 
Kathait  to  fight  with  him.  A great  batde  ensued 
between  them  lasting  for  seven  days.  On  the 
seventh  day  Chhaplia  flew  up  in  the  clouds,  came 
down  upon  Rudri  and  cut  off  all  his  limbs  with  his 
dagger.  Rudri  fell  on  the  ground;  but  soon 
recovered  himself  and  shot  an  arrow  at  Chhaplia, 
which  pierced  his  heart.  In  the  meantime,  Bhow 
Singh  Bhandari  came  to  Chhaplia ’s  rescue.  He 
drew  his  dagger  and  cut  off  Rudri’s  head. 

Rudri  left  a son  named  Udi,  who  was  a mere 
baby.  On  coming  of  age  he  inquired  from  his 
mother  as  to  who  had  killed  his  father.  At  first 
she  gave  evasive  replies;  but,  when  pressed,  she 
related  the  whole  story  how  his  father  had  been 
killed  by  Chhaplia  and  Bhow  Singfi  at  Padi  Doon. 
On  hearing  this  Udi  was  in  a great  rage.  He  put 
on  his  armour  and  rode  off  to  Patli  Doon.  On 


152 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


reaching  there  he  inquired  as  to  who  had  killed  his 
father.  Chhaplia  Hyunr  replied  that  he  had  done 
it  and  challenged  him  to  fight.  A severe  batde 
ensued  between  them  lasting  for  ten  days.  On  the 
tenth  day  Chhaplia  cut  Udi’s  head.  One  Belu 
Naithani  of  Naithanikot,  who  was  in  Udi’s  army, 
approached  Chhaplia  and  said,  “O  Prince,  you  aje 
a god  according  to  Shastras.  I bow  down  before 
you.  I have  never  seen  a greater  warrior  than 
you.  Take  off  your  armour  and  allow  me  to  be 
your  charioteer.”  While  driving,  Belu  taunted  the 
Kshattriyas,  and  said  that  they  were  a race  of  tyrants 
and  hence  Pharas  Ram,  the  Brahman  warnor^  had 
killed  them.  On  hearing  this  Chhaplia  became 
angry  and  challenged  Belu  to  fight  with  him.  A 
severe  batde  raged  between  them  lasting  for  twelve 
days.  At  last  Belu  dxot  an  arrow  at  Chhaplia 
which  pierced  his  heart  On  this  Belu  retorted 
and  said,  “Hast  thou,  a Kshattriya,  exhausted  all 
diy  strcngdi  against  me,  a Brahman?”  Chhaplia 
was  stung  by  the  taunt,  and  mustering  courage, 
bandaged  his  wounds  and  cut  off  Belu’s  head  with 
his  da^^.  Then  0iha|&  killed  the  whole  army 
of  Rdu,  after  which  he  also  Spired. 


LEGENDS  OP  HEROES 


153 


26.  ASARAWAT 

Once  upon  a time  there  lived  a great  warrior  Asa 
Rawat  by  name,  at  the  fair  fort  of  Bhopatikot 
He  possessed  large  granaries  full  of  grain  and  im- 
mense wealth.  On  one  occasion  Bhopatikot  was 
visited  by  a great  famine  and  all  the  granaries  of 
Asa  became  empty  and  his  large  family  was  in 
danger  of  starvation.  When  all  his  resources  were 
exhausted  he  resolved  to  kill  himself  and  all  his 
family  rather  than  see  them  perish  one  by  one  of 
hunger.  He  ordered  a meal  and  mixed  poison  in 
it.  He  only  spared  one  of  his  wives  who  was  with 
child.  The  rest  of  the  family  partook  of  the 
poisoned  meal  and  died. 

In  due  course  the  widow  of  Asa  Rawat  was 
delivered  of  a son  of  imusual  strength  and  beauty. 
He  was  named  Bhana  Rawat.  At  his  birth  the 
portico  of  his  palace  cracked  and  the  four  famous 
horses  of  his  father  died.  The  four  tubs  in  which 
the  baby  was  bathed  broke  one  after  another. 
Bhana  was  as  bright  as  the  flame  of  a lamp  and  as 
beautiful  as  the  full  moon.  When  the  boy  grew  up 
he  performed  many  extraordinary  feats  of  strength. 
Bhana  and  his  mother  were  in  great  distress.  Bhana 
went  for  help  to  his  aunt  (father’s  sister)  who  was 
very  rich  and  lived  at  Airankot.  The  aunt  taunted 


154 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


him  by  saying  that  he  was  a bastard,  as  his  father 
had  died  before  his  birth.  On  hearing  this  Bhana 
was  much  ashamed.  He  left  his  aunt’s  place  and 
went  abroad  begging.  At  last  he  reached  Kuluni- 
kot,  where  lived  a Prince  by  name  Dharni  Kaluni. 
Bhana  went  to  Dharni  and  begged  for  some  em^ 
ployment.  Dharni  Kaluni  was  much  impressed  by 
the  beauty  of  the  lad  and  thought  that  he  was  some 
Prince  in  disguise.  Dharni  had  a young  daughter, 
named  Sara,  who  lived  in  the  forest,  tending  his 
herds  and  flocks.  Dharni  told  Bhana  that  if  he 
wanted  to  serve  he  should  go  to  his  cattleshed  in 
the  forest  and  help  his  daughter  to  look  after  his 
flocks  and  herds.  When  Bhana  reached  the  cattle- 
shed  Sara  warned  him  that  her  two  he-buffaloes, 
Chandu  and  Bhandu,  were  very  ferocious  and  killed 
every  man  who  went  near  them.  On  hearing  this 
Bhana  pulled  the  horns  of  the  buffaloes.  Sara 
was  struck  by  the  beauty  and  strength  of  Bhana. 
Bhana  and  Sara  fell  in  love  with  each  other.  After 
a while  Bhana  proposed  to  marry  her.  He  enquired 
whether  she  had  been  previously  betrothed  to  any- 
one else.  Sara  replied  that  she  had  been  betrothed 
to  one  of  the  seven  brothers  of  the  Butolas  who  lived 
at  Gwari  Tachwar.  On  hearirig  this  Bhana 
resolved  to  kiU  the  Butolas  of  Gwari  Tachwar  and 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


155 


then  marry  Sam.  So  he  went  back  home,  and  put 
on  his  father’s  armour,  and,  riding  his  famous 
spotted  war  horse,  started  for  Gwari  Tachwar.  On 
arriving  there  he  challenged  the  Butolas  to  fight 
with  him.  The  Butolas  were  the  fojdars  (Gover- 
nors) of  their  fatti.  They  collected  a large  army  to 
fight  against  the  enemy.  Bhana  mshed  into  the 
army  of  the  Butolas  and  killed  them  right  and 
left.  Streams  of  blood  flowed;  and  the  earth  was 
covered  with  corpses.  The  Butolas  lay  hidden 
under  the  heaps  of  dead  bodies  and  managed  to 
escape.  They  proceeded  to  Dharni  Kaluni’s  house 
and  asked  him  to  give  his  daughter  in  marriage  to 
them  at  once.  The  marriage  ceremony  com- 
menced. Before  the  ninth  step  of  the  marriage  had 
been  taken  by  the  pair,  Bhana  dropped  down,  as  if 
from  the  clouds.  Dharni  Kaluni  had  anticipated 
the  danger  and  had  fixed  sharp  pointed  spikes  round 
the  marriage  altar.  Bhana ’s  horse  stepped  on  the 
spikes  and  was  pierced  by  them  and  fell  down. 
Bhana  too  was  mortally  wounded  by  the  spikes. 
Bhana  bandaged  the  wounds,  and,  taking  hold  of  a 
big  slab  of  stone  in  his  hands,  killed  all  the  seven 
Butola  brothers  with  their  retinue.  He  also  killed 
Dharni  Kaluni  and  all  his  people.  He  then 
reclined  on  the  lap  of  Sam  and  expired.  Sam  wept 


156 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


bitterly  and  prepared  a funeral  pyre.  She  put  on 
a white  sari,  and,  applying  vermilion  to  her  fore 
head,  mounted  the  funeral  pyre  and  became  Sati. 

27.  GORIL 

In  days  of  old  an  illustrious  line  of  Princes  ruled 
at  Champaw'atgarh.  Their  pedigree  was  as  follows : 

Samal  Rai,  Malu  Rai,  Alu  Rai,  and  Jhalu 
Rai. 

Jhalu  Rai  had  seven  queens,  but  no  children.  One 
day  Jhalu  Rai  went  out  shooting  with  a large  reti- 
nue. While  shooting  in  the  jungle  he  felt  thirsty  and 
ordered  his  men  to  fetch  water  for  him.  After  a 
long  search  they  came  upon  a small  tank  of  water 
with  two  fountains,  one  of  gold  and  the  other  of 
silver.  There  was  also  a temple  near  the  tank. 
They  opened  the  doors  of  the  temple,  and,  to  their 
surprise,  found  a goddess  inside  the  temple.  The 
goddess  inquired  why  they  were  taking  water  from 
her  tank.  They  repHed  that  their  King,  who  had 
come  to  that  forest  to  hunt,  felt  very  thirsty  and  that 
they  were  taking  water  for  him.  The  name  of  the 
goddess  was  Kalindra,  She  did  not  allow  the 
Raja’s  men  to  take  water  from  her  tank.  The  men 
went  back  to  the  Raja  and  reported  the  matter  to 
him.  The  Raja  was  enraged  and  attacked  the 
temple  of  Kalindra.  On  seeing  the  goddess,  Jhalu 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


157 


Rai  fell  in  love  with  her  and  brought  her  home  in 
a palanquin  and  married  her.  Iii  due  course 
Kalindra  Was  with  child.  Jhalu  Rai  distributed 
alms  among  the  poor  by  way  of  thanksgiving. 
When  Kalindra  was  about  to  give  birth  to  her  child 
Jhalu  Rai  called  a clever  nurse  to  attend  her.  The 
other  seven  queens  of  Jhalu  Rai  were  envious,  and, 
in  collusion  with  the  nurse,  confined  Kalindra  in 
a dark  room.  Before  delivery,  the  nurse  and  the 
seven  queens  bandaged  Kalindra’s  eyes,  saying  that 
it  would  be  unlucky  for  her  to  see  her  fost  bom 
child  at  the  time  of  delivery.  Kalindra  heard  a 
voice  from  inside  her  womb  saying,  “ Oh  mother, 
I wish  to  come  into  the  world:  through  which 
part  of  your  body  shall  I come  out?”  The  mother 
replied  “My  dear  child,  come  out  the  usual  way.” 
The  child  said,  “I  am  divine:  I shall  be  bom 
through  your  left  eye,  as  Krishna  was  bom  riirough 
the  right  eye  of  his  mother  DevaH.”  Immediately 
the  child  was  delivered  through  the  left  eye  of 
Kalindra.  The  child’s  name  was  Goril.  The 
child  was  super-human.  He  had  twmty  arms  and 
rode  on  a wooden  horse.  As  soon  as  the  step- 
mothers of  Goril  saw  him,  they  shut  him  in  a 
casket  of  gold,  which  they  threw  into  a river.  They 
placed  a cylindrical  stone  by  the  side  of  Kalindra 


158  HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 

and  declared  that  she  had  been  delivered  of  a stone 
instead  of  a human  child.  Goril  called  out  to  his 
father  from  inside  the  casket  as  it  floated  down  the 
river  telling  Jhalu  Rai  that  he  was  his  son  and  was 
born  from  his  queen  Kalindra.  When  he  heard 
the  cry  Jhalu  Rai  had  the  casket  taken  out  of  the 
river,  and,  on  opening  it,  found  a child  of  extra- 
ordinary beauty  inside  it.  On  learning  of  the 
treachery  of  his  seven  queens,  Jhalu  Rai  ordered 
them  to  be  beheaded,  and  celebrated  the  birth  of  his 
son  in  a right  royal  manner.  On  Jhalu  Rai’s 
death  he  was  succeeded  on  the  throne  of  Champa- 
watgarh  by  his  son  Goril,  who  became  famous  for 
his  noble  qualities  of  head  and  heart.  One  in- 
stance of  his  justice  and  universal  love  may  be 

“ A dove  had  a nest  on  a ruini  tree  within  his 
kingdom  The  dove  had  her  nestlings  in  that  nest. 
There  lived  five  Dotial  Princes  in  the  neighbouring 
territory  of  Dotigarh,  They  were  great  tyrants. 
One  day  they  chanced  to  pass  under  the  ruini  tree 
on  which  the  dove’s  nestlings  were.  While  the 
Dotials  sat  under  the  ruini  tree,  the  dove  brought 
some  food  in  her  bill  for  her  nesdings  and  entered 
the  nest,  on  which  the  young  ones  came  out  of  the 
nest  and  began  to  twitter  and  to  eat  the  food.  On 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


159 


seeing  this,  the  cruel  Dotials  killed  the  young  birds 
with  their  arrows.  The  bereaved  mother  cried 
bitterly,  frantic  with  grief.  She  went  and  sat  over 
the  throne  of  Goril  and  shed  tears,  which  fell  in 
Goril’s  lap.  Goril  looked  up  and  saw  a dove 
weeping.  The  dove  narrated  her  sad  story  to  him. 
Goril  was  moved  by  righteous  indignation  and 
vowed  not  to  rest  till  he  had  caused  the  cruel 
Dotials  to  shed  tears  of  blood. 

Goril  at  once  collected  a large  army  and  invaded 
the  territory  of  the  Dotials  and  killed  all  of  them 
by  way  of  punishment  of  their  having  killed  the 
dove’s  nestlings.” 

Goril  ruled  over  his  kingdom  justly  as  Ram 
ruled  over  Ajodhia,  and  was  deified  after  his  death. 
A large  number  of  temples  are  still  to  be  found  in 
the  Himalayas  dedicated  to  Goril. 

28.  RANU  RAW  AT  AND  SUPIA  RAW  AT 

Once  there  lived  a chieftain  named  Hinwa 
Rawat  at  Kulawalikot,  who  held  a jagir  of  several 
villages  from  the  Raja  of  Srinagar.  He  had  a 
son  named  Bhinwa.  Both  Hinwa  and  his  son 
Bhinwa  were  great  warriors.  Bhinwa  had  a wife 
whose  name  was  Mainawati. 

A tribe  of  Airwals  lived  in  the  Doon  who  owed 
allegiance  to  the  Raja  of  Srinagar.  Owing  to  the 


l6o  HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 

illegal  exactions  of  the  Raja  they  revolted  against 
him.  The  Raja  sent  a letter  to  Hinwa  requesting 
him  to  go  and  subdue  the  Airwals.  On  reading 
the  letter  Hinwa  began  to  make  preparations  for 
the  expedition.  His  son  Bhinwa  said,  “Father, 
you  are  old  and  will  not  be  able  to  fight  alone.  I 
will  accompany  you  in  the  expedition.”  Hinwa 
consented.  They  both  started  for  the  Doon.  After 
encountering  many  difficulties  they  reached  the 
village  where  the  Airwals  lived  and  challenged 
them  to  fight.  A severe  battle  ensued,  which  lasted 
for  nine  days  and  lune  nights.  On  the  tenth  night 
a truce  was  arranged  between  the  contending 
parties  and  both  sides  went  to  rest.  While  Hinwa 
was  asleep  some  men  from  the  enemy’s  camp  went 
and  stabbed  him  to  death.  The  battle  was  resumed 
next  morning.  Bhinwa  was  furious  at  the  murder 
of  his  father  and  fought  single-handed  against  the 
enemy,  but  was  at  last  killed  in  the  battle.  When 
the  news  of  Hinwa  and  Bhinwa’s  death  reached 
Kulawalikot,  there  was  deep  mourning  through- 
out the  kingdom. 

Mainawati,  wife  of  Bhinwa,  was  a great  heroine 
and  bore  the  calamity  with  fortitude  and  vowed 
to  revenge  the  death  of  her  father-in-law  and  hus- 
band. She  had  a son,  named  Ranu  Rawat,  by 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


i6r 

Bhinwa,  and  the  boy  was  then  twelve  years  of  age. 
Mainawati  called  her  son  and  said,  “Dear  Ranu, 
thy  father  and  grandfather  have  been  killed  by 
the  enemy.  Thou  art  a worthy  son  of  a worthy 
father.  Go  and  revenge  thy  forefather’s  death.” 
On  hearing  this,  Ranu  was  afraid,  and  began  to 
weep.  Mainawati  again  addressed  him  thus,  “My 
son,  be  of  good  cheer.  Thou  hast  descended  from 
a long  line  of  warriors.  Thou  hast  sucked  the  milk 
which  can  break  through  even  an  iron  plate. 
Surely  thou  canst  kill  the  enemy.  Fear  not,  go 
and  fight,  and  vindicate  the  honour  of  thy  family.” 
So  saying,  she  pressed  her  breast  and  caused  a 
stream  of  her  milk  to  flow  with  such  force  that  it 
made  a hole  in  a thick  iron  plate.  Ranu  mustered 
courage  and  obeyed.  He  began  to  prepare  for  the 
expedition.  Mainawati  then  said  to  Ranu,  “ My  son, 
thy  cousin  (father’s  sister’s  son),  Jhankru,  lives  at 
Airakot.  Go  and  ask  him  to  accompany  thee  to 
the  Doon.”  Ranu  went  to  Jhankru  and  said, 
“Cousin,  thou  raayest  have  heard  that  my  father 
and  grandfather  have  been  killed  by  the  Airw'als  of 
the  Doon.  I am  determined  to  be  revenged  and 
fight  against  them.  I pray  thee  to  accompany  me 
in  the  expedition.” 


11 


i62 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


Ranu  had  a young  and  beautiful  wife  named 
Bimla.  On  seeing  her  Jhankru  fell  in  love  with 
her  and  was  anxious  to  stay  at  home.  When  Ranu 
was  ready  to  start,  he  requested  Jhankru  to  accom- 
pany him.  But  Jhankru  pretended  illness  and 
replied,  “Cousin,  I am  too  ill  to  fight  against  the 
enemy.  You  are  more  than  a match  for  them. 
Allow  me  to  stay  and  look  after  your  home  affairs 
during  your  absence.” 

Ranu  gave  him  permission  to  stay.  Ranu  donned 
his  armour  and  helmet  and  rode  off  to  the  Doon 
accompanied  by  his  family  bard  Champhu.  After 
encountering  many  hardships  Ranu  reached  the 
Doon  and  sent  a challenge  to  the  Airwals  to  fight 
against  him.  The  Airwals  collected  a large  army 
to  fight  against  Ranu.  A big  battle  ensued  which 
lasted  for  nine  days  and  nine  nights.  Ranu  mowed 
down  the  army  of  the  Airwals  with  his  sword  like 
figs.  While  Ranu  was  fightiiig  against  the  enemy 
Champhu  hur}(ta  was  singing  songs  in  praise  of 
his  master  in  order  to  cheer  him.  After  killing  the 
whole  army  of  the  Airwals,  Ranu  marched  into 
their  village  and  killed  all  the  inhabitants  thereof. 
The  Airwals  had  buried  the  heads  of  Hinwa  and 
Bhinwa  in  a drain  under  the  staircase  of  their 
house.  Ranu  dug  up  the  heads  and  brought  them 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


163 

home  in  a triumphant  procession.  While  return- 
ing home  Ranu  saw  Jhankru  in  a dream  sleeping 
on  the  bed  of  his  wife  Bimla.  Ranu  started  and 
trembled  with  rage.  He  rushed  towards  his  home 
like  a roaring  lion.  In  the  meantime  Bimla  had 
heard  of  the  approach  of  Ranu  and  hastily  con- 
cealed Jhankm  in  a cornbin.  On  reaching  Bimla’s 
room,  Ranu  caught  hold  of  Bimla  and  threatened  to 
kill  her,  unless  she  showed  her  paramour.  Bimla 
remonstrated  m vain.  At  last  the  cunning  Bimla 
hit  upon  a plan  to  save  herself  and  her  paramour. 
She  tauntingly  replied,  “Sir,  you  are  falsely  accus- 
ing me,  but  forget  that  you  yourself  have  crucUy 
deserted  your  former  wife,  Sushiia,  daughter  of 
Birwa  Bhandari  of  Birukot,  to  whom  your  father 
had  betrothed  you  while  you  were  still  in  your 
mother’s  womb.  She  is  about  to  be  remarried  to 
one  Mclu  Kulani  of  Kalunikot  If  you  are  a 
true  hero  go  and  fetch  her  home  first.  Then  shall 
I willingly  offer  myself  as  a sacrifice  to  her.”  Ranu 
was  vexed  by  these  sarcastic  words  of  Bimla  and 
resolved  to  bring  Sushiia  from  Bimlikote  and  then 
offer  Bimla  as  a sacrifice  to  her. 

He  started  for  Bimlikot  at  once.  On  reaching 
Bimlikot  Ranu  disguised  himself  as  a sadhu,  and 
sat  on  the  way  leading  to  Mclu  Kaluni’s  house. 


164 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


He  saw  a girl  of  surpassing  beauty  being  taken  in 
a palanquin  in  a great  procession  from  Melu 
Kaluni’s  house.  Ranu  went  up  to  Birwa  Bhandari 
and  said,  “O  Birwa,  I am  the  Guru  of  Melu  Kalum. 
1 have,  come  to  congratulate  the  bride  on  her 
marriage.  Allow  me  to  speak  to  her  in  private.” 
Birwa  bowed  down  and  gave  the  sadhu  permission 
to  see  the  bride.  Ranu  went  up  to  the  bride’s 
palanquin,  introduced  himself  to  her  and  said, 
'‘Dear,  dost  thou  not  know  tliat  we  were  betrothed 
to  each  other  while  yet  unborn?  Pray,  pardon  me 
for  my  neglecting  thee  so  long.  I love  thee  most 
dearly  and  have  come  to  take  thee  away.”  Sushila 
was  charmed  by  the  beauty  and  youth  of  Ranu  and 
accepted  Ranu  as  her  partner.  Ranu  then  threw 
off  his  disguise,  and,  approaching  Birwa  Bhandari, 
said,  “Birwa,  thou  hast  no  right  to  take  away  this 
girl,  who  had  been  betrothed  to  me  long  ago.  I 
will  not  allow  thee  to  take  her  and  I challenge  thee 
to  fight  with  me.”  A great  battle  ensued  between 
them.  Ranu  mowed  down  Birwa  and  his  men 
with  his  dagger  like  so  many  figs.  Kalu,  brother  of 
Melu  Kaluni,  alone  escaped.  Ranu  carried  away 
Sushila  towards  his  home. 

Ranu  was  completely  exhausted  and  rested  on 
the  banks  of  a river  and  fell  into  a deep  slumber. 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


165 


Kalu  pursued  them  and  reached  the  place  where 
Ranu  was  asleep.  He  stealthily  stabbed  Ranu  inflict- 
ing mortal  wounds.  Ranu  started  up  from  his 
sleep,  and,  looking  towards  Kalu,  caught  him  by 
the  neck  and  dashed  him  to  death. 

Ranu’s  strength  soon  began  to  fail.  He  clasped 
Sushila  and  ejaculated,  “Dear  Sushila,  thou  hast 
sacrificed  thy  all  for  my  sake.  Alas ! I have  made 
thee  the  most  miserable  creature  on  earth.  I am 
departing  from  this  world,  leaving  thee  to  the  care 
of  God.  May  God  unite  us  in  the  next.  Adieu !” 
So  saying,  Ranu  expired.  Sushila  wept  bitterly  ; 
but  there  was  none  to  console  or  sympathize  with 
her.  She  then  placed  Ranu’s  dead  body  on  a 
funeral  pyre,  mounted  it  herself  and  placing  Ranu’s 
head  in  her  lap  set  fire  to  it  and  was  soon  burnt  to 
ashes. 

After  the  death  of  Ranu  a posthumous  son  was 
bom  to  Simla,  who  was  named  Supia  Rawat  He 
was  a greater  warrior  than  his  father.  When  he 
was  still  a stripling  he  heard  the  story  of  the  death 
of  his  forefathers,  which  made  his  blood  boil.  He 
vowed  to  wreak  vengeance  on  the  enemy.  He  first 
went  to  Kalunikot  and  killed  all  the  sons  and 
grandsons  of  Melu  Kaluni.  Then  he  proceeded 
to  Birukot  and  killed  Birwa  Bhandari,  with  all  his 


i66 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


kith  and  kin.  Lastly,  he  went  to  the  house  of 
Jhankru  and  killed  him  and  all  his  family. 

Supia  then  returned  home  in  a triumphant  pro- 
cession. On  reaching  home  he  went  to  his  mother 
Bimla  and  said,  “O  thou  wretched  old  hag,  thou 
hast  been  the  cause  of  the  ruin  of  our  family.  The 
only  punishment  suitable  for  thy  foul  deed  is 
death.”  So  saying  Supia  drew  his  sword  to  kill 
her.  But  Mainawati  stopped  him  and  said  that  it 
was  a great  sin  to  kill  one’s  own  mother,  however 
wicked  she  might  be,  Supia  was:  dius  persuaded 
to  spare  Bimla. 

After  killing  all  his  enemies  Supia  ruled  in 
peace. 

29.  BIRTH  OF  DEORI,  MOTHER  OF  KRISHNA 
In  the  Himalayan  folklore  Krishna  is  called  the 
King  of  the  Nags,  or  Nag  Raja.  There  are  many 
songs  sung  describing  the  birth  of  Krishna  and  his 
early  life. 

The  substance  of  one  song  is  given  below  :. 

The  genealogy  of  the  Nag  dynasty  is  as  follows: 
Ami  Nag,  Phrai  Na^  Sisar  Na^,  Bisar 
Nag,  Tataki  Na^  B^isula  Nag^  father  of 
Eoishna. 

This  genealogy,  though  somewhat  different  from 
that  given  in  the  Purans,  is  interesting. 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


167 


King  Auk  had  four  queens — Dki,  Aditi, 
Kadru  and  Banita.  From  Kadru  were  born  2,740 
daughters.  She  married  2,700  of  her  daughters  to 
the  moon,  and  from  them  were  born  the  kings  of 
the  Lunar  dynasty,  She  married  the  remaining 
daughters  to  the  sun,  and  from  them  were  bom  the 
kings  of  the  Solar  dynasty.  The  male  issue  from 
Kadru  were  the  \Tiltures;  while  those  from  Banita 
were  the  snakes. 

The  gods  were  born  from  Diti  and  the  demons 
from  Aditi. 

Once  upon  a time  Kansa  was  the  king  of  the 
demons.  He  oppressed  both  gods  and  men.  He 
levied  illegal  taxes  of  various  kinds,  such  as  on 
unmarried  girls  and  on  the  grass  that  grew  in  the 
forest.  He  forced  the  gods  to  accept  bis  suzerainty. 
Then  the  gods  approached  Brahma  in  a body  for 
consultation.  They  cut  open  their  thighs  and 
filled  an  eardten  jar  with  their  blood,  Brahma 
said,  “From  Ais  blood  will  issue  forth  a being,  who 
will  destroy  Kansa  and  oAcr  demons,” 

They  Aen  tmt  Ae  jar,  carefully  packed,  to  Kansa 
by  way  of  hotasge,  Kansa  was  much  pleased  and 
ordered  the  jar  to  he  handed  over  to  his  old 
moAcr,  aged  eighty  years.  Her  name  was  Pawan 
Rekha.  Pawan  Rckha  opened  Ae  vessel  and 


i68 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


looked  into  it.  While  thus  leaning  over  the  pot. 
she  inhaled  the  vapour  arising  from  it.  They 
penetrated  into  her  womb  and  caused  her  to  be- 
come pregnant.  When  she  became  aware  of  it, 
she  was  alarmed,  and  called  her  seven  sons  to  her, 
and  told  them  about  it,  adding  that  it  foreboded  evil 
to  the  family.  In  due  course  Pawan  Rekha  was 
delivered  of  a female  child,  whom  the  astrologers 
named  Deoki.  They  also  predicted  that  her 
eighth  child  would  destroy  Kansa  and  other 
demons. 

30.  THE  INVENTION  OF  PLOUGHING 

After  the  Guru  had  created  the  earth  and  all 
things  that  dwell  in  it,  man  approached  him  and 
said,  “How  shall  I live  on  this  earth?”  The  Guru 
first  called  the  lion  and  asked  him  to  plough  the 
earth.  The  lion  replied  that  he  was  the  king  of 
the  forest  and  it  would  be  derogatory  for  him  to 
plough.  Then  the  Guru  called  the  other  animals, 
one  by  one,  who  all  declined  to  plough.  At  last 
the  bullock  was  asked  and  he  agreed.  The  Guru 
was  very  pleased  with  him  and  blessed  him  thus, 
“Thou  shalt  be  worshipped  by  men  in  the  Kali 
Age.  Thou  shalt  be  anointed,  worshipped  and 
feasted  on  the  twelve  days  of  the  Dewali  festival. 
Silver  caps  will  be  put  on  diy  horns  and  none  will 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES 


169 


remain  without  thee.”  Then  the  Guru  called 
Melu,  the  ploughman,  and  said,  “ Of  what  wilt 
thou  make  the  plough?”  Melu  named  all  the 
metals  from  gold  to  iron,  one  by  one.  Bui  God 
said,  “The  poor  cannot  afford  to  make  their 
ploughs  of  these  precious  metals.  Make  the 
plough  of  wood  and  the  ploughshare  of  iron.” 
Then  Melu  went  to  the  blacksmith  and  asked  him 
to  make  a plough  of  wood  for  him,  and  offered 
nine  \hars  (one  \har  is  equal  to  about  16  maunds) 
of  paddy  as  wages.  But  the  Gum  said,  “The  poor 
will  not  be  able  to  pay  as  much  as  that.  Let  the 
wages  for  making  a plough  be  one  winnowing 
basketful  only  for  all  alike.”  Then  the  Gum 
called  the  bullock  and  put  the  silver  caps  on  his 
horns.  He  also  created  butter  to  mb  his  neck 
with,  so  that  the  yoke  might  not  hurt  it.  He  then 
ordered  the  swine  to  mb  the  butter  on  the  bullock’s 
neck  with  his  snout.  The  boar  ate  a part  of  the 
butter  himself  and  mbbed  a little  on  the  bullock’s 
neck.  Hence  the  neck  of  the  bullock  has  remained 
soft  and  is  hurt  with  the  yoke.  The  Gum  cursed 
the  swine;  and  foretold  that  in  the  Kali  Age  he 
would  meet  a cmel  death  by  his  stomach  being 
pierced  with  a sharp  stick  (this  refers  to  the  way  in 
which  a swine  is  killed). 


170 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


31.  NIRANKAR 

The  following  curious  story  is  sung  during  the 
worship  of  Nirankar: 

“ Kavir,  the  weaver,  had  dedicated  one  basketful 
of  grain  and  two  cocoanuts  to  Nirankar. 

^ Nirankar  went  to  Kavir’s  house  to  receive  the 
offerings,  in  the  guise  of  a beggar,  while  Kavir  was 
away.  He  asked  for  alms  from  Kavir’s  wife. 
She  said  that  the  only  grain  left  in  the  house  was 
the  basket  which  had  been  dedicated  to  Nirankar. 
The  beggar  told  her  to  give  him  out  of  this. 
Kavir’s  wife  went  on  taking  out  the  grain 
from  the  big  basket  in  order  to  fill  the  beggar’s 
bowl,  but  could  not  fill  it.  She  emptied  the  whole 
basket,  still  the  bowl  could  not  be  filled.  She  then 
took  out  the  two  cocoanuts  also  and  offered  them 
to  the  beggar.  The  sadhu  told  her  to  close  her  eyes, 
which  she  did.  On  reopening  her  eyes  she  found, 
to  her  great  astonishment,  all  her  room  over-full 
with  grain  and  two  sons  playing  by  her  side  in 
place  of  one — but  the  sadhu  had  disappeared.  He 
was  a cripple  and  had  put  the  two  cocoanuts  in 
his  armpits.  While  running  back  from  Kavir’s 
house,  the  two  cocoanuts  dropped  down  in  an  un- 
clean place  and  wefe  changed  into  male  and  female 
swines.  This  story  is  evidently  invented  to  explain 


LEGENDS  OF  HEROES  I7I 

why  the  Dorns  in  the  Hills  sacrifice  pigs  to  Niran- 
kar  instead  of  goats. 

32.  SONG  IN  HONOUR  OF  NIRANKAR 

The  following  song  describes  the  genesis  of  the 
world  thus: 

“In  the  beginning  there  was  neither  earth,  nor 
sky,  nor  water.  Nirankar,  the  Guru,  alone  existed. 
The  Guru  rubbed  his  right  side  and  from  the  sweat 
thereof  a female  vulture  was  born.  The  Guru 
rubbed  his  left  side  and  from  the  sweat  thereof  a 
male  vulture  was  produced.  Thus  the  female 
vulture  was  placed  over  the  male.  The  name  of 
the  female  vulture  was  Soni  Garuri,  and  of  the 
male,  Brahma  Garur.  The  Guru  was  surprised 
that  while  he  wished  to  create  human  beings  who 
would  serve  him,  vultures  were  produced  instead. 
The  male  vulture  flew  to  the  east  and  then  to  the 
north.  He  then  came  to  marry  Soni  Garuri. 
Soni  Garuri  said,  “O  dear,  you  and  I have  been 
created  by  the  same  Guru  and  are  brother  and 
sister.  How  can  we  marry  each  other?”  She  then 
made  taunting  remarks  about  his  ugly  shape,  which 
caused  Brahma  Garur  to  weep.  Then  Soni 
repented  and  picked  up  the  tear-drops  which  had 
fallen  from  the  Garur’s  eyes.  The  tears  penetrated 


172 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


into  her  womb  and  she  became  pregnant.  She 
ilew  to  the  abode  of  Brahma  Garur  and  begged 
him  to  build  a nest  for  her  to  lay  eggs  in.  The 
Garur  retorted,  “You  are  an  unchaste  woman. 
How  did  you  become  pregnant?  You  are  also 
very  ugly.  I cannot  accept  you  as  my  wife.” 
Soni  began  to  weep.  Brahma,  who  was  moved  by 
her  helplessness,  said,  “There  is  neither  earth  nor 
water.  Where  can  I build  a nest  for  thee  ? Come, 
and  lay  eggs  on  my  wings.”  Soni  replied : “You 
are  the  vehicle  of  Vishnu  and  would  be  polluted 
by  my  laying  eggs  on  your  body.” 

The  egg  dropped  do^vn  and  was  divided  into 
two  halves.  The  lower  half  became  tlie  earth 
and  the  upper  half  the  sky.  The  fluids  inside  the 
egg  became  the  sea  and  die  fleshy  substance  the 
land. 

Thus  did  Nirankar  create  the  world. 


SECTION  II 

INTRODUCTION  BY  REV.  E.  S.  OAKLEY 

The  fact  has  often  been  remarked  that  almost 
all  races,  however  remote  from  one  another  in 
place  and  time,  and  however  little  related  in 
language,  have  practically  much  the  same  myths. 
The  same  may  be  said  of  the  fairy  tales  and  folk- 
lore of  different  countries.  This  has  given  rise  to 
much  speculation.  Some  have  thought  that  the 
elements  of  folklore,  representing  such  remarkable 
similarities,  must  be  genealogically  descended 
from  ideas  prevalent  at  a time  when  the  human 
race  was  practically  one,  and  undivided.  It  is 
obviously  impossible  to  trace  such  a connection 
historically,  since  we  have  nothing  but  the  folk- 
tales themselves  to  go  upon;  although  it  can  be 
seen  that  the  old  Sanskrit  stories,  such  as  those 
contained  in  the  Panch-Tantra  and  also  many 
other  stories,  are  the  originals  of  much  in  the  folk- 
lore of  Asia  and  England.  Much  ingenuity  was 
wasted  in  the  last  half  century  on  attempts  to  show 
the  descent  for  fables  philologically;  and  an  Indian 
origin  was  ascribed  in  the  elaborate  speculations  of 
Max  Muller,  Sir  G.  Coxc  and  others,  to  Greek  and 

17» 


m 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


Roman  mythology.  Sanskrit  etymologies  were  ex- 
pected to  explain  everything.  More  recent 
inquirers  have  realized  that  etymology  does  not 
really  explain  the  origin  of  a myth  or  fable.  A 
more  real  solution  to  the  puzzle  is  found  in  the 
reflection  that  all  races  began  at  the  same  mental 
level,  and  human  nature  from  the  beginning  being 
a constant  quantity,  the  same  ideas,  in  almost  the 
same  forms,  were  evolved  in  various  countries,  re- 
presenting the  attempt  of  early  man  to  formulate 
some  theory  of  the  natural  appearances  around 
him.  Many  of  these  are  incredibly  rude  and 
■gross  even  in  the  beautiful  mythology  of  Greece. 
It  is  not  because  some  deep  spiritual  meaning  is 
concealed  beneath  the  rude  form,  but  because  they 
faithfully  reflect  the  ideas  of  early  men,  handed 
down  in  a modified  form  to  a more  refined  age  in 
which  they  appear  as  strange  survivals,  like  Pan 
and  the  Fauns  and  Satyrs,  presenting  themselves 
in  the  company  of  well-bred  ladies  and  gentlemen. 
In  the  folktales  of  every  land  we  have  survivals  of 
the  primitive  conception  of  the  world  and  the 
forces  of  nature.  In  this  connection  it  is  not  easy 
to  distinguish  between,  mythology  and  folklore  ; 
for  both  represent  an  early  stage  of  consciousness 
when  man’s  fancy  worked  with  freedom  and  was 


INTRODUCTION 


175 


employed  to  give  an  explanation  of  all  things. 
We  arc  apt  to  think  too  seriously  of  the  so-called 
religious  ideas  of  non-christian  peoples.  They 
are  largely  relics  of  man’s  early  unrestrained  fancy, 
consecrated,  to  some  extent,  in  later  times,  by  cus- 
tom and  priestly  adoption;  but,  originally,  on  the 
same  level  as  our  nursery  tales.  To  the  early  in- 
telligence of  our  remote  ancestors  everything  was 
alive.  Life  was  a constant  surprise,  and  miracles 
happened  every  hour.  Nothing  was  inconceivable, 
because  everything  was  possible.  Hence  the 
wonderful  richness  of  fancy  which  characterises 
these  early  pictures.  Hence  also  the  peculiar  ascrip 
tion  of  life  to  all  kinds  of  objects.  A savage  state  is 
even  now  existing  in  some  countries  to  which  the 
name-  of  Animism  and  Fetishism  have  been 
applied.  The  vivid  sense  of  life  as  existing  every- 
where, combined  with  a vagfue  and  confused  idea 
as  to  what  constitutes  life  and  soul,  gave  rise  to  the 
notions  famihar  to  us  in  our  commonest  fables 
and  folktales.  We  may  take  for  example  the  idea 
of  a magician’s  soul  or  life  as  something  which  he 
ran  hide  away  in  order  to  keep  it  safe  from  ene- 
mies, but  whose  hiding-place  the  hero  of  the  story 
discovers,  with  fatal  consequences  to  the  wizard. 
This  is  said  to  be  a real  belief  among  some  savage 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


176 

tribes  existing  today.  In  Mr.  W.  B.  Yeats* 
charming  review  of  Irish  folktales  there  is  a story 
about  the  souls  of  drowned  sailors  being  kept  in 
lobster  pots  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea  ; and  when 
these  were  turned  up  the  souls  escaped.  In 
Grim’s  Fairy-tales  we  read  of  the  house  of  Death 
where  the  souls  of  men  burn  as  candles,  and 
when  one  goes  out  a life  ceases.  In  the  same  book 
we  read  of  a child’s  soul  being  present  in  a rose 
which  blossomed  afresh  when  the  child  died  ; and 
of  another  child  whose  life  was  identified  with  that 
of  a toad  the  killing  of  which  caused  it  to  die  also. 
A manuscript  collection  of  Himalayan  folktales  has 
come  into  the  writer’s  possession,  made  a good 
many  years  ago,  by  an  Indian  official  in  Garhwal. 
It  is  interesting  to  come  across  a story  in  which  the 
familiar  feature  above  mentioned  finds  a place. 
The  story  is  given  below  exactly  as  told  by  the 
peasants  of  Garhwal  in  the  long  winter  evenings. 

In  an  island  beyond  the  seven  seas  there  lived 
a demon  who  had  a beautiful  daughter.  A cer- 
tain prince,  hearing  of  her  beauty,  fell  in  love 
with  her  fame  and  set  off  to  gain  her  hand  in 
marriage.  It  took  him  six  months  to  travel  to 
the  island,  but  at  last  he  arrived  there  and  foimd 
a large  and  beautiful  city  adorned  with  gold, 


llSrTRODUCTION 


177 


silver  and  precious  stones,  but  with  no  human 
beings  in  its  streets.  The  inhabitants  of  the  city 
had  all  been  devoured  by  the  fiend.  At  length, 
after  wandering  about  the  place  for  some  hours, 
he  espied  the  princess  sitting  at  a window  of  the 
royal  palace.  He  approached  and  entered  into 
conversation  with  her.  She  earnesdy  advised  him 
to  go  aw?y  at  once,  saying  “Wretched  mortal, 
what  ill  fate  has  brought  thee  here  only  to  be 
devoured  by  my  father  who  is  even  now  gone  to 
hunt  for  human  prey?  You  will  surely  fall  into 
his  clutches  unless  you  escape  quickly,  for  no  man 
who  visits  this  barren  island  is  ever  spared  by  him. 
He  can  traverse  a hundred  miles  in  a few  minutes. 
You  had  better  be  off  with  all  speed.”  The  prince 
replied,  “ Beautiful  lady,  I have  come  hither  for 
pur  sake  only.  After  posing  through  all  man 
ncr  of  dar^rs  and  hardships  I can  not  forsake  you 
now,  even  should  I be  eaten  by  pur  father.  I 
shall  willingly  die  in  the  attempt  to  gain  you.” 
The  princess,  touched  by  his  devotion,  then  showed 
him  some  gourds  which  the  demon  had  filled 
with  different  articles  intended  for  his  own  de- 
fence. The  first  contained  mist,  and  the  second 
thorns,  the  third  water,  the  fourth  mountains. 
By  means  of  these  the  demon  hoped  to  be  able  to 


178 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


escape  from  every  adversary.  She  also  showed  the 
prince  an  iron  cage  in  which  a parrot  was  kept, 
and  in  the  parrot  was  the  demon’s  life.  She  then 
instructed  him  how  he  should  proceed  when 
attacked  by  the  demon.  As  soon  as  the  prince 
had  taken  the  gourds  in  his  hands,  the  fiend  felt 
sick  and  giddy,  his  life  being  threatened;  and  per- 
ceiving that  an  attempt  was  being  made  to  destroy 
him,  he  ran  homewards.  The  prince  thereupon 
dashed  down  the  mist  gourd,  which  spread  dark- 
ness in  his  path.  Then  he  broke  the  thorn 
gourd,  the  water  gourd,  the  mountain  gourd,  one 
after  another,  and  these  threw  obstacles  in  his  way 
and  hindered  his  approach  to  the  house.  Yet,  in 
spite  of  all  these  hindrances,  he  was  making  his 
way  rapidly  homewards.  When  he  had  come 
quite  near,  the  prince  severed  the  legs  of  the  parrot 
with  his  sword,  and  immediately  the  demon  fell 
down.  He,  however,  managed  to  drag  along  his 
body  over  the  ground  towards  his  enemy.  But 
just  as  he  was  about  to  close  with  the  prince,  the 
latter  killed  the  parrot  outright,  whose  death  at 
once  caused  that  of  the  demon.  The  prince  mar- 
ried the  daughter,  and  returned  triumphantly  to 
his  own  country,  taking  with  him  his  beautiful 
bride. 


INTRODUCTION 


179 


Another  story  embodies  the  same  idea,  and 
mentions  also  a profusion  of  magical  properties 
which  would  be  exceedingly  useful  to  any  official 
on  tour,  such  as  a fairy  flute,  flying  bed,  a self- 
tying  rope,  an  automatic  club,  a self-cooking  pot 
and  auto-distributing  spoon.  The  wizard’s  life  was 
concealed  in  an  insect  inhabiting  the  body  of  a 
parrot  kept  in  an  iron  cage,  which  again  was 
secured  in  an  innermost  chamber,  there  being  six 
outer  rooms  carefully  padlocked  leading  to  it,  and 
the  keys  of  these  rooms  were  kept  by  the  magi- 
cian himself.  As  soon  as  the  hero  (who  in  this 
case  also  was  the  lover  of  the  wizard’s  daughter) 
opened  the  first  room,  the  wizard  felt  feverish, 
when  the  second  room  was  unlocked,  he  had 
high  fever.  The  magic  flute  when  played  called 
down  a number  of  heavenly  nymphs  (Apsaras, 
it  is  to  be  presumed),  who  danced  bewitchingly 
and  produced  a shower  of  celestial  flowers  (Parijat 
flowers)  which  have  wonderful  properties. 


CHAPTER  II — Wit  and  Wisdom 

WE  turn  now  to  stories  connected  with  the 
supernatural,  and  sagas  such  as  are 
found  in  the  popular  lore  of  most 
countries.  Readers  may  think  that  some  of  these 
Himalayan  tales  in  their  mingling  of  subde  fancy, 
rustic  charm,  and  reminiscence  of  old-world 
superstitions,  compare  not  unfavourably  with  the 
famous  Murchen  collected  by  the  brothers  Grim, 
or,  the  familiar  stories  of  our  Celtic  and  English 
folklore. 


1.  WARNING  TO  MISERS 

Once  a king  proclaimed  throughout  his  domi- 
nions that  he  would  give  a lakh  of  rupees  to  any 
man  who  could  • consent  to  be  entombed  alive. 
Half  the  sum  was  to  be  paid  in  advance  and  the 
other  half  if  he  came  out  unscathed  from  the 
ordeal.  A rich  miser  was  attracted  by  the  glitter- 
ing offer,  and  volunteered.  He  was  taken  in  pro- 
cession by  the  king’s  officers,  accompanied  by  a 
great  concourse  of  spectators.  On  the  way  to  this 
place  he  was  met  by  a dervish,  who  asked  for 

181 


iSz 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


alms,  telling  the  miser  that  as  he  was  going  to  be 
buried,  he  ought  to  give  away  something  for  the 
benefit  of  his  soul.  As  he  had  nothing  else  about 
him  to  give,  the  miser  jestingly  handed  over  to  the 
dervish  the  shell  of  an  almond  which  he  picked 
up  from  the  ground.  The  dervish  said,  “You 
will  get  the  reward  of  what  you  have  given  me”. 
The  man  was  then  buried  in  a tomb,  which  was 
closed  up.  While  in  this  living  grave  he  saw 
many  hideous  sights.  Horrid  ghosts  came  to  de- 
vour him  and  venomous  snakes  assailed  him  ; but 
the  almond  shell  stood  him  in  good  stead  ; for  it 
was  interposed  between  the  jaws  of  the  serpents 
every  time  they  sought  to  bite  him.  Next  morn- 
ing the  king  came  to  the  place  and  ordered  the 
tomb  to  be  opened,  expecting  that  the  entombed 
man  would  certainly  have  perished  ; but  to  the 
astonishment  of  all  the  man  was  found  alive.  He 
was  taken  out,  bathed  and  sumptuously  attired, 
and  told  to  accompany  the  king  to  his  palace  to 
receive  the  remainder  of  the  promised  reward. 
He,  however,  flatly  refused  to  go,  declaring  that  he 
must  return  home  at  once  to  attend  to  his  affairs ; 
promising  however  to  come  back  later.  On  reach- 
ing home  he  without  a moment’s  delay  began  dis- 
tributing the  whole  of  his  wealth  to  the  poor,  so 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


183 

deeply  had  the  lesson  of  that  dreadful  night  im- 
pressed itself  on  his  mind.  He  gave  away  all  his 
possessions  not  leaving  anything  for  himself  or  his 
children.  On  going  to  receive  the  second  half 
of  the  lakh  of  rupees  from  the  king,  he  related 
what  had  occurred  to  him  while  in  Ae  tomb,  and 
taking  the  money  distributed  that  also  to  the  poor. 

The  idea  that  ahns  given  in  one’s  life-time  will 
be  repaid  in  the  future  world  is  found  in  many 
old  legends.  It  is  clearly  expressed  in  the  Vendi- 
dad  of  the  Zendavesta,  where  we  find  it  stated, 
“At  the  head  of  the  Chirival  bridge  (over  which 
the  souls  have  to  pass  after  death),  the  holy  bridge 
made  by  Mazdu,  they  ask  for  their  spirits  the 
reward  for  the  wordly  goods  which  they  gave 
away.”  Referring  to  the  idea  of  the  return  of 
alms.  Sir  Walter  Scott  quotes  a passage  from  an 
old  manuscript  in  the  Cotton  Library,  descriptive  of 
the  district  of  Cleveland  in  Elizabeth’s  reign — 
“When  any  dieth,  certain  women  sing  a song  to 
the  dead  body,  reciting  the  journey  that  the  party 
deceased  must  go,  and  they  are  of  belief  (such  is 
their  fondness)  that  once  in  their  lives  it  is  good  to 
give  a pair  of  new  shoes  to  a poor  man,  for  as  much 
as  after  this  life  they  are  to  pass  bare-foot  through  a 
great  land  full  of  thorns  and  furzen,  except  by  the 


184 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


merit  of  the  alms  aforesaid  they  have  redeemed 
the  forfeit,  for  at  the  edge  of  the  land  an  old  man 
shall  meet  them  with  the  same  shoes  that  are  given 
by  the  party  when  he  was  living,  and  after  he  had 
shod  them  dismisseth  them  to  go  through  thick 
and  thin  without  scratch  or  scathe.”  The  verses 
which  are  quoted  by  Scott,  and  which  the  writer 
has  himself  heard  recited  by  an  old  Cleveland 
woman  are  the  following  among  others: 

“ If  ever  thou  gave  hosen  or  shoon 
Every  night  and  all,  sit  thee  down  and  put 
them  on, 

And  Christ  receive  thy  saul. 

But  if  hosen  and  shoon  thou  never  gave 
nane, 

Every  night  and  all. 

The  furzen  shall  prick  thee  to  the  bare 
bane, 

And  Christ  receive  thy  saul. 

If  ever  thou  gave  either  milk  or  drink, 
every  night  and  all. 

The  fire  shall  never  make  thee  shrink,  and 
Christ  receive  thy  saul.” 

According  to  Mannhardt  and  Grinun  a pair  of 
shoes  was  deposited  ih  the  grave  in  Scandinavia 
and  Germany  for  this  very  purpose.  In  one 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


185 


district  of  the  latter  the  term  “ todtens  shuh  ” or 
dead-shoe  is  applied  to  a funeral.  In  Scandinavia 
the  shoe  is  named  hd-s\o  or  hell-shoe. 

2.  THE  LUCKY  SIMPLETON 

There  were  once  two  brothers,  the  elder  of 
whom  was  a cunning  rogue  who  always  kept  the 
younger  one  hard  at  work  grazing  the  cattle  and 
rilling  the  land,  and  gave  him  only  four  “ chapa- 
ries  ” or  breadcakes  for  his  daily  meal.  One  day 
the  younger  while  sowing  in  the  field  ran  short 
of  seed-corn,  so  returned  home  for  a fresh  supply. 
As  the  elder  brother  and  his  wife  had  gone  out 
for  a rime,  he  looked  round  the  house  and  found 
a quantity  of  nice  food  ready  baked  in  the  kitchen. 
He  quietly  took  his  seed  and  went  back  to  his 
work,  but  on  return  he  received  the  usual  fare 
and  none  of  the  good  things  he  had  seen  ready. 
Anger  rose  in  his  heart,  and  he  taxed  his  brother 
with  his  unkind  treatment.  His  brother  mock- 
ingly told  him  that  the  reason  of  his  getting  only 
four  chapaties  for  his  dinner  was  because  his 
Luck  was  asleep  at  a place  beyond  the  seven  seas. 
However  his  jesting  words  turned  out  truer  than 
he  imagined.  The  young  man  believed  what  his 
elder  brother  said,  and  set  off  to  go  and  awake  his 


i86 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


good  fortune.  While  wandering  in  a forest  seek- 
ing the  way  to  the  place  of  which  he  had  been 
told,  he  noticed  a snake  climbing  up  a tree  to 
devour  the  young  ones  of  a vulture  which  had 
made  its  nest  there.  He  killed  the  snake,  and 
saved  the  lives  of  the  young  birds,  and  having  no 
other  place  of  lodging  he  lay  down  for  the  night 
beneath  the  tree.  When  the  parent  birds  came 
back  to  their  nest  with  food,  in  the  evening,  they 
were  told  by  the  young  vultures  of  the  great  deli- 
verance that  they  owed  to  the  young  man  lying 
below.  The  old  birds  thanked  him  very  heartily 
and  asked  if  they  could  be  of  any  service  to  him. 
He  told  them  his  story  and  then  the  vultures  offer- 
ed to  carry  him  over  the  seas  to  arouse  his  luck, 
and  bring  him  back  again  on  the  wings.  Before 
they  started,  a certain  tree  standing  near  that  spot 
requested  him  to  find  out  from  his  luck  the  cause 
of  its  being  withered,  and  to  inform  it  on  his  re- 
turn. The  birds  fulfilled  the  promise,  and  car- 
ried him  to  the  country  where  his  fortune  lay. 
He  aroused  it  and  asked  it  to  help  him.  First 
of  all  he  very  unselfishly  enquired  why  the  tree 
was  witihering.  His  fortune  told  him  it  was  be- 
cause of  a serpent  hidden  under  its  roots  guard- 
ing a great  treasure  which  was  buried  there.  He 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


187 


must  kill  the  serpent  and  then  the  tree  would 
recover  and  he  would  gain  possession  of  the  gold 
and  jewels.  He  was  conveyed  back  over  die  seven, 
seas  by  the  vultures,  and  returning  to  the  forest 
he  found  the  treasure  and  appropriated  it.  The 
tree  also  became  green  as  had  been  foretold.  On 
his  way  home  he  caught  and  tamed  a beautiful 
horse  that  was  running  wild,  and  continued  his 
journey  on  its  back.  Coming  to  the  dominions 
of  a certain  king,  he  found  the  place  in  gloom 
owing  to  the  serious  illness  of  the  king’s  favourite 
daughter.  All  efforts  of  the  royal  physicians  had 
failed  and  the  king  was  offering  huge  reward 
to  any  one  who  could  cure  her.  The  young  man  re- 
commended some  simple  remedy  that  he  had 
learnt  in  his  native  village,  and  by  good  luck  the 
girl  rapidly  recovered.  The  king  was  so  grateful 
that  he  odered  to  make  him  his  son-in-law  and 
gave  him  rich  rewards.  So  at  length  he  reached 
home  with  great  wealth  and  honour  owing  to  the 
awakening  of  his  good  fortune. 

We  see,  curiously  illustrated  in  the  above  story, 
the  materialising  character  of  popular  religious 
thought,  which  here  conceives  of  the  karma  or 
destiny,  a man’s  past  acts  in  former  lives,  as  a 
person  who  can  go  to  sleep  and  requires  to  be 


i88 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


awakened.  The  notion  of  treasures  being  guarded 
by  serpents  is  exceedingly  common  and  is  probably 
to  be  ascribed  to  the  fact  of  snakes  making  their 
dwellings  under  the  ground.  In  the  Volsunga 
Saga  a great  treasure  was  guarded  by  the  serpent 
Fafner  who  was  slain  by  Sigurd. 

3.  THE  PRECIOUS  COUNSEL 
A cdrtain  rich  man  had  two  sons,  and  when 
they  grew  up  he  gave  them  each  a sum  of  Rs.4  000 
to  start  business  with.  The  elder  son  went  into 
trade,  but  the  younger  one  bought  with  the  money 
four  pieces  of  advice  from  a celebrated  Faqir. 
These  were:  (i)  Never  to  walk  or  travel  alone, 

(2)  Not  to  sit  on  any  bed  before  examining  it, 

(3)  To  remain  awake  in  time  of  danger,  and  (4) 
To  suppress  anger.  He  made  up  his  mind  to 
abide  carefully  by  these  rules,  for  which  he  had 
paid  so  highly,  and  set  off  on  his  travels.  In 
accordance  with  die  first  rule,  as  he  had  no  one  else 
to  take  with  him,  he  picked  up  a crab  from  a 
pool  by  the  wayside  and  kept  it  in  his  cap.  Arriv- 
ing at  a certain  place  he  ate  his  food  and  lay  down 
to  sleep.  While  he  slept  a cobra  came  and  was 
about  to  bite  his  head,  when  the  crab  attacked  it. 
A fight-  ensued,  the  noise  of  which  awoke  the 
sleeper,  smd  he  killed  the  smdee.  Thus  he  found 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


189 

the  value  of  the  first  counsel,  that  had  been  given 
to  him  by  the  holy  man.  It  had  cost  him  a thou- 
sand rupees,  but  it  had  saved  his  life.  He  conti- 
nued his  journey,  and  as  night  fell  he  came  to  a 
house  in  which  lived  a beautiful  but  wicked 
woman.  She  received  him  hospitably,  and  after 
feasting  him  with  the  best,  showed  him  a richly 
covered  bed  on  which  he  was  to  sleep.  Before- 
lying  down,  however,  he  remembered  the  second 
rule,  and  looked  under  the  bed.  To  his  horror 
he  saw  that  it  was  placed  over  a deep  and  dark 
ditch.  Thus  having  discovered  the  evil  inten- 
tions of  the  woman,  he  promptly  killed  her  and 
took  possession  of  all  her  property.  Congratulating 
himself  on  the  good  results  of  following  the 
Faqir’s  advice,  he  pursued  his  journey  and  came 
to  a city.  He  found  lodging  in  the  house  of  an 
old  widow.  She  told  him  that  he  was  welcome 
to  stay  in  her  house,  but  that,  unhappily,  that  very 
night  it  was  die  turn  of  her  son  to  be  devoured  by 
a demon.  Inquiring  into  this  strange  story,  he 
was  told  that  the  demon  had  taken  up  its  abode 
within  the  body  of  the  king’s  daughter  in  the  form 
of  a snake.  It  would  have  devoured  the  princess 
long  ago,  and  perhaps  the  king  and  all  his  court- 
iers, if  they  had  not  arranged  to  supply  it  with  a 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


J90 

man  eveiy  night  to  satisfy  its  appetite.  The  snake 
issued  from  the  mouth  of  the  princess  at  night, 
and  assuming  gigantic  human  countenance,  ate 
up  the  victim  provided.  On  hearing  this  ghastly 
story  the  yotmg  man  was  in  no  wise  afraid,  but 
confiding  in  the  third  rule  which  had  been  given 
him  by  the  Faqir,  he  offered  to  take  the  place  of 
the  widow’s  son.  She  was  only  too  glad  to  allow 
him  to  do  so,  and  he  repaired  to  the  palace.  He 
asked  for  a dozen  lamps  to  be  placed  around  him, 
and  seated  himself,  sword  'in  hand,  in  the  prin- 
cess’s apartment.  He  took  care  to  keep  awake 
all  the  time.  At  last  the  demon  appeared  and 
began  to  put  out  the  lamps.  When  it  was  just 
about  to  existinguish  the  last  one  the  young  man 
started  up  and  slew  it  with  his  sword.  He  still 
remained  awake  watching  all  sides  of  the  room, 
but  nothing  further  happened.  The  king  and  his 
courtiers  were  delighted  to  find  the  demon  killed 
and  die  princess  delivered  from  the  demon.  The 
king  married  the  man  to  the  princess  and  gave 
him  much  wealth.  Some  time  after  he  returned 
to  his  original  home  to  tell  his  first  wife  and  other 
relatives  of  all  his  good  fortune.  Many  years  had 
passed,  the  wife  had  borne  a son  who  was  now 
grown  up,  and  who  came  forth  along  with  his 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


I9I 

mother  to  greet  him.  Seeing  the  young  man  there 
in  company  of  his  wife,  and  not  knowing  who 
he  was,  the  father  at  first  flew  into  a rage  and  was 
about  to  strike  him  dead,  but  remembering  the 
fourth  counsel,  he  kept  quiet,  and  on  learning 
that  this  was  his  son,  he  rejoiced  more  than  all  at 
this  last  proof  of  the  value  of  the  sage’s  advice. 

4.  THE  THREE  FOOLS 

Three  fools,  while  roving  together  in  a jungle, 
met  with  a lake  full  of  beautiful  fishes.  Seeing 
this,  one  expressed  his  regret  and  asked  how  would 
these  poor  fishes  survive  if  a wild  fire  were  to  beset 
the  body  of  water.  The  other  clown  rejoined, 
“ Oh,  it  was  an  easy  thing  for  them  (the  fishes)  to 
climb  up  trees  if  such  a catastrophe  should  ever 
come  to  them  by  chance.”  The  third  idiot,  con- 
tradicting his  companion,  said,  that  the  fishes  were 
not  buffaloes  which  could  mount  the  trees.  They 
then  departed,  after  making  their  respective  obser- 
vations on  the  pls^e  they  had  come  across. 

5.  THE  SAGACIOUS  DOG 

A certain  man,  who  owed  Rs.300  to  a creditor, 
liad  nothing  to  discharge  his  debt  with  except  a 
dog  which  he  had  trained  to  watch  his  house. 
On  being  pressed  by  the  creditor  for  repayment 


192 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


of  his  loan,  the  poor  man  gave  his  dog  as  a pledge 
for  three  years.  The  rich  man  took  the  dog  with 
him  and  went  awuy.  One  night  when  the  rich 
man  was  away  from  his  house  some  thieves  came. 
In  spite  of  the  alarm  given  by  the  dog  in  barking 
at  them,  no  one  awoke  from  sleep  to  detect  and 
arrest  them.  Thus  unguarded,  the  pilferers  found 
opportunity  of  entering  the  house  and  taking  away 
the  riches  from  it.  They  concealed  the  booty  in 
a deep  ditch  in  a neighbouring  jungle.  The  dog, 
unable  to  do  anything  to  prevent  their  doing  so, 
silently  notec  their  movement.  On  the  next  day 
when  the  master  of  the  house  came  home  the  dog 
frequently  fawned  at  his  feet  and  made  signs  to 
go  somewhere.  On  noticing  the  conduct  of  the 
dog  the  master  followed  the  animal,  which  took 
him  to  the  trench,  where  he  found  the  stolen  pro- 
perty. He  then  took  his  riches  home.  He  Was 
so  glad  to  recover  his  property  through  the  saga- 
city of  the  dog  that  he  wrote  a letter  to  his  debtor 
acknowledging  the  discharge  of  his  loan  through 
his  dog,  which  he  returned  with  many  thanks  to 
him.  The  dog  returned  to  his  former  master 
with  the  ktter  hanging  qa  his;  M The  master 
of  the  house,  seeing  the  dog  returning  home  in 
hres^  of  his  pledge,  shot  him  down.  Hie  fountl 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


193 


then  the  letter  on  his  body,  which  he  read  to  his 
never-ceasing  sorrow,  and  afterwards  he  committ- 
ed suicide  through  grief. 

6.  A SENSELESS  FOOL 

A fool  once  shaved  his  head  (an  inauspicious 
omen  performed  only  on  the  death  of  one’s  own 
near  and  dear  kinsman),  when  his  she-buflFalo 
gave  birth  to  a male  young  one.  The  universal 
custom  is  to  get  such  a calf  bathed  in  cold  water 
as  soon  as  it  is  born.  The  man  thrust  the  head 
of  the  young  calf  into  a wooden  vessel  full  of 
water  for  the  purpose.  When  he  wanted  to  take 
the  head  out  of  the  utensil  he  could  not  do  so : he 
devised  a plan  to  effect  his  purpose.  With  a 
sword  he  severed  the  head  of  the  calf  from  its 
body.  Then  the  beheaded  portion  would  not 
come  out  of  it.  He  was  then  obliged  to  break 
the  vessel.  The  last  business  might  have  been 
done  before,  to  save  the  young  one  and  the  wooden 
vessel,  if  the  man  had  had  any  sense. 

7.  A VILLAGE  WISEACRE 

There  was  once  a certain  man  in  an  out-of-thc 
way  village.  The  man  being  a Padhan  (head- 
man) pretended  to  be  philosopher  and  a man  of 
wisdom.  He  used  to  be  resorted  to  for  advice  in 

13 


194 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


every  case  which  the  other  residents  of  the  village 
did  not  understand  themselves. 

Once  a certain  man  of  the  village  found  the  outer 
frame  of  a sieve,  and  being  himself  ignorant  of 
what  it  was,  took  it  to  the  leading  man  for  exam- 
ination. The  man  after  carefully  inspecting  it 
drew  his  conclusion  and  said,  “ My  friend,  this  is 
nothing  but  the  frame  or  disc  of  the  moon.  Once 
the  sun  and  the  moon  fought  together  and  the 
latter  on  being  vanquished  got  his  ring  broken  and 
it  fell  down  on  the  earth.  You  see  it  has  been 
eaten  into  by  insects.” 

At  another  time  a certain  inhabitant  of  the 
village  reported  to  the  philosopher  that  his  crops 
were  damaged  or  eaten  by  some  animal  with  ex- 
traordinary large  feet,  and  requested  him  to  find 
out  what  it  was.  The  so-called  philosopher  went 
himself  to  inspect  the  damage  and  the  tracks  of 
the  feet  of  the  animal  which  had  damaged  the 
fields.  On  examining  the  same,  he  inferred  that 
it  was  some  deer,  which  after  fastening  the  mill- 
stones to  its  feet,  seems  to  have  trodden  on  and 
lijarfced  the  fields*  Going  a litde  further  he  and 
the  others  accompanying  him,  saw  an  elephant 
asleep  therei  This  the  so-called  philosopher 
dcdnJccd  to  he  Podhiag  but  either  concentrated 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


m 


darkness  of  the  night  (or  vapour  of  the  night 
after  the  sunset),  or  the  one  of  Delhi  (referring 
to  an  elephant  which  he  had  seen  years  ago  in 
that  city). 

8.  THE  DEBTOR  BORROWS  WITH 
CHEERFULNESS  BUT  REPAYS  WITH  SORROW 
The  Kauravas  and  the  Pandavas  are  the  chief 
characters  of  the  Sanskrit  poem  of  the  Mahabha- 
rat.  One  half  of  the  ancient  Delhi  kingdom  be- 
longed to  one,  and  me  other  half  to  the  other. 
The  latter  five  brothers  after  having  undergone  the 
punishment  of  13  years,  claimed  to  have  their 
half  of  the  kingdom,  but  the  former  declined  to 
give  them  their  share.  The  Pandavas  were  thus 
obliged  to  have  resort  to  a battle,  in  which  all  the 
kings  of  India  had  joined  for  help  on  both  sides. 
The  Kauravas,  who  were  already  in  possession  of 
the  kingdom,  had  money  enough  to  defray  the 
expenses  of  such  a great  war  as  it  was,  but  the 
Pandavas,  having  just  finished  the  time  of  their 
banishment  or  sojoimi,  had  nothing  to  cope  with 
the  expenses  of  such  a great  war.  As  nothing 
less  than  trillions  of  money  was  necessary  for  the 
purpose,  the  eldest  brother  of  the  Pandavas, 
Yudhisthar,  had  recourse  to  Kuver,  the  treasurer 
of  the  gods,  and  deputed  his  youngest  brother  to 


196 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


go  to  him,  to  ask  for  a loan  of  trillions  of  rupees 
for  the  war.  Kuver  asked  the  young  Pandava 
whether  he  would  repay  the  money  with  the 
same  glad  humour  with  which  he  wanted  to  bor- 
row. “ The  same  disposition,”  was  the  reply. 
On  this  Kuver  declined  to  lend  him  any  money. 
Yudhisthar  was  very  sorry  to  hear  of  the  refusal  of 
Kuver,  and  sent  then  his  fourth  brother  for  the  loan 
to  Kuver,  who,  after  having  received  the  same 
answer  to  his  question,  did  not  agree  to  lend  him 
any  money.  Yudhisthar  then  sent  his  second  and 
third  brother  one  after  the  other;  they  also  brought 
tire  same  flat  refusal  from  Kuver,  owing  to  his 
having  received  the  same  answer  to  the  question 
put  to  them.  Then  Yudhisthar  went  himself  for 
the  loan  to  Kuver,  who  put  him  the  same  ques- 
tion, in  answer  to  which  Yudhisthar  said,  “Dear 
Sir,  it  is  next  to  an  impossibility  for  a debtor  to 
discharge  his  debt  with  the  same  cheerfulness 
with  which  he  borrows  the  money.  He  borrows 
with  a glad  heart,  but  repays  it  with  sorrow  and 
regret  This  answer  satisfied  Kuver,  who 
allowed:  Yudhisthar  to  take  any  amount  of  money 
that  he  mi^t  be  in  want  of,  and  considered  him 
to  be  a truthful  man,  and  certain  to  repay  jhim  the 
nmney  which  he  was  then  borrowing. 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


197 


9.  WONDERFUL  FEATS  OF  TWO  ASCETICS 

In  former  times,  Dervishes  were  totally  devoted 
to  God  and  his  service,  being  quite  indiflferent  to 
the  world  and  worldly  things.  So  they  were  en- 
dowed with  supernatural  power  to  work  out 
wonders.  Some  four  hundred  years  ago  a Fakir 
by  name  Hardwarpuri  went  to  try  another  asce- 
tic by  name  Shravan  Nath,  at  Hardwar,  as  to  the 
power  of  his  devotion.  So  he  repaired  to  his 
house  and  asked  his  discipies  to  fill  his  vessel  of 
only  one  chatak  in  capacity  with  oil.  They  came 
with  a vessel  of  oil  to  accede  to  his  prayer.  Seers, 
nay,  jars  of  oil  were  poured  into  it,  but  it  was 
not  filled.  The  news  reached  Shravan  Nath,  who 
himself  came  with  a small  reedful  of  oil,  and 
began  to  fill  the  utensil  up  with  it ; yet  it  was 
not  filled  up,  nor  did  the  pouring  stream  of  oil 
cease  to  fall  into  tlie  vessel  incessantly  for  three  days 
and  nights.  The  performance  of  these  wonder- 
ful feats  brought  both  of  them  into  close  commu- 
nion with  each  other. 

It  was  a rule  with  Shravan  Nath  to  feed  thousands 
of  ascetics  and  Brahmins  during  the  Hardwar 
fairs.  Once,  while  doing  so,  he  ran  short  of  ghee 
(clarified  butter  in  which  cakes  arc  fried)  and  it 


198  HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 

was  not  to  be  had  in  the  bazar;  so  the  saint  order- 
ed his  servants  to  borrow  100  jars  of  ghee  from  the 
Ganges.  His  servants  filled  100  jars  of  the 
Ganges  water  in  place  of  ghee.  This  water  baked 
the  cakes  like  the  ghee,  to  the  amazement  of  the 
cooks  and  other  people  present  there  on  that 
occasion.  After  the  fair  was  over  the  ascetic 
ordered  100  jars  of  ghee  to  be  purchased  and  poured 
into  the  Ganges  as  a repayment  of  the  ghee  bor- 
rowed from  the  Ganges. 

10.  A FAQIR  ALONE  CAN  JUDGE  THE  MERIT 
OF  another  FAQIR 

A Fakir  is  discerned  and  judged  only  by  another 
Fakir  in  regard  to  the  nature  of  his  devotion.  It 
was  during  the  reign  of  a certain  Mohammadan 
ruler  that  a common  Mohammadan  dervish  by 
name  Alam  Shah  used  to  live  in  one  of  the  suburbs 
of  Delhi.  He  used  to  beg  cooked  food  from  door 
to  door,  and  live  in  a hut  thatched  with  leaves  and 
grass.  He  had  nothing  but  a cow,  which  he  used 
to  tether  and  drink  her  milk  in  the  same  way  as 
her  own  calf  did.  He  was  said  to  be  very  fond  of 
playing  with  the  boys  to  whom  he  was  wont  to 
teach  Persian  and  Arabic,  in  which  languages  he 
was  a thorough  scholar.  He  was  not  a well-known 
man,  but  seemed  to  be  a common  beggar  and 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


199 


known  only  to  the  people  of  the  suburb.  Years 
elapsed.  He  lived  there  in  this  way  quite  un- 
noticed, uncared  for,  and  unregarded.  Once  upon 
a time  another  Mohammadan  dervish  by  name 
Shutarbeg  (who  alone  seemed  to  know  the  merit 
of  Alam  Shah)  started  from  Arabia  with  a view  to 
have  some  communion  with  Alam  Shah  about 
God  and  divine  things.  The  former  ha4  siient  a 
letter  to  the  latter  to  this  effect  beforehand.  He 
mounted  and  rode  on  a lion,  with  a bridle  made 
of  two  living  cobras,  and  travelled  towards  Delhi, 
to  the  utter  astonishment  of  the  people  he  met 
with.  The  nearer  he  approached  DelW  the  more 
widely  the  alarm  spread  and  struck  the  people  of 
the  city  with  wonder  and  terror  who  did  not  fail 
to  inform  Alam  Shah  of  the  approach  of  the  Arab 
ascetic.  When  the  news  came  to  Alam  Shah  that 
Shutarbeg  was  only  at  2 miles  distance,  he  was 
teaching  boys  on  one  of  the  walls  of  a house  in 
ruins,  and  wanted  to  go  ahead  to  receive  him. 
The  citizens  of  the  city  and  suburb  camesdy  re., 
quested  Alam  Shah  not  to  go  to  receive  him  on 
foot,  but  to  ride  either  on  an  elephant,  a pony,  or 
a chariot  of  theirs.  On  this  Alam  Shah  said  that 
he  wanted  nothing  of  the  sort  for  his  vehicle,  but 
directed  the  wall  on  which  he  and  his  boys  sat. 


200 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


to  take  him  to  the  foreign  ascetic.  The  said  wall, 
undey  his  order,  begaB  to  move  like  an  animate 
thing  along  the  road  by  which  the  Arabian  faqir 
was  coming.  They  met,  one  showing  the  other 
the  merit  of  his  own  devotion,  The  former 
brought  the  fitter  to  bis  own  hut,  tying  his  lion 
with  his  own  cow.  They  remained  together  for 
many  weeks.  At  last  when,  the  foreign  ascetic 
was  ready  to  depart  he  found  his  lion  had  dis- 
appeared, and  asked  the  Pelhi  faqir  for  it.  In 
reply  to  his  query  h©  Said  diat  it  was  consigned  by 
him  to  the  care  of  his  cow,  so  he  should  ask  the 
cow  for  it.  The  other  fakir  accordingly  asked 
the  cow  for  his  lion,  which  she  vomited  up,  to  the 
amazement  of  the  Arabian  fakirx  and  the  other 
pepple  assembled  thgret  The  foreign  fakir  after 
having  mounted  his  lion  departed.  The  Delhi 
fakir  also  disappeared  with  his  cow  the  very  next 
day. 

II.  FAITfi  pop^S  aoUNTY 

There  wet©  twq  bfOthwa  in  a certain  family, 
both  of  whom  were  married,  and  used  to  live 
separately  from  each  Other,  The  elder  was  very 
diligent,  and  always  deYoted  his  time  to  work, 
hut  Ac  younger  one  Icing  ve^  lazy  used  to  do 
nothing  but  sleep  and  otherwise  idle  away  his 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


201 


time.  His  wife  was  very  angry  with  the  conduct 
of  her  husband,  and  not  unfrequently  she  used  to 
taunt  him  with  his  slothfulness.  Her  husband 
when  so  tasked  and  worried  in  this  way  used  to 
say,  that  if  God  was  ever  pleased  with  him  he 
would  send  wealth  and  riches  inside  his  house 
himself,  by  breaking  open  his  roof.  One  day  his 
wife,  while  grazing  her  eatde  ip  the  jungle,  found 
some  clue  of  a jar  full  of  gold  mohars  buried  there. 
She  instantly  covered  it  with  grass  and  earth  so 
that  no  one  else  might  detect  i{,  with  a view  to 
take  it  at  night,  and  requested  her  husband  to 
help  her  to  convey  the  money  home.  The  hus- 
band still  insisted  m God’s  sending  it  himself  in- 
side his  home,  SaM  lhat  he  would  not  act 
like  a thief  to  get  ihe  rfties.  As  she  not 
prevail  oh  him  any  further,  she  Was  at  last  diliged 
to  share  it  with  her  elder  sister-in-law  (the  wiis 
of  the  elder  brother)  and  told  her  the  happy  news. 
The  herself  fully  aware  of  the 

wher^lM«^i4^^  ' ^ wealth,  refused  to 
accompny  hfif , that  she  would  not  risk  her 

life  by  fhnp|  #l  hxt,  cunningly,  # 
tlmug^  in  her  netol  that  fhe  and  hey 
would  there  atoiue  and  appropriate  the  whole 
of  It  thesselyps.  After  this,  when  she  found  her 


202 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


younger  sister  asleep  together  with  her  husband, 
she  took  her  own  husband  with  her  and  repaired 
to  the  jungle  where  the  riches  were  said  to  have 
been  buried.  As  soon  as  they  arrived  at  the  spot 
they  began  to  unearth  the  jar  of  gold,  but  no 
sooner  was  this  done  by  them  than  numbers  of 
hornets  assailed  and  stung  them.  This  prevented 
them  from  further  digging  the  place  for  the 
money,  They  thought  that  they  were  imposed  on 
by  their  relation  to  be  thus  troubled  and  killed  by 
the  means  invented  for  the  purpose.  In  their  rage 
diey  thought  of  revenging  themselves  on  them  (the 
younger  brother  and  his  wife)  for  their  enmity  by 
throwing  the  jar  of  wasps  or  hornets  itself  into  the 
chimney  hole  of  their  house  as  a return  for  the 
injury.  They  did  accordingly.  As  the  hornets 
had  already  flown  out  of  the  jar,  the  gold  mohars 
which  it  still  retained  were  poured  into  the  room 
wherein  the  younger  broAer  and  his  wife  had 
slept,  On  seeing  the  heap  of  gold  mohars  inside 
his  houk  the  younger  brother  cried  out,  “ Lo,  God 
is  pltKised  with  me  now,  and  so  He  has  thrown 


itcnes  insme  my  nouse  ttunsen,  oy  navmg  rn 
roof  of  Ms  hewse  broken  open  for  the  purpose’ 
$p  the  confidence  of  ire  younger  brother  in  th 
fioodwill  of  God  was  iustified. 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


m 


12.  THE  IMPATIENT  CREDITOR 

Creditors  or  money-lenders,  in  the  pre‘British 
times,  were  considered  and  treated  by  their  debt&rs 
as  their  exclusive  lords  and  despotic  masters,  as 
next  to  the  reigning  king.  A creditor’s  appropria- 
tion of  any  of  the  moveables  pertaining  to  his  dcb* 
tors,  even  without  their  consent,  was  quite  tolerat- 
ed. He  could  swear  his  debtor  not  to  cat  any  of 
his  meals  or  come  out  of  his  house,  or  could  shut 
him  up  inside  his  house,  or  kindle  fire  on  the 
threshold  of  his  door,  unless  or  until  the  loan  was 
repaid.  Moreover,  he  could  take  the  sons  or 
daughters  of  the  borrower  as  slaves  for  himself, 
either  for  a time  or  for  their  whole  lives.  Thus  the 
creditors  were  wont  to  go  to  their  debtor’s  houses 
themselves  for  realization  of  their  loans.  The 
presence  of  a creditor  had  a stunning  effect  on  the 
debtor,  if  the  latter  was  not  in  a position  to  dis- 
charge his  debt. 

Once  a certain  creditor  went  to  the  house  of 
his  debtor  to  ask  for  the  repayment  of  his  loan. 
The  latter  was  not  at  home  but  his  wife,  being 
otherwise  unable  to  repay  the  debt,  had  presence 
of  mind  to  show  him  four  large  white  pumpkins 
kept  in  her  house,  representing  them  to  be  the  eggs 
given  birth  to  by  her  mare,  and  promised  him  to 


204  HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 

pay  the  debt  as  soon  as  the  eggs  were  hatched,  by 
selling  the  horses  which  should  come  from  the 
eggs.  The  creditor  trusted  her  word,  and  having 
himself  become  impatient  to  take  the  eggs  in  pay- 
ment for  his  money,  asked  her  to  let  him  have  them 
at  once.  The  debtor’s  wife  said,  “ Sir,  the  eggs 
when  hatched  would  fetch  not  less  than  Rs.400 
how  can  you  take  them  in  return  for  only  Rs.ioo 
of  yours?”  The  creditor  said,  “ I must  have  them 
now,  otherwise  I will  charge  you  double  interest”. 
She  yielded  to  this  demand  of  her  husband’s  cre- 
ditor, and  said,  “ Sir,  you  are  master  of  our  house- 
hold, you  can  take  them  in  lieu  of  your  money,  but 
they  are  not  mature  yet ; they  are  to  be  conveyed 
to  your  home  very  carefully  by  a path  which  runs 
along  the  tops  of  the  mountains,  on  the  bottom  of 
a basket  turned  up,  otherwise,  they  will  rot  on  your 
way  home  ”.  The  impatient  creditor  observed 
these  precautions,  and  started  for  his  home,  put- 
ting the  eggs  (puinpkins)  on  die  Other  side  of  a 
basket,  on  his  head.  While  he  was  thus  conveying 
them  over  the  tops  of  the  mountains,  all  of  them 
roiled  down  a pmcipice  into  a forest  slope>  where 
deer  were  ^raaing.  The  fall  of  the  puinpkins 
startled  the  deer,  and  they  ran  away  in  alarm  at 
the  sight  of  the  creditor,  who  was  fully  convinced 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


205 


in  his  mind,  that  the  deer  were  the  horses  bom 
from  the  eggs  which  had  been  broken  by  the  fall. 
The  creditor  arrived  at  his  home  in  a disappointed 
mood,  when  his  children  flocked  to  him  as  usual, 
and  asked  their  father  where  he  had  come  from, 
and  what  he  had  brought  for  them.  On  his 
relating  the  whole  story  of  his  unsuccessful  specu- 
lation and  the  loss  of  four  valuable  horses,  one  of 
his  sons  said  eagerly  that  he  would  have  gladly 
ridden  one  of  them  if  his  father  had  brought  them 
home.  Being  already  mortified  by  the  unfor- 
tunate transaction,  his  son’s  foolish  Saying  so 
provoked  him  to  anger  that  he  could  not  refrain 
from  killing  him. 

13.  A DERVISH’S  WISE  ADVICE 

There  was  a Raja  of  a certain  country,  who  used 
to  feed  a certain  dervish  constantly  for  some  years, 
in  his  own  palace.  After  the  death  of  this  king  his 
son  also  made  it  a rule  to  place  a dish  of  food  before 
the  ascetic  with  his  own  hand.  One  day  no  sooner 
was  the  plate  of  food  laid  before  him  by  the  prince 
than  the  Fakir  began  to  weep  and  mourn  over  it. 
On  the  prince’s  enquiring  the  cause  of  his  sadness 
the  devotee  said,  “Oh  my  son,  I am  sorry  to  say 
that  the  courtiers  of  your  father  have  conspired  to 


2o6 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


have  you  assassinated  and  your  kingdom  taken,  so 
it  behoves  you  now  to  leave  this  country  at  once, 
and  go  to  a strange  country.  Take  your  money  in 
gold,  silver,  and  precious  stones  with  you,  and  act 
on  my  exhortations  and  never  forget  them  for  a 
minute. 

They  are  these : 

1st — ^Rest  or  stay  out  of  the  way  (not  on  any 
road). 

ind — ^Do  not  sit  in  the  bed  of  another  with- 
out thoroughly  striking  it  before  you  do  so. 

yd — One’s  sister  is  a sister  during  his 
prosperity. 

— One’s  friend  is  a friend  during  his 
adversity. 

The  prince  started  taking  his  money.  After 
travelling  some  distance  he  felt  exhausted,  and 
remembering  the  advice  of  the  Fakir,  wanted  to 
rest  in  a place  out  of  the  way.  After  getting  some 
refreshment  there,  he  travelled  on  (leaving  the  bag 
of  his  money  at  the  spot  unwittingly).  When  he 
was  at  some  distance  from  the  place,  he  noticed  the 
loss  of  his  valuable  bag,  to  his  utter  despair.  He 
returned  to  the  out-nf-the-way  place  where  he  had 
left  it  On  finding  his  bag  there  he  was  very  happy 
and  thankful  to  the  devotee  for  the  invaluable 


WIT  AKD  WISDOM 


207 


advice  by  whicb  he  was  so  immensely  benefited. 
He  again  resumed  his  journey,  and  arrived  in  a 
secluded  forest  where  a witch  had  placed  a bed 
with  a white  sheet  spread  over  it,  apparently  for  the 
rest  and  refreshment  of  fatigued  travellers,  but  with 
the  secret  intent  of  having  them  killed  so  that  she 
might  appropriate  their  property.  This  bed  was 
placed  over  a deep  ditch,  so  that  the  sojourner 
should  go  down  to  destruction  as  soon  as  he  sat 
on  it.  The  witch  said,  “Dear  son,  you  are  wel- 
come, get  yourself  refreshed  by  reposing  on  this 
bed,  and  then  take  your  meal,  which  I shall  gladly 
get  ready  for  you  after  a while.”  The  prince  again 
remembered  the  advice  of  the  Fakir.  As  soon  as  he 
gave  2 or  3 strokes  on  it,  the  covering  sheet  sank 
down,  and  the  deep  hole  became  visible.  The 
prince  after  having  fully  imderstood  the  treacherous 
purpose  of  the  woman,  slaughtered  her  there  and 
then.  Then  he  proceeded  to  a town  where  his 
own  sister  was  married.  He  sent  a message  to 
her  that  he  was  waiting  for  her  in  a certain  suburb 
of  the  town.  His  sister,  considering  him  to  be  in 
a beggarly  state,  had  not  only  paid  no  heed  to  him, 
but  denied  him  to  be  her  brother;  a fact  which  the 
prince  found  to  agree  with  the  prophecy  of  the 
hermit.  He  then  left  the  town  and  proceeded  to 


2o8 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


another  place  where  he  heard  a friend  of  his  was 
living.  In  order  to  try  the  advice  of  his  admonisher 
he  sent  word  to  him  also.  He  immediately  came 
to  the  prince,  and  took  him  to  his  house  with  great 
courtesy  and  regard,  and,  placing  all  his  property 
at  his  disposal,  eagerly  requested  him  to  stay  and 
live  there.  The  prince  after  staying  there  for  some 
days,  repaired  to  another  town  where  he  was 
wedded  to  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  the  country, 
who  made  the  reins  of  his  kingdom  over  to  the 
young  prince,  his  son-in-law.  Having  thus  attained 
the  princely  office  the  prince  after  some  years 
returned  to  his  own  country  with  a large  army,  and 
in  all  the  splendour  of  a king  with  a view  to  take 
possession  of  his  kingdom.  While  thus  proceeding 
his  sister  came  to  welcome  and  receive  him,  but 
the  king  dealt  with  her  as  became  a potentate.  The 
prince  thereafter  continued  to  think  of  and  remem- 
ber his  patron  saint  as  long  as  he  lived. 

14.  THE  GODLY  MAN  IS  AS  MAD  TO  THE 
WORLD  AS  THE  WORDLY  MAN 
TO  THE  SOUL 

A really  religious  man,  who  was  quite  uncon- 
cerned with  wordly  affairs,  used  to  be  nicknamed 
a “Mad  Man”  by  the  worldly  people  wherever 
he  went.  Being  so  despised  and  ridiculed  in  this 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


209 


world  he  was  at  last  forced  to  go  and  complain  to 
God  about  the  bad  treatment  he  received  at  the 
hands  of  the  unspiritual  people.  On  this  God 
instanced  to  him  great  and  most  renowned  states- 
men, politicians,  warriors,  and  others  of  great  capa- 
cities and  qualifications  who  had  eventually  done 
nothing  for  their  immortal  soul  after  death,  and  all 
their  deeds  became  of  none  effect.  God  said  that  the 
godly  man  was  no  doubt  as  mad  to  the  world  as 
were  the  worldly  men  to  the  soul.  The  pious  man 
then  returned  home  quite  pleased  and  satisfied  with 
his  own  behaviour,  and  thenceforward  paid  no 
regard  to  what  the  world  said  about  him. 

15.  YOUR  MAJESTY  IS  THE  FOURTH  FOOL 

Once  a certain  king  directed  his  minister  to 
produce  four  fools  before  him.  The  official  set 
out  in  search  of  them.  While  engaged  in  the  expe- 
dition he  noted  a man  going  mounted  on  a pony 
with  the  packet  of  his  luggage  on  his  head.  The 
minister  taking  him  for  a fool  ordered  him  to 
accompany  him.  On  going  further  he  found  a 
certain  man  distributing  sweetmeats  for  the  joy  he 
felt  on  account  of  birth  of  a child  to  his  long 
estranged  wife,  who  had  deserted  him  and  gone  to 
another  man  as  a concubine  many  years  since. 
The  envoy  took  him  also  with  him.  With  these 


210 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


two  aforesaid  dunces  the  officer  went  to  the  king 
and  presented  them.  Each  of  tliem  was  made  to 
relate  his  doings  to  the  monarch,  who  was  quite 
satisfied  with  the  deficiency  of  their  reason.  After 
this  the  king  asked  his  minister,  “Why  do  you  bring 
only  two  fools  instead  of  four  as  ordered?”  “Sir, 
I am  the  3rd  fool,  who  instead  of  spending  my 
valuable  time  in  profitable  and  wise  works,  am 
squandering  it  in  search  of  fools  and  idiots.”  The 
king  then  asked  for  the  fourth,  the  administrator 
to  this  eager  query  of  his  replied,  “My  Lord,  may 
I be  excused  from  replying  to  this  question  ? ” The 
king  insisted  on  a reply.  The  minister  then  said, 
“Your  majesty  is  the  fourth  fool,  who  is  so 
earnestly  intent  on  finding  out  fools  instead  of  wise 
men,” 

16.  DISCERNMENT  OF  GOD  OR  GOD  HELPS  A 
RIGHTEOUS  PERSON 

Once  upon  a time,  a certain  hermit  who  was 
living  in  a secluded  forest  far  off  from  human 
habitations  felt  a doubt  as  to  Sri  Krishna  being  an 
incamation  of  God.  He  invariably  heard  from  the 
people  he  met  with,  that  the  former  had  always 
sided  with  and  helped  the  Papdavas  sigainst  the 
Kauravas;  a quality  or  disposition  opposed  to  the 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


211 


divine  will.  So  once  he  set  out  from  his  hut  in 
order  to  test  the  merit  of  the  parties  concerned. 
After  having  had  his  meal  he  went  to  the  king  of 
the  Kauravas  in  the  afternoon.  He  was  welcomed 
and  received  by  the  king.  The  king  asked,  “Where 
have  you  come  from?”  The  saint  answered, 
“From  Dwarka.”  The  king  again  asked  him, 
“What  is  Sri  Krishna  doing  now-a-days?”  The 
saint  answered,  “He  has  fixed  a needle,  in  the 
oposite  side,  on  the  ground  in  an  expansive  lawn, 
and  having  himself  mounted  an  elephant  with  his 
wives  he  goes  backward  and  forward  through  its 
eye.”  The  king  hearing  this  story  of  the  hermit, 
contemptuously  laughed  at  him  and  said,  “Oh 
man,  you  are  not  at  all  a godly  man  as  you  appear 
to  be,  but  a liar  and  scoundrel;  for  you  talk  foolish- 
ly. You  had  better  turn  your  face  and  go  away, 
or  else  you  will  be  thrown  into  prison  to  rot  there 
for  your  Hfc.”  Having  patiently  endured  the  abuse 
as  a saint  should,  the  hermit  again  begged  to  be 
allowed  to  present  his  request,  and  prayed  the  king. 
“Sir,  you  are  lord  of  the  world,  you  will  be  merciful 
to  me  and  grant  me  a present  of  a cow.  A son 
has  recently  been  born  to  me,  and  I am  obliged  to 
have  him  fed  with  the  milk  of  the  cow.”  On  this 
die  king  asked  him,  “What  propitious  day  is  this? 


212 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


and  have  you  not  already  had  your  food?”  The 
saint  rejoined,  “Oh  lord  of  the  earth,  today  is  not 
a fast  day,  and  I have  taken  my  food  already.  But 
the  urgency  of  the  case  has  brought  me  here,  for 
if  my  son  does  not  get  cow’s  milk  today  it  is  not 
unlikely  that  he  may  die  without  it.”  To  this  the 
king  said,  “You  certainly  deserve  to  be  expelled 
from  my  court.  The  day  on  which  you  ask  for  a 
gift  of  a cow,  is  not  a propitious  day,  the  time  is 
afternoon.  Yourself  and  I have  both  had  our  food. 
All  these  things  are  opposed  to  the  teaching  of  the 
Hindu  scriptures.  You  must  at  once  go  home 
without  any  further  discussion,  or  else  you  will  be 
driven  in  disgrace  out  of  this  place.  But  you  can 
come  to  me  again  in  the  early  morning  of  some 
sacred  day,  fasting,  and  ask  me  for  the  gift  of  a 
cow.”  The  saint  then  left  the  place  and  went  to 
the  king  of  the  Pandavas,  a couple  of  miles  oB,  on 
the  same  day.  On  his  arrival  there  he  was  received 
with  great  regard  and  reverence  by  the  king  who 
said,  “Oh  saint,  you  are  heartily  welcome.  You 
have  purified  and  blessed  me  and  my  country  by 
your  holy  appearance.  Where  do  you  come  from?” 
The  saint  answered,  “From  Dwarka.”  “What  is 
Sri  ICrishna  doing  there  now-a-days?”  To  this  the 
saint  gave  the  same  reply  as  to  the  king  of  the 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


213 


Kauravas.  The  king  of  the  Pandavas  was  highly 
pleased  with  the  reply,  and  said,  “Though  it  is 
beyond  the  capacity  of  human  conception,  it  is  an 
easy  thing  for  Almighty  God,  such  as  Sri  Krishna 
himself  is,  to  thmst  the  whole  universe  through  the 
eye  of  a needle.  Oh  holy  sage,  have  mercy  upon 
me,  if  I can  be  of  any  service  to  you.’*  The  saint 
asked  for  a cow  for  the  maintenance  of  his  newly- 
born  son.  The  king  without  any  objection  or 
scruple  ordered  a cow  to  be  given  to  the  saint,  who 
selected  one.  While  taking  it  home  the  entire 
herd  of  the  kine  began  to  follow  or  accompany  it, 
in  spite  of  the  efforts  of  the  herdsmen  and  other 
people  to  keep  them  back.  When  the  report 
reached  the  king  he  ordered  that  the  entire  herd 
of  the  kine  should  be  allowed  to  go  with  the  sage. 
All  these  events  brought  the  hermit  to  his  senses, 
and  he  was  thenceforward  convinced  in  his  mind 
that  the  Pandavas  were  the  righteous  people,  and 
Sri  Krishna  was  a true  incarnation  of  God,  ready  to 
help  and  protect  those  who  are  virtuous  and  humble 
in  spirit 

17.  A SIMPLETON  WHO  FOLLOWED  HIS 
INSTRUCTIONS  TOO  LITERALLY 

There  was  once  a simpleton  in  a certain  village. 
When  ready  to  go  to  the  house  of  his  father-in-law 


214 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


he  asked  his  relations  what  to  say  to  the  members 
of  his  family.  They  instructed  him  to  say  “Yes” 
or  “No”  as  the  occasion  might  require.  Accord- 
ingly he  noted  these  words  in  his  mind.  Then  he 
asked  them  what  he  should  say  to  those  who 
might  meet  him  on  the  way.  He  was  told  to  say 
“Good  morning.”  With  these  directions  impressed 
on  his  heart  he  started. 

He  reached  a place  where  a fowler  having  con- 
cealed himself  in  a bush,  had  spread  his  net  to 
catch  birds.  He  met  the  simple  man,  just  at  the 
time  when  the  birds  were  about  to  enter  his  net. 
No  sooner  did  the  dupe  bid  him  good  morning 
than  the  birds  flew  away,  alarmed  by  his  voice. 
The  fowler  being  greatly  enraged  at  his  conduct 
inflicted  a good  beating  on  the  fool,  who  exclaimed, 
“What  am  I to  say  then,  instead  of  good  morning?” 
The  fowler  instructed  him  to  say  “continue  to  come 
and  be  ensnared”  (referring  to  his  own  desire  to 
catch  birds).  Noting  this  instruction  of  the  fowler 
the  simpleton  went  On,  and  meeting  thieves  in  the 
way  he  repeated  the  aforesaid  speech  to  them.  Of 
course  on  hearing  such  a sarcastic  speech  about  their 
own  profession,  they  also  became  very  angry  and 
gave  a thrashing  to  the  man.  He  happened  to  ask 
them,  “Sirs,  you  heat  nac  for  what  I said  to  you. 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


215 


what  am  I to  say  then?”  They  replied  telling  him 
to  say  “Continue  to  bring  and  deposit”  (referring  to 
their  own  purpose).  With  this  instruction  of  the 
thieves  the  simple  man  took  his  way.  No  sooner 
did  he  see  men  bearing  a dead  body  (to  be  burnt) 
on  their  head,  than  he  began  to  repeat  the  sentence 
told  to  him  and  was  thereupon  beaten  by  them  for 
his  abusive  language.  The  simpleton  asked  them, 
“Friends  what  should  I say  then?”  They  said 
“Say,  be  not  so  always”  (as  the  occasion  required). 
With  this  instruction  of  theirs  he  went  on.  Sooner 
he  saw  a marriage  procession  coming,  and  he 
uttered  the  last  mentioned  sentence  (be  not  so  ever) 
and  was  again  beaten  by  the  people  who  formed  the 
procession,  because  of  this  foolish  and  ominous  say- 
ing. At  last  he  arrived  at  the  house  of  his  father- 
in-law  and  was  received  with  great  regard  and 
affection.  His  mother-in-law  asked  him,  “Are  you 
quite  well?” 

He  says  “Yes”  (as  originally  tutored  by  his  own 
kinsmen). 

She  asked  again  “Is  my  daughter  well?” 

He  says  “No.” 

She  asks,  “Is  she  sick”? 

He  says,  “Yes”. 

She  asks,  “Is  she  not  improving?” 


2i6 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


He  says  “No.” 

She  asks,  “Is  she  dead”? 

He  says  “Yes”. 

At  this  all  the  members  of  the  family  began  to 
mourn  over  her.  The  wife  of  the  simpleton  was 
safe  and  alive,  but  it  was  only  the  instruction  given 
to  the  idiot  which  caused  all  this  pain  and  alarm. 
i8.  IN  THIS  AGE  ALL  ARE  SINNERS 

When  God  created  the  world,  the  heavens  and 
all  the  things  therein,  he  divided  infinite  time  into 
four  ages ; viz.  first,  the  age  of  truth  and  innocence; 
second,  three-fourth  righteousness  and  one-fourth 
iniquity;  third,  half  of  righteousness,  half  of  sin; 
fourth,  made  of  entire  sin.  Along  with  other 
things  he  also  provided  84  extensive  hells  for  the 
occupation  of  sinners.  Of  course  when  first  made 
they  were  wholly  unoccupied.  So  God  sent  for  the 
four  ages  and  asked  each  of  them  to  fill  the  hells. 
The  first  age  came  and  expressed  his  inability  to 
send  even  one  person  to  the  hells.  The  second  on 
his  appearance  before  God  promised  to  send  a few 
to  the  hells,  but  expressed  his  inability  to  fill  them 
up.  Then  the  third  age  made  his  appearance  and 
promised  to  fill  them  to  a certain  extent  but  not  up 
to  their  brim.  After  this  the  fourth  age  arrived, 
and  after  seeing  the  84  large  and  wide  hells  uttered 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


217 


a sigh,  and  humbly  asked  God,.  “My  Lord,  you 
know  that  I am  the  most  powerful  of  all  my  col- 
leagues and  that  to  fill  up  thy  hells  to  the  top  is 
nothing  to  me.  They  are  hardly  large  enough  to 
contain  the  multitudes  of  people  whom  I shall  daily 
send  to  them.  So  let  me  have  ten  fold  more  space 
for  them.”  This  means  that  almost  all  the  people 
of  this  age  are  sinners  and  deserve  to  be  sent  to  hell. 

19.  A CRIPPLE  FAVOURED  BY  LUCK 
There  was  a man  and  his  wife  in  a certain  town 
who  used  to  get  their  living  by  selling  grass  and 
fuel.  Though  very  poor  the  pair  were  very  anxious 
to  have  a son.  At  last  they  had  a son  born  to  them, 
who  had  no  hands  and  feet.  They  nourished  him 
with  parental  love  and  care.  When  he  was  full 
grown  they  became  tired  of  him  and  grumbled  at 
him,  saying  that  they  had  to  feed  a son  who  was  of 
no  help  to  them,  and  the  son  used  to  reply  to  them 
that  it  was  his  own  luck,  and  not  his  parents’, 
which  was  feeding  him.  This  invariable  state- 
ment of  his  provoked  them  further.  At  last  im- 
pelled by  the  ungratefulness  of  their  son,  they  took 
him  to  a solitary  jungle  and  left  him  there  un- 
provided and  uncared  for,  and  returned  to  their 
home.  On  the  evening  of  the  same  day  the  cows 
which  were  accustomed  to  graze  in  some  neigh- 


2i8 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


bouring  jungle,  instead  of  returning  homeward, 
fled,  in  spite  of  the  efforts  of  the  cowherds  to  stop 
them,  to  the  place  where  the  limbless  child  had 
been  laid  by  his  parents.  Thus  the  boy  was  brought 
to  the  notice  of  the  cowherds  by  their  cattle.  Seeing 
him  in  this  helpless  state  in  the  jungle,  the  herds 
kindled  a fire  near  him,  and  fed  him  with  their 
own  hands  before  returning  home  with  their  kine. 
They  did  not  forget  to  feed  him  in  this  way  for 
months  and  years.  One  night,  seeing  flames  of 
fire  from  a distance,  a travelling  saint,  supposing 
the  place  (to  be  a habitation  of  men,  went  to  the 
place)  and  saw  the  limbless  boy  with  whom  he 
stayed  that  night.  Before  his  departure  next  morn- 
ing, the  sage  asked  him  if  there  were  any  thing 
he  wanted.  The  boy  in  reply  said  that  nothing 
in  the  universe  could  help  him  except  his  own 
fate  (formed  of  the  consequence  of  his  own  doing 
in  this  and  in  the  previous  births)  which  he  was 
obliged  to  endure,  denying  at  the  same  time  either 
the  favour  or  disfavour  of  God,  to  the  utter  amaze- 
ment of  the  godly  saint,  The  saint  then  went 
straight  to  God  and  inforBoed  him  of  the  boy’s 
miserable  state  and  his  strong  and  firm  belief  in 
fate,  against  the  power  and  influence  of  any  God 
vdiatsoever.  Then  God  came  himself  with  the 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


219 


saint  to  see  the  boy,  and  asked  him  whether  he 
could  do  anything  for  him.  The  boy  refused  to 
accept  his  help,  and  relied  on  his  own  fate.  . But 
God  having  compassion  on  the  boy  made  him  a 
good  looking  boy,  complete  in  all  his  limbs.  But 
he  not  only  did  not  acknowledge  the  mercy  of  God, 
but  again  ascribed  his  regeneration  to  his  fate  alone. 
He  was  after  this  married  to  the  only  daughter  of 
the  king  of  that  country,  who  leaving  his  country 
to  the  boy  (his  son-in-law)  went  away  to  some 
jungle  for  penances  and  the  purification  of  his  soul. 
The  boy,  having  thus  become  the  king  of  the 
country,  as  a good  son  should,  sent  for  his  parents, 
who  were  still  living  on  the  proceeds  of  the  sale  of 
their  grass  and  fire  wood;  gave  them  sufficient 
wealth  and  land  to  five  hke  great  people,  and  said 
to  them  openly  that  there  was  no  occasion  whatever 
for  any  blame,  since  fate  reigns  over  every  creature 
in  the  world. 

20.  A FAITHFUL  WIFE  WHO  SAVED  HER 
HUSBAND  FROM  DEATH 

There  was  a certain  man  who  had  no  children 
at  all.  With  a view  to  obtain  a son  he  performed 
many  penances  and  prayed  to  God  for  one.  God 
granted  him  a son  whose  age  was  to  be  limited  to 
12  years.  His  parents  proposed,  when  he  attained 


220 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


the  age  of  ii  years,  to  marry  him  and  to  leave 
their  home  for  good  so  that  they  might  not  see  the 
death  of  their  son  before  they  themselves  died. 
So  the  father  started  in  search  of  a wife  for  his  son. 
He  arrived  in  a village  where  a certain  man  had 
daughters,  who  were  conversing  with  each  other 
about  the  manner  in  which  each  of  them  would 
treat  her  husband  if  she  were  married.  The  eldest 
said  she  would  kill  her  husband  and  then  go  away 
from  his  house;  the  second  said  that  she  would 
always  trouble  her  husband;  the  third  said  she 
would  starve  him;  the  fourth  said  that  she  would 
never  obey  him;  the  fifth  and  youngest  one,  remon- 
strating with  her  other  sisters,  said  that  she  would 
never  cease  to  love  and  obey  her  husband,  with 
her  heart  and  soul,  and  would  save  him  even  at  the 
sacrifice  of  her  own  life.  After  hearing  the  fanci- 
ful proposals  of  the  five  sisters  the  man  felt  inclined 
to  ask  for  the  youngest  sister  for  his  son.  He  asked 
her  father  for  the  girl  and  she  was  married  to  his 
son.  The  nearer  the  term  of  12  years  approached 
the  more  anxious  and  miserable  the  parents  felt. 
But  the  girl  thought  that  she  was  the  only  cause  of 
their  anxiety  and  discomfiture.  So  one  day  she 
plainly  asked  them  to  let  her  go  to  her  father’s 
house,  since  they  had  become  very  unhappy  since 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


221 


her  marriage  to  their  son.  Hearing  such  pleading 
they  were  obliged  to  disclose  the  secret  of  their 
imminent  misfortune.  Before  the  fatal  night  of  her 
husband’s  death  was  to  fall  due  she  had  a house 
built  at  the  burning  ghat  (place  where  dead  bodies 
are  consumed)  with  four  doors  leading  into  it. 
On  the  evening  of  the  predicted  fatal  night  she  took 
her  husband  there  and  seated  him  on  a bed  in  the 
centre 'of  it.  At  one  door  she  placed  a burning- 
lamp  as  a guardian,  and  addressed  it  thus  “Oh  holy 
hght,  be  vigilant  in  your  duty,  and  do  not  allow  any 
visible  or  invisibile  soul  or  spirit  to  enter  this  night, 
or  else  I will  extinguish  you  from  the  face  of  the 
world  for  ever.”  At  the  second  door  she  put  a 
vessel  of  water  as  a watchman,  and  addressed  him, 
“Oh  holy  water,  the  habitation  of  God,  be  attentive 
to  your  duty  of  forbidding  entrance  into  the  house 
to  any  perceptible  or  imperceptible  soul.  On  the 
failure  of  your  duty  I shall  have  you  destroyed  or 
extirpated  for  ever  from  the  face  of  the  earth;  I 
give  you  my  oath  on  this.”  In  the  third  gate  she 
placed  some  gram  as  a sentinel  and  said  to  it,  “Oh 
grain,  a form  of  God  to  nourish  the  world,  I 
solemnly  assign  to  you  die  duty  of  preventing  the 
entrance  of  any  soul  or  spirit  into  the  house  this 
night  for  my  s^e,  or  else  you  will  have  the  punish- 


222 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


ment  of  being  annihilated  for  ever  from  the  face  of 
the  earth.”  In  the  fourth  door  she  herself  sat  to 
meet  the  danger.  When  the  fixed  hour  came  the 
messengers  of  death  came  to  take  the  soul  of  the 
boy,  but  they  were  not  allowed  to  enter  the  room. 
So  they  went  back  to  their  master,  Death,  and  told 
their  stories.  At  this,  Death,  being  curious  to  see 
the  supernatural  power  of  the  protectors,  who  had 
set  his  verdict  at  defiance,  repaired  to  the  house 
himself  to  take  the  soul  of  the  youth  as  ordained 
before.  No  sooner  had  he  entered  the  house  by 
the  door  where  the  girl  was  keeping  watch,  than 
she  bowed  down  to  him  saying,  “Father,  have 
mercy  on  me,  the  most  miserable  creature  in  the 
world,  by  sparing  the  boy  to  whom  I have  been 
wedded.”  Death,  on  being  so  aflFectionately  and 
humbly  addressed  by  a girl  of  very  tender  age, 
could  not  but  spare  her  husband  and  said  to  her 
“Daughter,  I have  been  so  moved  by  your  hmnble 
petition,  that  I leave  your  husband  for  12  years 
multiplied  by  120  years  in  this  world.”  The  Death 
having  wished  happiness  to  the  young  pair  departed 
from  the  house. 

2X.  THE  TWO  CLEVER  THIEVES 
'Ihcrc  was  a hereditary  thief  once  upon  a time. 
He  had  two  sonS,  who  not  caring  for  their  jfather’s 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


223 


profession,  used  to  idle  away  their  time  in  other 
ways.  So  the  father  was  very  angry  with  them  and 
chastised  them.  So  they  came  to  their  senses  and 
agreed  to  learn  the  profession.  After  having  been 
thoroughly  trained  in  the  art  of  theft  for  some 
years,  they  were  at  last  sent  by  their  father  to  steal. 
On  the  first  day  they  stole  a valuable  necklace  of  big 
pearls  out  of  the  palace  of  the  king  of  the  country; 
on  the  second  day  jewellery  and  on  the  third  day 
a large  amount  of  money.  In  spite  of  careful 
search  and  investigation  by  the  police  officers  of 
the  king  no  clue  could  be  found  to  the  outrageous 
actions  of  the  criminals.  For  they  used  to  commit 
their  thefts  at  night,  and  to  sit  in  the  kings’ 
courtyard  during  the  day  time,  after  having  attired 
themselves  gorgeously  like  great  persons.  In 
such  a state  of  affairs,  the  king  and  his  courtiers 
adopted  a plan  to  discover  them.  An  elephant 
loaded  with  a great  treasure  was  let  loose  to  find 
out  the  offender.  The  thieves  unseen  by  others 
sank  the  elephant  in  a deep  ditch  and  took  away 
the  money  at  night.  The  elephant  disappeared 
next  day.  Then  a courtesan  was  deputed.  She 
started  for  the  city  and  roved  from  door  to  door 
among  the  women  of  the  houses  asking  for  a litde 
of  the  elephant’s  dung  which  she  needed  for  some 


224 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


medicine,  and  she  offered  an  exorbitantly  high 
price  for  it.  The  mother  of  the  young  thieves 
being  ignorant  of  the  real  business  of  her  sons,  sold 
it  to  the  procuress  who  at  once  sealed  or  marked  the 
house  with  cow-dung  and  went  to  the  palace  and 
reported  her  success  in  the  presence  of  the  thieves 
themselves,  who  had  sat  there  in  the  disguise  of 
gentlemen.  The  court  proposed  to  search  the  house 
of  the  woman  (who  had  sold  the  elephant’s  dung) 
next  morning.  The  thieves  at  once  went  and  put 
similar  marks  of  dung  on  all  the  houses  of  the  city. 
Next  day  when  the  police  officers  and  minister 
were  led  by  the  witch  to  the  house  of  the  woman  to 
arrest  her,  to  the  bewilderment  of  the  expert 
woman  they  foimd  all  the  houses  bearing  a similar 
mark.  So  she  could  not  succeed  in  pointing  out 
the  house  of  the  thieves  and  so  they  were  left  un- 
discovered. 

One  night  the  thieves,  and  their  father,  entered 
the  palace  by  a window  on  one  of  the  high  walls 
of  the  house,  by  fixing  pegs  in  the  wall  and  hanging 
a rope  on  them  for  going  up  and  down  it.  As  soon 
as  they  had  thrown  down  the  valuable  articles  the 
guards  awoke  and  were  about  to  arrest  them,  but 
the  young  men  got  off  quickly.  Seeing  their  father, 
an  old  man^  unable  to  act  as  they  did,  and  about  to 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


225 


be  apprehended  by  the  guards,  they  cut  off  his  head 
and  threw  it  away.  As  the  body  could  not  be 
identified  the  police  conveyed  it  to  every  street  of 
the  town  offering  it  to  anyone  who  might  ask 
for  it  for  burning  (as  a means  of  discovery).  No  one 
asked  for  it  or  mourned  over  it.  At  last  the  police 
had  to  burn  the  body  to  ashes  by  the  king’s  orders, 
so  they  took  it  to  the  funeral  ghat  for  that  purpose, 
a great  crowd  following  them  out  of  curiosity  to 
see  the  consumption  of  the  headless  corpse.  It  was 
necessary  according  to  their  religion  for  the  heirs 
of  the  deceased  to  mourn  and  bemoan  him  at  the 
last  funeral  rite,  so  the  mother  of  the  thieves  (the 
wife  of  the  deceased)  taking  a pot  of  curds  thrust 
herself  into  the  dense  throng  and  fell  down  with  her 
curds  in  consequence  of  being  pushed.  So  she 
feigned  to  weep  over  her  curds,  saying,  “Oh  my 
dear  curds,  what  has  become  of  you?  and  where 
have  you  gone  to,  leaving  me  alone  here?”  No 
one  understood  her  stratagem.  Her  sons,  who  had 
the  head  of  their  father  which  it  was  necessary  to 
have  burnt  with  the  body,  enclosed  it  in  a drum, 
and  followed  the  rabble  in  the  disguise  of  beggar 
minstrels,  lamenting  over  their  father  and  singing 
sad  ballads  and  hymns.  When  the  pyre  was  in 
flames  the  beggar  minstrels  (the  young  diieves' 

15 


226 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


insisted  on  receiving  gifts  from  the  police  officials 
(no  such  ceremony  is  an  occasion  for  alms).  No 
sooner  were  they  reprimanded  for  their  improper 
begging  than  they  became  angry  and  threw  the 
drum  (containing  the  head  of  their  father)  into  the 
burning  flames  and  pretended  to  weep  over  their 
drum,  ail  the  people  being  ignorant  of  the  real 
reason.  In  reality  they  were  weeping  over  the 
death  of  their  father. 

22.  THE  BHADRA  OUTWITTED 

Once  a certain  man  started  from  his  home  to  the 
house  of  his  father-in-law  on  a day  rendered  un- 
propitious  by  Bhadra  (an  unlucky  moment).  The 
Bhadra  followed  him  in  the  form  of  his  own 
shadow.  When  he  arrived  there  the  Bhadra  did 
the  same.  To  his  father  and  mother-in-law  and  to 
his  own  wife  also  two  faces  (he  and  the  Bhadra  in 
his  shape)  of  like  form  and  stature  appeared  to  their 
amazement.  None  of  them  could  in  any  way  dis- 
tinguish the  real  man  and  the  Bhadra  in  his  image. 
Two  men  of  the  same  countenance  and  stature 
stood  at  dinner  and  bed.  The  girl  was  claimed  by 
each  of  them  equally.  At  last  the  parents  permitted 
the  girl  to  go  with  her  husband.  She  followed 
both  to  «)me  distance  when  two  roads  from  differ- 
ent directions  met  The  real  husband  was  taking 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


227 


his  wife  to  his  own  house  but  the  Bhadra  attempted 
to  take  her  by  another  road.  So  a conflict  took 
place  when  an  arm  of  the  girl  was  caught  by  her 
own  husband  and  another  by  the  Bhadra  ghost. 
The  real  husband  at  last  had  recourse  to  the  Raja 
of  the  place;  so  did  the  Bhadra  ghost,  each  claim- 
ing the  damsel  to  be  his  own  wife  before  the  king. 
After  hearing  the  parties  the  ingenious  king  had  a 
water*pot  with  two  holes  put  before  him,  and 
wanted  to  test  thereby  the  real  man.  So  he  said 
that  he  would  allow  him  to  have  the  wife  who 
would  pass  into  the  vessel  from  one  hole,  and  come 
out  through  the  other,  twice  or  thrice.  Of  course, 
it  was  impossible  for  a human  being  to  compress 
himself  thus  and  then  come  out  through  the  hole. 
The  other  form  Bhadra  did  this,  however,  as 
desired  by  the  king.  While  in  the  act  of  doing  so, 
the  Bhadra  ghost  was  shut  up  by  the  king  within 
the  vessel,  by  closing  the  holes.  The  king  ihen 
allowed  the  man  and  his  wife  to  go  home,  keeping 
the  ghost  confined  within  the  pot  for  some  months, 
when  it  disappeared  by  evaporation.  The  Hindus 
therefore  take  care  to  avoid  days  polluted  by  the 
Bhadra,  for  all  their  undertakings,  such  as  going 
on  pilgrimage  or  other  journeys,  performing  reli- 
gious and  social  duties,  building  and  occupying 


228 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


new  houses,  etc.  On  the  whole  nothing  good  is 
commenced  during  the  portion  of  day  and  night 
which  is  eclipsed  by  the  Bhadra.  This  prevails 
during  the  first  or  second  half  of  certain  lunar 
dates,  being  the  shade  of  a certain  planet,  accord- 
ing to  astrology. 

23.  WISDOM  SUPERIOR  TO  WEALTH 

There  were  once  two  men,  one  noted  for  his 
ingeniousness  and  the  other  for  his  wealth.  They 
quarrelled  widi  each  other  about  each  one’s  super- 
iority to  the  other.  They  went  to  wise  and  learned 
men  to  decide  their  respective  claims  and  precious- 
ness, and  had  arbitrators  appointed  for  the  purpose, 
but  to  no  effect.  They  then  resorted  to  the  sub- 
ordinate king  of  the  country,  who,  being  himself 
unable  to  decide  between  them,  referred  them  to 
the  superior  king.  They  then  represented  their 
case  to  him,  wfio  ordered  them  to  file  a joint  appli- 
cation on  the  subject  matter.  On  receipt  of  their 
petition  the  superior  king  passed  an  order  on  it 
tixat  the  parties  should  be  beheaded,  and  sent  it  to 
ihc  subordinate  one  for  execution  of  the  sentence, 
after  having  them  chainedl  and  hand-cuffed  as 
though  convicted  of  some  grave  offence.  Being 
thus  suddenly  humiliated  and  mortified  by  the 
sentence,  they  begmi  to  repent  of  their  contention. 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


229 


and  the  ingenious  man  asked  the  wealthy  man, 
■“Dear  sir,  can  you  think  of  any  alternative  by  which 
to  escape  the  imminent  calamity?”  The  wealthy 
man  replied,  “Dear  brother,  I do  not  see  any,  but  I 
am  willing  to  spend  the  whole  of  my  wealth,  bil- 
lions of  rupees,  to  save  my  life,  for  it  is  all  useless  to 
me  after  I die.”  The  wise  man  again  asked,  “Sir, 
will  you  then  give  me  half  of  your  wealth  on  condi- 
tion that  your  life  is  saved?”  The  opulent  man 
rejoined,  “Certainly  I will,”  and  he  instandy  wrote 
a letter  to  the  wise  man  to  this  effect  and  gave  it 
to  him,  as  an  assurance.  The  wise  man  kept  the 
letter  in  his  possession  and  went  to  the  sub-king 
with  his  comrade  and  earnesdy  implored  him  to 
have  them  beheaded  at  once  then  and  there.  The 
king,  astonished  at  such  a request  to  meet  instant 
death,  enquired,  “Gentlemen,  what  is  it  that  makes 
you  so  impatient  to  give  up  your  lives  so  readily? 
For  we  human  beings  are  always  namrally  anxious 
to  prolong  our  lives  even  for  a few  minutes  at  the 
sacrifice  of  the  whole  of  our  riches.”  The  wise 
man  said,  “My  lord,  since  we  are  destined  to  die, 
we  must  die  a pious  and  cheerful  death  in  accord- 
ance with  our  scriptures,  which  plainly  set  forth 
that  an  innocent  deadi  will  secure  to  the  deceased 
the  felicity  of  paradise,  whereas  it  will  annihilate 


230 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


him  and  his  posterity  from  the  face  of  the  earth, 
who  kills  or  causes  to  be  killed  an  innocent  person. 
The  saying  of  the  wise  man  made  a great  impres- 
sion on  the  mind  of  the  king,  and  acted  as  a deter- 
rent against  his  execution  of  the  sentence  passed  by 
the  higher  authority.  Under  such  circumstances, 
the  sub-king  sent  the  parties  back  to  the  higher 
king,  saying  that  he  himself  was  unable  to  execute 
them,  for,  it  would  be  a great  shock  to  his  con- 
science. They  appeared  then  before  the  supreme 
king  and  related  every  thing  that  had  passed  in  the 
meantime,  and  showed  the  letter  which  had  occa- 
sioned the  rich  man  to  write  to  the  wise  man  to 
save  his  life.  The  king  said,  “You  are  at  liberty  to 
go  where  you  please,  since  you  have  decided  the 
matter  under  issue,  yourself,  inasmuch  as  the  rich 
man  has  acknowledged  the  superiority  of  the  wise 
man.” 

24.  THE  THING  MOST  APPRECIATED 
IN  THE  WORLD 

Once  upon  a time  there  was  a king  of  a certain 
country  who  placed  recorders  of  gossip  at  all  the 
gates  which  led  to  his  capital.  Once  four  women 
passed  by  one  of  the  recording  stations  arguing 
among  themselves  the  thing  most  appreciated  in  the 
World.  One  woman  claimed  the  superiority  of 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


231 


the  flesh,  the  second  that  of  liquor,  the  third 
suggested  harlots,  and  the  other  insisted  that  false- 
hood stood  first.  The  recorder  heard  their  con- 
versation, and  noted  the  topics  they  discussed  to- 
gether with  the  whereabouts  of  each  of  the  women. 
The  register,  as  usual,  was  sent  at  the  end  of  the 
month  to  the  king  for  his  perusal.  The  king  sent 
for  the  women  and  commanded  each  of  them  to 
prove  their  words. 

“What  further  proof  can  you  demand  of  me,  my 
lord,  of  the  fondness  for  flesh  in  the  animal  and 
vegetable  kingdom  exclaimed  the  first  woman, 
“You  can  see  it  with  your  own  eyes.  First  of  all 
is  not  flesh  devoured  by  mankind  and  the  bones 
chewed  by  dogs  ? The  refuse  of  bones  is  eaten  by 
the  ants  and  other  insects,  and  what  they  leave  is 
disposed  of  by  the  vegetable  kingdom.  As  no 
portion  of  flesh  is  left  unutilized,  does  it  not  claim 
ascendancy  over  all  other  edible  things  in  the 
world?”  The  king  noted  all  she  had  said  in  his 
own  mind,  and  permitted  her  to  go. 

The  second  woman  then  appeared  to  prove  her 
statement : “Dear  Sir,”  she  said  “liquor,  that  is  to 
say,  strong  drink  is  comparativclyvmore  costly  than 
other  beverages.  It  deprives  its  devotees  of  their 
senses,  when  under  its  influence,  besides  draining 


232  HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 

their  resources.  Notwithstanding  these  evil  results 
it  is  impossible  for  them  to  withstand  its  temptation, 
and  in  the  end  it  brings  its  victims  to  bankruptcy 
and  the  grave.  Yet  there  are  always  others  to  take 
their  place  and  still  the  worship  of  drink  goes  on.” 
The  king,  convinced  in  his  mind  by  her  argument, 
allowed  her  to  go. 

The  third  woman  came  there  and  began  to 
speak : “Sir,  you  know  well  that  people  seduced  by 
harlots  become  bankrupt  and  contract  various 
diseases  in  their  society,  which  eventually  lead  them 
to  poverty  and  to  the  grave;  still  they  are  not  got 
rid  of.  They  are  so  madly  attached  to  the  pros- 
titutes that  they  have  no  care  left  for  their  moral 
and  spiritual  character,  or  their  worldly  prospects. 
These  facts  conclusively  prove  that  I am  right  in 
my  statement.”  After  having  heard  so  much  the 
king  let  the  third  woman  go. 

The  fourth  woman  was  called  and  she  spoke, 
“Sire,  the  love  of  falsehood  stands  ururivalled,  if 
you  will  only  pernrit  yourself : to  see  it”  She  was 
thfcn  ea.gerly  requested  by  the  king  and  his  courtiers 
to  explain  her  words.  She  continued,  “My  lords, 

I cannot  explaia  to  yon  unless  you  pay  me 
Rs.  10,000.”  She  was  at  once  paid  the  sum.  After 
sending  the  money  to  heir  home  she  said,  “Deir 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


233 


sirs,  wonderful  things  are  to  be  seen,  from  yonder 
banyan  tree.  On  the  Amawas  (when  there  is  no 
moon)  but  only  by  those  who  are  real  sons  of  their 
fathers  (i.e.  not  born  of  paramours  of  their  mothers) 
and  no  person  who  is  born  a bastard,  can  see  them.” 
She  then  went  away  to  her  home.  After  some 
month  the  day  fixed  arrived,  when  all  the  people, 
including  the  king,  waited  to  see  the  promised 
spectacle.  So  the  woman  was  sent  for.  She  came 
there  in  time  and  conveyed  the  assembled  company 
to  the  banyan  tree,  and  again  told  them  to  climb  up 
the  tree  from  whence  they  would  see  wonderful 
things,  provided  they  were  the  real  sons  of  their 
fathers.  First  up  went  the  royal  priest.  He  saw 
nothing  but  the  usual  view,  so  that  he  became  sus- 
picious of  his  birth,  and  to  conceal  the  blemishes  of 
his  mother  he  felt  obliged  to  tell  a lie,  and  professed 
to  have  seen  wonders  and  marvellous  sights  of  the 
three  worlds.  The  king  next  mounted  the  tree. 
He  saw  nothing,  but  he  too  would  not  confess,  so 
followed  the  example  of  the  royal  priest.  These 
facts  led  every  one  of  those  assembled  there  to  climb 
the  tree  and  pretend  they  had  seen  wonderful 
sights.  After  this  all  repaired  to  their  respective 
homes.  While  at  home  some  of  them  asked  most 
solemnly  and  confidentially  their  intimate  friends 


234 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


about  the  alleged  shows.  They  privately  whispered 
that  they  saw  nothing  at  all.  The  whispers  also 
leaked  out  to  the  ktug  emboldened  thereby, 
asked  his  royal  priest,  wbo  Said  he  also  saw  nothing. 
The  king  also  blurted  out  the  secret  of  his  seeing 
nothing  there.  Gradually  every  ono  said  publicly 
that  he  saw  nothing  from  the  banyan  tree.  The 
king  and  his  people  at  last  found  themselves  thus 
imposed  upon  by  the  wpiuafi  who  was  immediately 
arrested  and  brought  before  the  .kmg  to  answer  to 
dfc  charge  of  cheating.  To  that  charge  she  replied, 
“Sirs,  I told  you  beforehand  that  falsehood  had  the 
greatest  reifsh  in  the  world-  It  was  only  the 
relish  of  the  falsehood  which  caused  you  to  dance 
like  puppets  under  its  wonderful  power  or  influ- 
ence.’ The  humour  of  the  whole  thing  appealed 
to  the  king,  and  so  the  woman  was  acquitted  of 
the  charge. 

35.  AN  UPRIGHT  OFFICER 

Once  a great  officer,  with  g viow  to  test  the 
truthfulness  of  Ids  suhordinatii,  said  m them  during 
the  daytime  that  h?  could  w % gtirs  in  die  sky, 
looking  toward?  tbt  irmaiieftt  it  the  same  time. 
On  his  so  addifesing  theih  the  whole  crowd,  except 
begat  m lay  at  mree,  “Oertainly  Sir,  we  eat 
rise  see  iwm  disdaedy,  shining  it  die  sky,**  The 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


235 


Other  man  kept  silence  during  this  time.  The 
officer  then  looking  towards  him  asked  him 
whether  he  could  See  the  stars  which  he  did. 
Rather  indignantly,  the  man  replied,  “My  Lord,  I 
can  hardly  see  anything  amidst  the  blazing  rays  of 
the  sun;  I wonder  whether  I have  had  my  eyes 
spoilt  or  whether  you  all  have.”  The  officer  was 
greatly  pleased  with  the  man  for  his  cl^  and  up- 
right conscience,  and  he  openly  censured  die  syco- 
phancy of  the  others,  who,  he  said,  had  no  con- 
sciences or  only  dull  ones,  and  were  unfit  to  exercise 
judgment. 

26.  A JUST  AND  WISE  KING 

A certain  one-armed  man  had  500  gold  mohars 
which  he  had  covered  concealed  under  a certain 
tree  in  a certain  jungle.  He  used  to  make  sure  of 
it  by  occasionally  looking  at  it  A time  came 
when  to  his  despair  he  found  it  taken  away.  So 
thinking  it  stolen,  he  was  constrained  to  lay  a com- 
plaint about  this  before  the  king  of  the  country, 
saying  at  the  same  time  that  he  had  no  witoesses 
to  produce,  either  to  the  riches  being  deposited 
there  by  himself,  or  to  its  being  taken  away  by 
anybody.  That  just  and  wise  king,  after  having 
inspected  the  spot,  sent  for  all  the  physicians  of  his 
kingdom  and  inquired  frLm  each  of  tliem  as  to 


236 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


the  medical  use  of  the  leaves,  roots,  and  bark  of 
the  tree  under  which  the  wealth,  was  buried  and 
the  diseases  for  which  tliey  were  administered. 
After  acquainting  himself  with  the  information 
thus  derived  he  then  ascertained  from  them  the 
persons  suhFering  from  the  particular  malady 
which  was  cured  by  the  specific  tree  under  which 
the  money  had  been  hidden.  This  elaborate 
investigation  brought  the  culprit  to  light,  who  con- 
fessed and  returned  the  money.  The  whole  king- 
dom applauded  the  action  of  the  king  in  discover- 
ing the  money  lost. 

27.  THE  KING  IS  LIKE  THE  PHILOSOPHER’S 
STONE 

There  was  once  a poor  family  consisting  of 
husband  and  wife,  the  latter  of  whom  when  starv- 
ing urged  her  husband  to  go  to  the  king  who  was 
like  a Philosopher’s  Stone  (turned  all  to  gold  that  it 
touches).  The  beggar  had  only  an  iron  tawa 
(plate)  for  cooking  bread;  he  took  it  with  him  and 
went  to  the  king,  thinking  that  if  he  caused  the 
tawa  to  touch  some  part  of ; the  king’s  body  it 
would  become  gold.  So  he  touched  the  king  with 
great  difficulty,  and  asked  nothing,  but  began  to 
rub  the  plate  on  the  king’s  body.  The  king  was 
starded  and  asked  him  what  he  was  doing.  The 


WIT  AND  WISDOM 


237 


beggar  said  he  (the  king)  was  considered  to  be  a 
Philosopher’s  Stone  and  had  brought  that  to  be 
turned  into  gold.  The  king  was  very  pleased  to 
hear  of  this  idea  and  ordered  him  to  stay  with  him 
while  in  court.  In  a few  days  people  thought  him 
to  be  a great  favourite  of  the  king  and  all  litigants 
gave  him  gifts  to  gain  the  favour  of  the  king. 
In  a few  days  he  had  earned  lakhs  of  rupces. 
Once  the  king  asked  if  he  had  earned  anythipg. 
The  poor  beggar  said  that  he  had  collected  some 
lakhs  of  rupees.  So  the  king  said  he  was  really 
a Philosopher’  Stone  in  that  sense. 


CHAPTER  III — Animal  lore 
I.  THE  FOXES  AND  THE  ELEPHANT 

ONCE  a band  of  foxes  conspired  together  to 
kill  and  eat  an  elephant.  The  whole  body 
went  to  the  elephant  and  their  spokesman 
addressed  him  as  follows : “ My  Lord,  we  are 
badly  in  need  of  a king  to  rule  over  us,  and  all 
our  plans  are  fandom  and  ill-concerted  since  the 
death  of  our  former  king  the  lion.  If  you  will  be 
so  kind  as  to  become  our  king,  we  shall  all  be 
entirely  at  your  service.  You  will  no  longer  have 
to  roam  about  looking  for  food,  for  we  shall 
provide  you  with  every  necessity,  while  you  sit  at 
home  at  ease.” 

The  elephant,  suspecting  no  ill,  agreed  to  their 
artful  suggestions  and  assumed  the  royal  office. 
From  that  time  they  used  to  gather  fodder  for  him 
and  all  waited  upon  him  on  tip-toe  to  carry  out 
his  slightest  command.  Once  they  brought  him 
some  delicious  soft  grass  out  of  a marshy  place, 
and  the  elephant  enjoyed  it  more  than  any  other 
food.  They  supplied  him  with  it  constantly  and 
he  relished  it  more  and  more.  The  foxes  then 
told  the  elephant,  “ We  are  ready  always  to  bring 

238 


ANIMAL  LORE 


239 


to  your  majesty  anything  you  wish,  but  perhaps 
it  would  be  better  if  you  condescended  to  go  with 
us  some  day  to  the  place  where  we  get  the  grass, 
and  point  to  us  the  kind  you  prefer.”  The  ele- 
phant accompanied  the  foxes  to  the  place,  and 
began  to  feed  greedily  on  the  soft  grass  of  the 
swamps.  The  further  he  went  the  more  he  sank 
into  it.  When  he  had  gone  to  a little  depth  the 
foxes  said,  “ My  Lord,  allow  us  to  lift  you  up.” 
The  elephant  still  feeding  away  with  his  mouth 
full  of  grass  said,  “ Dear  friends,  do  so  by  all 
means  ”.  So  they  all  used  their  united  strength 
to  raise  him  up.  After  lifting  him  somewhat  they 
let  him  plump  down  again  suddenly,  and  repeat- 
ing the  process  several  times,  as  if  anxious  to  drag 
him  out  of  the  mud,  they  at  length  caused  him  to 
sink  entirely  in  the  marsh,  where  he  was  drowned, 
and  the  cunning  foxes  devoured  his  carcase. 

In  some  parts  of  India  where  the  jackal  is  com- 
moner than  the  fox,  he  figures  much  more  largely 
than  that  animal  in  folklore  ; and  as  Mr.  J.  L.  Kip- 
ling in  his  ‘ Beast  and  Man  in  India  ’ says,  “The 
jackal  is  the  true  Mr;  Reynard  of  Eastern  folk- 
lore, the  great  originator  of  the  best  of  our  fox 
stories-sweet  toothed,  mischievous,  lurking,  and 
as  full  of  resource  as  Brer  Rabbit  Mr.  i^pling 


240 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


also  reminds  us  that  his  Sanskrit-born  name,  gidar, 
means  greedy,  and  is  doubdess  from  the  same  root 
(Sanskrit  gridhnu).  In  the  two  jackal  stories  of 
the  present  collection,  it  is  the  jackal’s  consistent 
cunning  in  saving  himself  trouble  and  imposing 
on  his  betters  that  is  dwelt  on. 

2.  THE  JACKAL  AND  THE  TIGER’S  DEN 

There  was  once  a jackal  whose  wife  presented 
him  with  young  ones.  They,  poor  things,  felt 
very  unhappy,  as  she  had  no  house  for  her  cubs. 
The  father  promised  to  make  a house  for  them  in 
a certain  jungle,  and  every  day  after  taking  his 
morning  meal  he  would  go  off,  but  instead  of 
working  he  would  sleep  the  whole  day.  On  his 
return  in  the  evening  he  pretended  he  had  begun 
the  house,  and  that  it  was  taking  a long  time  on 
account  of  certain  contentions  which  he  describ- 
ed, making  a long  yarn  about  it  every  evening  ; 
and  this  pretence  he  carried  on.  for  months.  The 
mother  jackal  became  very  angry  with  him  for  this 
troublesome  delay.  So,  one  day,  ais  he  was  going 
throu^  the  forest  be  spied  dfe  den  of  a tiger  and 
returned  home  with  the  g^d  aem  that  the  house 
was  ready  for  occupation.  The  next  day  he  took 
his  wife  apd  famitjr  to  the  cave  and  instdled  them 
in  it  He  then  inshucted  his  tvilfe  when  he 


ANIMAL  LORE 


241 


gave  a certain  signal  she  was  to  bite  her  cubs  and 
make  them  cry,  and  when  he  should  ask  why  they 
were  crying,  to  tell  him  that  they  wanted  the  flesh 
of  a tiger,  and  would  not  eat  the  stale  one  which 
he  had  killed  for  them  yesterday.  Towards 
evening  the  jackal  placed  himself  at  the  entrance 
of  the  cave,  and  prescndy  the  tiger  returned,  and 
seeing  the  jackal  gave  a loud  roar  and  made  a 
spring  towards  him.  But  at  that  moment  the 
mother  jackal  inside  made  her  cubs  cry  loudly,  and 
the  father  asked  what  was  the  matter.  She  rep- 
lied from  within  that  her  young  ones  wanted  fresh 
tiger  meat  and  refused  to  eat  the  stale  flesh  of  the 
tiger  killed  the  day  before.  This  talk  of  theirs 
so  frightened  the  tiger  that  he  left  the  place  ins- 
tantiy  and  fled  for  his  life  to  a distant  jimgle,  and 
never  disturbed  them  any  more. 

3.  THE  JACKALS  AND  THE  TIGERS 

The  hills  were  the  original  abode  of  the  jackals, 
and  the  plains  of  the  Bhabar  (just  below  the  hills) 
were  inhabited  by  the  tigers.  Once  these  two 
species  proposed  an  exchange  of  territory,  and  the 
jackals  arrived  in  the  Bhabar  just  when  the  tigers 
had  started  to  the  hills  by  the  same  route.  The 
sight  of  so  rnany  tigers  together  rather  frightened 
the  jackals,  for  they  feared  they  might  be  attacked 

16 


2/p. 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


and  devoured,  but  they  did  not  lose  their  presence 
of  mind.  Seeing  the  carcase  of  an  elephant  lying 
there,  one  of  the  jackals  mounted  on  it,  placing  all 
his  comrades  arovmd,  and  loudly  declaring  that  he 
had  killed  it.  The  company  of  tigers  was  now 
drawing  near,  and  as  they  advanced  the  jackal 
cried,  “ Bring  me  my  scimitar  that  I may  break  the 
skull  of  this  first  tiger.”  The  tigers  hearing  this, 
and  seeing  the  boastful  attitude  of  the  jackal  on 
the  dead  body  of  an  elephant,  were  gready  alarm- 
ed- Those  behind  pushed  forward  the  tigers  in 
point,  and  they  began  to  growl  and  quarrel  among 
themselves,  and  made  no  progress.  The  jackal 
who  professed  to  have  slain  an  elephant  then 
addressed  the  tigers,  “ Dear  Brothers,  you  have 
no  occasion  to  fear  us.  Let  us  all  be  friends. 
The  way  to  do  this  is  by  arranging  a close  alliance 
between  die  two  tribes.  Now  you  have  many 
young  females  among  you.  Let  one  of  them  be 
married  to  me.”  The  tigers,  imposed  on  by  the 
proud  words  and  attitude  of  the  jackal,  consented 
to  the  proposed  connexion,  and  a tigress  was 
married  to  the  jackal,  who  took  her  to  his  den. 
One  day  when  they  felt  hungry  they  went  out  to 
hunt.  The  tigress,  whose  mental  superiority 
began  to  assert  itself,  pos^tdl  the  jackal  at  a narrow 


ANIMAL  LORE 


243 


pass  with  instructions  to  kill  animals  there  when 
driven  up  by  her  from  the  jungle.  Some  deer 
were  then  driven  through  the  gorge,  but  the  jackal 
could  not  kill  one  of  them.  The  tigress  oh  her 
remrn  finding  nothing  killed  asked  him  the  cause. 
He  replied  it  was  quite  improper  to  kill  an  animal 
when  it  was  frightened,  and  he  gave  her  a box  on 
the  ear  by  way  of  correcting  her  for  asking  such  a 
foolish  question.  She  endured  it,  as  he  was  her 
husband,  and  she  owed  him  wifely  obedience. 
Then  she  took  him  to  a large  herd  of  deer,  but  the 
jackal  only  killed  a fawn  which  could  not  run 
away.  On  her  questioning  him  about  it,  he  gave 
her  another  cuff  which  she  endured  patiently. 
The  third  time  she  charged  him  to  kill  some  buffa- 
loes for  their  food,  which  of  course  he  was  unable 
to  do,  and  she  was  obliged  to  go  and  kill  them 
herself.  Taking  offence  at  this,  the  jackal  struck 
her  angrily,  saying  that  he  would  have  destroyed 
them  slowly  and  playfully  and  not  as  she  has  done 
at  one  full  stroke.  On  another  occasion  they  be- 
gan to  cross  a large  river.  The  tigress  got  across, 
but  the  jackal  could  not  and  returned  from  the 
water.  She  was  obliged  then  to  swim  back  and 
take  her  husband  over.  No  sooner  did  they  arrive 
at  the  bank  than  he  gave  her  another  blow  charg- 


244  HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 

ing  her  with  going  off  without  his  permission. 
They  had  again  occasion  to  return  to  the  opposite 
bank  of  the  river.  The  tigress  reached  the  other 
side  by  swimming  straight  across,  but  the  jackal 
let  himself  float  down  the  river  and  reached  the 
other  shore  two  miles  below  the  spot.  On  meet- 
ing the  tigress  he  reprimanded  her  severely  for  her 
insolence  in  not  accompanying  him.  But  this 
time  when  he  offered  to  beat  her,  she  killed  the 
wretch. 

4.  THE  TIGER  AND  THE  TRAVELLER 

A man-eating  tiger  was  once  caught  in  a trap 
in  the  forest.  Seeing  a man  pass  by,  the  tiger 
earnestly  and  piteously  implored  him  to  open  the 
trap  and  set  him  free,  at  the  same  time  promising 
to  give  the  traveller  a fine  pair  of  gold  bracelets, 
wiudi  he  had  found  on  the  body  of  a man  recently 
lolled  by  him,  as  soon  as  he  was  let  loose.  The 
traveller,  tempted  by  this  rich  offers  opened  the 
door  of  the  trap  and  let  him  out  As  soon  as  he 
was  free,  the  tiger  tipgratefully  altadced  the  man, 
who  pleaded  earnestly  with  the  beast,  and  at  last 
persuaded  him  to  submit  the  matter  to  arbitration. 
The  trees  of  the  forest  and  fox  were  to  be  the  um- 
pires. The  trees  were  of  opinion  that  diough 
maakin-d  to  the  whole  was  their  enemy,  yet  as 


ANIMAL  LORE 


245 


every  one  would  be  requitted  according  to  his 
deeds,  they  would  say  nothing.  The  fox  on  his 
part  demanded  to  see  the  parties  in  the  dispute 
return  to  their  original  positions,  so  that  he  might 
judge  easily  between  them.  The  tiger  was  made 
to  re-enter  the  trap  and  the  man  closed  the  door 
of  it  and  went  by.  Thereupon  the  fox  decided 
that  either  party  should  remain  as  they  were.  They 
went  off  home  and  the  tiger  remained  imprisoned 
in  the  trap  to  meet  with  the  due  reward  of  his 
deeds. 

5.  THE  SHE-GOAT  AND  THE  LEOPARD 

Once  upon  a time  a highly  respectable  old  she- 
goat  was  grazing  in  a jimgle,  when  she  spied  a 
leopard  lying  in  wait  to  kill  her.  Instead  of  being 
frightened  or  nmning  away,  she  assumed  a calm 
attitude  and  did  not  move  a pace  from  the  spot, 
shewing  that  she  was  quite  prepared  and  willing 
to  meet  her  end.  This  uncommon  behaviour  of 
her  made  the  leopard  pause  and  he  asked  the  goat 
what  she  meant  by  it.  So  he  enquired,  “ Dear 
sister,  I am  about  to  kill  you,  why  do  you  stand  so 
undauntedly  in  your  place?”  She  replied,  “Dear 
brother,  I have  already  discharged  my  worldly  duty 
to  my  6wncr,  who  has  been  enriched  by  my  giving 
birth  to  numerous  progeny  twenty-one  times  for 


246 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


his  benefit.  To  tell  the  truth  he  has  been  brought 
by  this  means  to  a state  of  prosperity  from  a very 
miserable  condition,  owing  to  the  children  I have 
borne.  For  two  years  I have  ceased  to  have  young 
ones,  and  since  then  my  unkind  master  has  taken 
no  care  of  me  and  refuses  to  provide  fodder.  He 
drives  me  to  the  jungle  every  morning  to  graze  and. 
has  no  concern  for  me  now.  I heard  him  talk- 
ing last  night  with  his  family,  saying  that  “I 
should  be  killed  for  meat.  He  is  certain  to  kill 
me  without  the  least  regard  for  the  benefits  he  has 
received  from  me  during  my  past  life.  As  I am 
quite  convinced  in  my  mind  of  the  selfishness  of 
mankind  I thought  it  a good  thing  to  be  killed  and 
eaten  by  any  animal  other  than  a man.  So  I was 
very  glad  when  I saw  you  lying  in  wait  to  kill 
me.”  The  leopard  was  touched  by  this  speech  of 
the  she-goat,  and  made  friends  tvith  her.  They 
used  to  wander  about  together  in  the  jungle  from 
that  day,  and  the  leopard  allowed  no  harm  to 
come  to  her.  Indeed  so  kind  was  the  leopard  to 
the  goat  that  he  once  caught  kold  of  the  trunk  of 
an  elephant  and  made  him  promise  to  take  the 
goat  on  his  back  and  feed  her  with  twigs  and 
leaves. 


ANIMAL  LORE 


247 


6.  THE  FELINE  RACE 

The  cat  is  said  to  be  the  ancestor  of  leopards 
and  tigers,  though  these  have  developed  to  such  a 
superior  size.  Their  qualities  and  disposition  are 
just  the  same  as  those  of  the  cat.  The  cat  taught 
her  progeny  every  shift  and  device  of  her  kind, 
but  fearing  danger  from  their  large  stature  she 
kept  back  from  them  the  art  of  climbing  trees  as  a 
means  of  escape  for  herself,  should  they  turn  upon 
her  at  any  time.  And  so  it  proved.  For,  when 
they  grew  to  full  size,  they  attacked  their  grand- 
mother, the  cat,  who  escaped  by  climbing  a tree, 
an  art  in  which  leopards  and  tigers  are  to  this  day 
deficient. 

7.  THE  CUNNING  FOE 

A leopard,  a wolf,  a wild  cat,  a fox  and  a mouse 
once  conspired  to  kill  a big  antelope  in  the  forest, 
a feat  which  none  of  them  singly  could  achieve. 
The  crafty  fox  said,  “ Our  friend  the  mouse  will 
gnaw  the  hoofs  of  the  antelope  while  he  sleeps 
and  then  the  leopard  will  easily  catch  and  kill  him. 
We  can  then  enjoy  the  flesh  for  a long 
rime.”  The  mouse  and  the  leopard  did  thek 
part  of  the  bargain  successfully.  Then  the 
others  assembled  to  take  their  share  of  the  ante- 
lope. The  artful  fox  said,  “ Brothers,  here 


248 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


is  the  fat  deer  lying  on  the  ground.  You 
should  all  go  to  the  river  to  perform  the  due 
ablution,  and  I will  take  care  of  the  carcase  until 
you  return.  So  they  all  went  to  the  river-side  and 
the  fox  remained  to  think  out  some  means  of 
appropriating  the  whole  deer.  On  his  return  the 
leopard  found  the  fox  deep  in  thought  and  asked 
him  why  he  looked  so  anxious,  “ What  do  you 
advise?  Shall  we  not  eat  the  flesh  and  play  with 
each  other?"  The  fox  replied,  “Dear  brother,  I 
am  sorry  to  tell  you  that  the  mouse  has  invoked  a 
terrible  curse  on  you.  He  has  said,  “Blasted  be 
the  strength  and  powers  of  the  leopard,  for  he  will 
gorge  himself  with  the  flesh  of  the  deer,  and  leave 
nothing  for  me  who  helped  to  kill  it.”  Aghast  at 
this  news,  and  fearing  the  curse,  the  leopard  left 
the  spot  and  hid  himself  in  a distant  jungle.  Then 
the  mouse  came,  and  to  him  the  fox  said,  “ Brother, 
die  jungle<at  says  he  does  not  wish  to  eat  the 
flesh  of  the  deer,  preferring  yours.  I warn  you  of 
the  danger.  You  may  do  as  you  please;”  The 
mouse  withdrew  to  his  hole,  where  he  stayed  tremb- 
ling with  fm.  Next  the  wh|£  came.  The  fox 
said  to  him,  “ Dear  friend,  I am  sorry  to  say  that 
the  leopard  is  very  angry  at  the  idea  of  any  of  us 
sharing  in  the  deer.  He  has  gone  ofl  to  fetch  his 


ANIMAL  LORE 


249 


family  to  eat  it.  Do  as  you  like,  but  as  you  arc 
stronger  than  I am,  I will  leave  you  here.”  The 
wolf  thereupon  turned  tail  and  bolted.  The  wild 
cat  only  remained.  The  fox  said,  “My  dear  cat, 
the  leopard,  the  wolf  and  the  mouse  have  all  run 
away  after  being  defeated  by  me,  you  and  I will 
fight  a duel  for  the  deer.  The  cat  also  hastily 
departed,  leaving  the  fox  to  enjoy  the  whole  ante- 
lope alone. 

8.  A TANGLED  YARN 

Once  an  old  woman  and  her  grandson  lived  to- 
gether. The  boy  used  to  graze  sheep  and  goats  in 
the  jungle.  One  day  the  grand-motha:  called 
loudly,  telling  him  to  return  home  as  a hurricane 
was  coming.  A leopard  who  was  lurking  near, 
waiting  his  chance  of  carrying  off  one  of  the  flock, 
overheard  what  she  said  and  began  to  wonder  what 
a hurricane  was.  He  already  knew  that  a storm 
meant  a high  wind  but  this  new  word  puzzled  and 
alarmed  him.  So  he  hid  himself  among  the  sheep 
and  goats,  and  along  with  them  entered  the  sheep- 
fold  for  the  night  Not  long  after,  four  thieves 
crept  in  to  steal  a goat  from  the  shed.  In  the  dark- 
ness they  felt  among  the  animals,  and  finding  flic 
leopard  to  be  die  largest  and  fattest,  put  a rope 
round  his  neck  and  led  him  away.  The  leopard, 


250 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


Still  in  vague  fear  of  the  hurricane,  submitted.  At 
break  of  day  the  thieves,  finding  to  their  amaze- 
ment that  their  fat  sheep  was  a large  leopard,  at 
once  set  him  free  and  hastily  climbed  up  into  the 
hollow  trunk  of  a dried  tree,  fearing  an  attack 
from  the  beast.  But  the  leopard  had  no  mind  for 
hostilities.  He  fled  away  into  the  jungle,  and  there 
met  a bear,  who  asked  him  why  he  was  running 
away  so  fast.  The  leopard  replied,  “ Brother,  I 
have  just  narrowly  escaped  the  terrible  peril  called 
‘ Hurricane  The  bear  rqoined,  “ My  dear  Sir, 
We  jungle  beasts  arc  afraid  of  no  one.  You  are 
surely  alarmed  without  cause:  show  me  this 
Hurricane.  I will  fight  him.”  The  leopard, 
feeling  reassured,  led  the  bear  to  the  hollow  tree, 
as  the  place  where  the  hurricane  was  lying  conceal- 
ed. The  bear  climbed  up  the  trunk  and  dropped 
his  tail  into  it  to  feel  and  ascertain  the  nature  of 
the  danger.  The  thieves  caught  hold  of  it  and 
began  m tug  with  all  their  might  The  bear  in 
tenor  pulled  and  got  his  tail  much  bruised  and 
hurt  before  he  could  tear  himself  away.  The  bear 
and  the  leopard  ran  ofl  into  die  jungle  and  diere 
met  a tig^,  who  enquired  die  reason  of  their 
p®ic.  The  leopard  and  the  bear  told  their 
stories.  The  tiger j^  diwoprog  the  report  wiik 


ANIMAL  LORE 


251 

contempt,  offered  to  help  them  if  they  would 
show  him  the  danger.  So  the  three  wild  beasts 
started  off  again.  The  thieves,  seeing  the  tiger 
with  two  allies  coming  towards  them,  climbed 
further  up  the  tree.  The  tiger  took  his  station 
under  the  tree  and  roared  frightfully,  which  so 
terrified  one  of  the  thieves  that  he  fell  down  on  the 
tiger’s  back  and  clasped  him  so  tighdy  that  the 
tiger  thought  he  was  being  ridden  by  a demon  and 
took  to  flight.  In  running,  the  thief  was  thrown 
down  by  the  tiger  and  lay  unconscious.  When 
all  three  beasts  had  reached  a safe  distance,  they 
congratulated  one  another  on  their  escape.  The 
tiger  grumbled  angrily  at  the  leopard  and  the  bear, 
on  accoimt  of  the  wrong  information  they  had 
given  him,  saying,  “ You  quite  misled  me,  saying 
the  hurricane  was  a kind  of  dragging  thing,  where- 
as I foimd  him  to  be  a rider  of  beasts.  If  I had 
known  that,  I would  not  have  ventured  to  approach 
it.” 

Learned  anthropologists  tell  us  that  early  man 
conceived  animals  as  being  quite  as  wise  as  him- 
self,  but  the  above  story  belongs  to  a more  modern 
cycle,  and  not  unpleasingly  attempts  to  describe 
dhe  half  light  of  animal  intelligence  in  relation  to 
human  beings. 


252 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


9.  A GOAT’S  RESOURCES 

Once  a shepherd,  in  the  days  when  the  speech  of 
the  animals  was  more  generally  understood,  asked 
one  of  his  goats  what  protection  he  had  against 
unforeseen  dangers  if  he  went  alone  into  the 
jungle.  The  goat  replied,  “ Sir,  I have  four  bro- 
thers (legs)  who  can  run  and  carry  me  away  ; two 
brethren  armed  with  clubs  for  my  defence  (horns) 
two  brothers  to  fan  me  (ears)  ; and  one  to  drive 
ofi  flies  (tail). 

10.  THE  SENSITIVE  TIGER 

The  elephant,  says  Mr.  J.  L.  Kipling,  is  often 
represented  in  Indian  Folklore  as  peculiarly  sen- 
sitive, though  probably  with  little  cause.  It  is 
rare,  however,  to  find  the  tiger  credited  with  a 
thin  skinned  liability  to  be  hurt  in  his  feelings,  as 
in  the  following  story. 

A certain  Brahmin,  having  m marry  his  daugh- 
ter, went  into  a far  country  to  cam  money  for  her 
dowry.  Passing  through  a jungle  he  met  a tiger 
who  asked  where  he  was  going  add  for  vdial  pur- 
pose. The  Brahmin  told  his  stoty  with  strict 
trudi,  and  the  tiger  taking  Wm  to  his  den  showed 
hkn  all  the  gold  ornaments  and  jewels  Which  he 
had  (^ected  from  the  persons  of  those  Whom  he 
had  slain.  The  tiger  very  generously  told  him  to 


ANIMAL  LORE 


253 


take  them  all  as  the  marriage  portion  of  his  daugh- 
ter, adding  a request  that  he  would  invite  him 
also  to  the  wedding  ; but  saying  that  he  wished  to 
have  a private  corner  assigned  him  at  the  cere- 
monies, lest  the  people  should  be  alarmed  by  his 
presence.  The  marriage  day  arrived,  and  the 
tiger,  according  to  promise,  was  accommodated  in 
a cellar  under  the  house.  In  the  midst  of  the 
festivities  the  guests  began  to  notice  an  unpleasant 
odour  (from  the  tiger)  and  asked  the  Brahmin  the 
cause  of  it.  The  Brahmin,  afraid  of  telling  out  the 
secret,  said  it  must  be  coming  from  the  manure-heap 
in  the  yard,  a remark  which  was  ovwheard 
by  the  tiger.  The  marriage  ceremony  being  over, 
the  tiger,  deeply  wounded  by  the  words  of  his  host, 
commanded  him  to  strike  ofi  his  head  with  an 
axe,  or,  he  would  kill  him.  To  save  his  life  the 
Brahmin  had  at  last  to  strike  the  ti^  in  Ac  man- 
ner indicated.  The  blow  which  he  gave  to  the 
tiger’s  head  made  an  incision  an  inch  deep.  The 
tiger  told  him  to  return  to  see  him  after  a week. 
The  Brahmin  did  so,  and  found  Ae  woimd  already 
healed  up  The  tiger  admonished  him,  “My 
fricn4>  *h.e  bodily  wound  you  inflicted  on  me  has 
healed  in  Ais  short  time,  but  Ae  mental  wound 
ymi  caused  me  is  sAl  unhealed-  In  future,  take 


254 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


care  not  to  hurt  the  feelings  of  other  people  for 
such  impressions  remain  unerased  for  a long  time, 
as  the  proverb  says,  “ Scmetimes  words  wound 
more  than  swords.” 

ir.  THE  ELEPHANT  AND  THE  MOUSE 

An  elephant  and  a mouse  met  in  a forest.  The 
elephant,  scarcely  deigning  to  notice  the  little  ani- 
mal, began  to  abuse  him  saying,  “You  mean  and 
wretched  creature,  you  are  only  fit  to  gaze  at  me 
from  a distance.  I can,  if  I like,  tread  you  into 
nothing  with  a single  stamp  of  my  foot.”  The 
mouse  answered  him,  “ Oh,  greatest  of  beasts,  I 
salute  you.  The  same  God  has  created  us  both 
for  different  purposes,  and  has  endowed  us  with 
different  powers,  according  to  our  need.  You 
need  not  be  proud,  for  both  of  us  will  soon  perish. 
If  you  depend  on  your  strength,  I depend  on  my 
wisdom.  So  there  is  in  reality  nothing  to  boast 
about.”  The  elephant  replied,  “ We  are  indeed 
of  the  same  earth,  but  I am  bom  far  superior  by 
nature,  and  your  duty  is  simply  to  submit  to  me 
and  pay  obeisance  to  my  higher  qualities ; other- 
wise you  must  be  punished.  Wisdom  has  no  as- 
cendancy over  nature.”  Thus  they  disputed 
angrily.  The  inouse,  in  order  to  convince  the  ele- 
phant of  the  superiority  of  vrisdom,  began  to  dig 


ANIMAL  LORE 


255 


a ditch  in  the  ground  where  the  elephant  was 
accustomed  to  walk.  Accordingly  one  day  the 
latter  fell  into  the  hole,  and  was  utterly  helpless  to 
extricate  himself.  Thus  humbled,  the  elephant 
begged  the  mouse’s  pardon,  and  acknowledged  the 
superiority  of  wisdom,  whereupon  the  mouse  filled 
up  the  ditch  and  enabled  the  elephant  to  come  out. 

X2.  THE  CAT  AND  THE  MOUSE 

A certain  cat  once  asked  a mouse  to  give  him 
his  daughter  in  marriage,^  forgetting  the  law  of 
nature.  The  mouse  was  so  puffed  up  at  the  idea 
of  this  noble  alliance  that  he  agreed  to  the  request, 
in  spite  of  its  strangeness,  and  a date  was  fixed  for 
the  wedding.  Following  the  usual  custom,  a 
train  of  cats  formed  the  marriage  procession,  and 
went  with  a drum  to  the  mouse’s  dwelling,  or 
rather  hole.  The  maternal  relatives  of  the  bride  were 
gathered  there,  also  accompanied  by  a drummer  to 
receive  the  bridegroom  and  his  party.  Just  as  the 
two  processions  were  advancing  towards  each  other, 
the  drummer  of  the  cats,  forgetting  himself,  sound- 
ed the  war  signal,  “ One  to  catch  two  I ” (One  cat 
to  catch  two  mice)  “ One  to  catch  two.”  Under- 
standing the  signal  and  also  yielding  to  the  force 
of  habit,  the  mouse’s  dnunmer  sounded,  “ Run 
away  and  hide  ! Run  away  and  hide,”  which  the 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


256 

mice  prompdy  did  ; and  on  the  arrival  of  the  cats 
there  was  not  a single  member  of  the  bride’s  party 
to  be  seen.  They  called  from  outside  “Oh  foolish 
mouse,  come  out  and  hear  us.”  The  mice  from 
within  answered,  “ O artful  and  greedy  cats,  speak 
on,  we  are  listening  inside.”  The  end  of  it  was 
that  no  marriage  took  place. 

13.  AN  UNGRATEFUL  FOX  CHASTISED  BY  GOD 

A fox  once  entered  the  stomach  of  the  dead 
body  of  a camel  for  the  purpose  of  eating  into  its 
intestines.  He  devoured  them  for  some  days, 
without  in  the  least  thinking  as  to  how  he  would 
come  out  of  it.  In  the  meanwhile  the  way  by 
which  the  fox  penetrated  to  the  belly  of  the  dead 
body,  having  been  closed  owing  to  the  drying  of 
the  skin  in  tlie  sun,  the  fox  was  tightly  pressed 
within  it.  Being  subjected  to  such  a difficult 
position  the  fox  prayed  God  for  a rainfall  so  that  the 
skin,  might  be  softened  to  enable  him  to  make  his 
way  out.  God  granted  his  request  by  causing  rain- 
fall on  the  dried  body.  As  soon  as  the  animal  had 
come  out,  he  let  God  at  defiance,  saying  that  he 
was  all-powerful  himself,  even  to  have  rain  of  his 
own  sweet  will,  and  tried  to  escape  from  God’s 
presence.  God  therefore  had  a damsel  of  tar 
madcj  and  put  it  up  in  the  jungle,  placing  a bit  of 


ANIMAL  I/)RE 


257 


meat  in  its  hand.  The  fox  came  there  and  asked 
for  the  meat,  but  it  could  not  and  did  not  give  it. 
Being  enraged  at  this  conduct  of  the  tar  damsel, 
the  animal  gave  it  two  buffets,  which  stuck  him  to 
it.  This  provoked  him  more.  In  his  further 
attempts  to  extricate  himself  from  it,  his  whole  body 
became  fast  to  the  tar.  Seeing  him  in  this  plight, 
God  chastised  him,  and  then  he  came  to  his  senses, 
and  praised  God  for  His  greamess,  with  self- 
humiliation  and  mortification. 

The  “ slimness  ” of  the  fox  has  often  been  dwelt 
on  in  folklore,  but  the  following  story  exhibits  his 
cynical  cunning  as  well. 

14.  A FOX  AND  A BEAR 

(l) 

A fox  and  a bear  made  friends,  and  agreed  to 
set  up  a joint  establishment.  They  bought  a 
buffalo  for  the  sake  of  its  milk,  and  it  was  agreed 
that  the  buffalo  should  be  tethered  in  the  jungle  and 
watched  by  either  in  turn.  The  fox  would  milk 
her  in  the  day  after  she  had  been  grazed  by  the 
bear,  and  vice  versa.  The  good  honest  bear  used 
to  carry  out  his  duty  thoroughly  and  feed  the 
buffalo  with  plenty  of  leaves  and  twigs,  which  he 
pulled  off  the  trees.  The  fox  thus  fared  well  and 
got  plenty  of  milk.  When  it  was  the  bear’s  turn, 

17 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


258 

however,  to  milk  the  animal,  he  could  hardly  get 
any,  for  the  fox  neither  would  nor  could  feed  it 
properly.  After  a time  the  fox  grew  tired  of  a 
milk-diet,  and  thought  he  would  like  to  cat  the 
flesh  of  the  buffalo.  He  therefore  took  it  to  graze 
along  the  edge  of  a steep  precipice,  and  it  was  not 
long  in  falling  over.  The  buffalo,  however,  did 
not  fall  quite  to  the  bottom,  but  lodged  half-way 
down  ; so  the  fox  brought  his  friend  die  bear  to 
lift  her  up,  and  himself  stood  at  the  top  of  the 
cliff  to  give  his  advice  and  help  in  the  operation. 
With  great  exertion  the  bear  raised  the  buffalo. 
Just  as  he  was  reaching  the  top,  the  fox  gave  him 
a vigorous  push  and  both  bear  and  buffalo  rolled 
to  the  bottom  and  lay  dead.  The  fox  had  now  the 
materials  for  a grand  feast,  but  he  found  himself 
unable  to  remove  the  skin  of  the  buffalo,  and  so 
went  to  the  Dorns,  the  low-caste  villagers,  who 
alone  in  the  hill  country  eat  the  flesh  of  the  buffalo, 
even  when  dead,  and  hivited  them  to  come  and 
cut  up  the  corpse  and  eat  it.  A great  concourse 
of  Dpms  gathered,  Ica'^ing  dieir  village  entirely 
empty*  ^d,  while  dbey  were  cutting  up  the  buffalo, 
the  fox  went  and  set  fire  to  tiheir  houses.  Return- 
mg,  he  .iidbrmed-t^  that  their  village  was 
burning,  whoreupon  they,  of  course,  rushed  off  to 


ANIMAL  LORE 


259 


their  houses,  and  were  occupied  a long  time  in 
putting  out  the  fire.  The  fox  proceeded  in  a 
leisurely  manner  to  devour  the  flesh,  and  when  he 
was  well  satisfied,  he  went  up  to  the  top  of  a 
ridge,  and  sang  his  well-known  ditty  about  how 
pleasant  it  was  to  have  killed  his  brother  the  bear 
and  to  have  burnt  the  huts  of  the  Dorns  to  ashes. 

15.  THE  FOX  AND  THE  BEAR 

(2) 

Once  a fox  chose  a bear  as  a companion  and  they 
used  to  walk  about  everywtiere  together.  The  fox, 
being  the  more  cunning  animal,  used  to  dupe  the 
bear  in  every  way  for  his  amusement.  One  day 
in  the  jungle  they  came  upon  a large  hornets’  nest, 
and  the  fox,  intending  to  play  a trick  on  the  bear, 
began  to  beat  on  the  hollow  hornets  ’ hill,  which 
sounded  like  a drum.  The  bear’s  simple  mind 
was  quite  charmed  with  the  proceeding,  as  the  fox 
had  anticipated,  and  he  asked  the  fox  to  let  him 
try  playing  the  drum  on  the  hornets’  nest.  The 
fox  replied,  “ O Yes,  dear  brother  bear,  now  beat 
it  soundly  and  it  will  make  a fine  noise.”  The 
bear  began  to  dance  and  beat  the  nest  with  his 
great  feet,  and  it  was  soon  broken  in,  when  ail  the 
hornets  rushed  out  and  stung  the  bear  terribly  to 
the  great  delight  of  his  malicious  friend.  Another 


26o 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


time  the  sly  fox  hung  up  a swing  over  a precipice 
and  began  to  swing  himself  in  it,  while  the  bear 
sat  and  watched.  The  fox  made  out  he  was  having 
a fine  time  and  enjoying  himself  greatly.  The 
stupid  bear,  believing  what  the  fox  said,  asked  for 
a turn  in  the  swing  for  a few  minutes.  The  fox 
said,  “ Certainly,  dear  brother  bear  ; but  remember 
that  if  you  push  the  swing  hard  and  make  it  go 
far  out,  the  pleasure  will  be  all  the  greater.”  The 
bear  got  into  the  swing,  and  the  fox  gave  it  a great 
jerk  which  made  the  cord  break,  and  the  bear  fell 
down  the  steep,  bumping  himself  very  severely,  to 
the  secret  delight  of  his  false  companion. 

A third  time  the  wicked  fox  cut  off  the  tail  of 

dead  buffalo  and  put  it  inside  a hole  in  the  wall 
under  a terrace  which  overhung  a deep  valley. 
Then  he  went  to  his  friend,  the  bear,  and  informed 
him  that  a buffalo  had  got  into  the  wall,  and  if 
they  pulled  hard  enough  they  could  get  him  out 
and  eat  him.  They  went  to  the  spot,  and  the 
bear,  taking  hold  of  the  tail,  dragged  it  out  with 
all  his  force  and  unbalancing  himself  rolled  down 
the  precipice  and  was  killed. 

i6.  THE  AMBITIOUS  MOUSE 

Once  upon  a time  there  was  a certain  mouse 
who  had  a bcautifiil  daughter  of  marriageable  age. 


ANIMAL  LORE 


261 


He  was  very  ambitious  and  determined  to  espouse 
her  to  the  most  powerful  personage  in  the  world, 
in  order  to  raise  the  level  of  his  own  social  posi- 
tion. With  this  purpose  in  view  he  went  to  the 
sun  and  offered  his  daughter  in  marriage,  but  the 
sun  declined  the  honour  saying,  “ Oh  my  dear 
mouse,  I would  gratefully  accept  your  kind  offer, 
were  it  not  that  my  circumstances  prevent  me,  for 
these  reasons.  First,  I am  the  centre  and  focus  of 
heat,  and  your  daughter  would  be  unable  to  bear 
my  scorching  rays.  Secondly,  I have  no  house  to 
live  in.  Thirdly,  having  to  travel  incessantly  day 
and  night  round  the  earth,  I have  no  time  to  earn 
food  and  clothing  for  her.  So  you  had  better  go 
to  my  brother,  the  moon,  and  marry  your  girl  to 
him.”  At  once  the  mouse  journeyed  to  the  moon, 
to  whom  he  made  the  same  offer  to  give  him  his 
daughter  in  marriage.  The  moon  received  the 
mouse  with  great  courtesy  and  etiquette  and  said 
“Dear  Sir,  I am  not  a proper  match  for  your 
daughter,  since  I have  stains  on  my  body,  in  conse- 
quence of  which  I conceal  myself  in  the  day-time 
and  appear  only  at  night.  Besides,  the  cloud  has 
supremacy  over  me,  inasmuch  as  he  can  cover  me 
up  at  any  time.  It  behoves  you  then  to  give  your 
daughter  to  the  cloud,  who  is  stronger  than  I am.” 


262 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


The  father  accordingly  went  to  the  cloud  and  made 
his  offer.  The  cloud  put  forward  his  inability  to 
marry  the  girl  since  he  was  easily  blown  away  by 
his  enemy,  the  wind,  and  so  referred  him  to  the 
wind  as  a husband  for  his  daughter.  Accordingly^! 
his  next  visit  was  to  the  wind.  The  wind  said,' 
“ Alas,  Dear  Sir,  I am  not  at  all  a big  person  in  the 
world  ; true,  I can  blow  away  all  things,  with  the 
exception  of  the  stone,  and  he  is  bigger  and  heavier 
than  I am.  Better  you  should  give  your  daughter 
to  the  stone.”  The  old  mouse  at  once  betook  him- 
self to  the  stone,  who  said,  “ Woe  is  me ! I am  an 
inanimate  thing,  quite  unable  to  move.  How  can 
I earn  bread  and  clothing  for  your  daughter?  Why 
not  go  to  the  earth,  who  produces  savoury  edible 
grains  and  vegetables,  besides  precious  stones  and 
valuable  metals.  He  could  marry  your  daughter  and 
provide  her  with  every  luxury  and  necessity.”  To 
this  suggestion,  the  mouse  thankfully  paid  his  res- 
pects to  the  earth,  and  represented  his  case.  The 
earth  said,  “Your  offer  is  welcome,  but  I cannot 
ffiarry  your  daughter,  being  bound  by  the  roots  of 
trees,  which  I bear  on  my  head,  and  I am  then 
prevented  from  going  here  and  there  in  search 
of  livelihood.  You  had  better  go  to  the  tree  and 
espouse  your  daughter  to  him.  He  is  superior  to 


ANIMAL  LORE 


263 


me.”  The  mouse  then  started  to  the  tree,  and 
addressed  him.  The  tree  said,  “ Though  I do  con- 
trol the  earth  in  some  way,  still  your  little  mice 
are  superior,  for  you  cut  and  eat  into  my  roots  and 
make  me  wither,  so  you  should  give  your  daughter 
in  marriage  to  the  mouse,  for,  he,  being  so  power- 
ful can  certainly  accept  your  offer.”  In  this  man- 
ner the  mouse,  after  all,  had  to  go  to  the  mouse 
to  whom  his  daughter  was  married  with  great 
rejoicings  and  feastings. 


CHAPTER  IV — ^Bird  Folklore 


The  cuckoo  in  England  is  believed  to  change 
into  a hawk  in  winter  (sparrow  hawk).  In 
Germany  after  St.  John’s  Day,  about  the 
time  when  it  becomes  mute.  Kelly  asks,  “ As  the 
form  of  the  cuckoo  remotely  resembles  that  of  the 
falcon  tribe,  may  we  conjecture  that  hence  in  Ger- 
man tradition  that  bird  in  some  degree  represents 
the  fire-bringing  falcon  of  the  Aryans?”  Manhardt 
says,  “The  cuckoo  is  the  messenger  of  Thor,  the  god 
in  whose  gift  were  health  and  strength,  length 
of  days  and  marriage  blessings.”  And  therefore  it 
is  that  people  call  upon  the  bird  to  tell  how  long 
they  have  to  live,  and  how  soon  they  will  be  mar- 
ried, and  how  many  children  they  shall  have  ; and 
that  in  Schauenburg  the  person  who  acts  at  a 
wedding  as  master  of  the  ceremonies  carries  a 
cuckoo  in  his  staff. 

Kelly  says : “ The  cuckoo’s  connexion  with 
storms  and  tempests  is  not  clearly  determined,  but 
the  owl’s  is  indisputable.  Its  cry  is  believed  in 
England  to  foretell  hail  and  rain  ; the  latter  of 
which  is  usually  accompanied  with  lightning, 

and  the  practice  of  nailing  it  to  the  barndoor,  to 

264 


BIRD  FOLKLORE 


265 

await  the  lightning,  is  common  throughout  Europe, 
and  is  mentioned  in  an  ancient  treatise  on  agri- 
culture. 

The  robin— In  Ireland  (Gerard  Vallency  says) 
the  Druids  represented  this  bird  as  the  king  of 
birds.  This  superstitious  respect  offended  most 
Christian  missionaries,  who  taught  the  people  to 
hunt  and  kill  it  on  Christmas  Day.  In  other  coun- 
tries it  is  a sacred  bird.  To  take  its  life  or  even  rob  its 
nest  in  the  Pays  de  Caux  is  regarded  as  a crime 
of  such  atrocity  that  it  will  bring  down  the  light- 
ning upon  the  homestead  of  the  offender.  In 
Perigord  the  swallow  is  called  “lapula  de  Dieu” 
and  is  regarded  as  the  messenger  of  life. 

The  raven,  sacred  to  Odin  and  Apollo,  the  Ger- 
man and  Greek  form  of  the  Aryan  Rudra,  was  and 
indeed  is  yet,  pre-eminentiy  the  bird  of  ill-omcn. 
Othelo  says,  “ Oh,  it  comes  o’er  my  memory,  as 
doth  the  raven  o’er  the  infected  house  boding 
ill.”  The  raven’s  power  of  scenting  carrion 
from  a great  distence  may  have  originally  in- 
fluenced, as  in  the  case  of  the  dog  and  the 
owl,  its  selection  as  a personification  of  impend- 
ing death  or  other  calamity.  The  raven  was 
the  standard  of  the  Scandinavian  Vikings,  as  the 


266 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


eagle  was  that  of  the  ancient  Romans  and  of  the 
French  today. 

Many  other  birds  possess  somewhat  similar  attri- 
butes to  the  raven,  such  as  crows,  magpies,  jack- 
daws, etc.  Ramsay,  the  author  of  the  “ Elmintholo- 
gia,”  says,  “If  a crow  fly  but  over  the  house  and 
croak  thrice,  how  do  they  fear,  they  or  someone  in 
the  family  shall  die.” 

The  croaking  of  crows  and  ravens  foreboded 
rain.  In  this  particular  they  resembled  the  wood- 
pecker. It  was  (still  is)  held  that  to  see  a crow  on 
the  left  hand  is  a sinister  omen.  The  old  formula 
it  still  credited,  “One  for  sorrow,  two  for  mirth, 
three  for  a wedding  and  four  for  death.”  On 
sight  of  a magpie  turn  round  thrice,  or  mark  a 
cross  with  the  toe  on  the  ground,  to  avert  calamity. 

The  woodpecker,  perhaps,  of  all  the  fire-bring- 
ing birds,  has  most  permeated  the  ancient  mytho- 
logies. The  Latins  named  it  Picus,  whose  brother 
(or  double)  Piluranus,  was  the  god  of  bakers  and 
millers.  In  early  times  the  millers  pounded  their 
com  with  a pesde,  and  pilum  signified  both  pestle 
and  Javelin  which  are  e(|ually  types  of  the  tiiunder- 
bolt.  The  tapping  of  the  beak  of  the  woodpecker 
was  regarded  as  partaking  of  a similar  character. 
Qn  die  birdi  of  a child  it  was  customary  at  Rome 


BIRD  FOLKLORE 


267 

to  prepare  a couch  for  Pilumnus  and  Pitumnus, 
who  were  believed  to  bring  the  fire  of  life,  and 
were  supposed  to  remain  until  the  vitality  of  the 
infant  was  indisputable.  The  Romans  likewise 
styled  the  woodpecker  Martins  and  Feromius,  from 
the  god  Mars  and  Sabine  goddess  Feronia.  The 
name  Feronia  is  indicative  of  fire  or  soul-bringing, 
intimately  connected  with  that  of  Phoroneus,  the 
Prometheus  of  a Peloponnesian  legend,  relating  to 
the  original  procuring  of  the  heavenly  fire.  Dr. 
Kuhn  says  both  the  names  are  identical  with  epi- 
thets commonly  applied  to  the  Aryan  fire  god 
Churannya,  which  signifies  “one  who  pounces 
down,  or  bears  down  rapidly.”  Picus  was  the  son 
of  Saturn,  and  first  king  of  Latium,  as  well  as  a fire- 
bringing  bird.  This,  Kelly  observes,  “is  only  an- 
other way  of  saying  that  he  like  Manu,  Manyas, 
Minos,  Phoroneus,  and  other  fire-bringers,  is  the 
first  man;  and  therefore  it  is  that,  under  the  name  of 
Picaninus,  he  continued  in  later  times  to  be  the 
guardian  genius  of  children,  along  with  his  brother 
Piluminus.” 

A remarkable  coincidence  between  the  Anglo- 
SaxDn  |»s;digree  of  Odin,  which  makes  Bcev  or 
Beowulf,  one  of  his  ancestors,  and  the  story  of  the 
first  king  of  Latium,  is  noticed  by  Gervinus.  Bee- 


268 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


wolf,  that  is  “ bee-eater,”  is  the  German  name  for 
the  woodpecker.  Among  the  various  lightning 
birds  of  the  Aryan  mythology,  some  were  regard- 
ed as  portentious  of  evil.  Others,  as  the  robin,  the 
stork,  and  the  woodpecker,  on  the  contrary,  were 
regarded  with  favour  and  specially  protected.  The 
red  beak  of  the  robin,  the  red  legs  of  the  stork, 
and  red  patch  of  the  woodpecker,  were  believed  to 
result  from  their  lightning  origin. 

In  German  the  robin  is  held  in  as  much  regard 
as  it  is  England.  The  Anglo-Saxon  name, 
Herodh-be-osht  ” or  “ Heodbeht  ” signifies  flame 
bright,  which  was  one  of  the  appellations  of  Thor. 
In  illustration  of  the  reverence  paid  to  the  red- 
breast, a writer  in  Notes  and  Queries  relates  the 
beautiful  story,  which  he  had  heard  from  his 
nurse,  a native  of  Carnarvonshire. 

“Far  away  in  a land  of  woe,  darkness,  spirits  of 
evil  and  fire,  day  by  day  does  the  little  bird  bear 
in  his  bill  a drop  of  water  to  quench  the  flame. 
So  near  to  the  burning  stream  does  he  fly  that  his 
dear  little  feathers  are  scorched  ; and  hence  he  is 
named  Bromhn-ddyn  (i.e.  breast  burned,  or  breast 
scorched).  To  serve  little  children,  the  robin 
dares  approach  the  infernal  pit.  No  good  child 
will  hurt  the  devoted  benefactor  of  men.  The 


BIRD  FOLKLORE 


269 


robin  returns  from  the  land  of  fire,  and,  therefore, 
he  feels  the  cold  of  winter  far  more  than  his  bro- 
ther birds.  He  shivers  in  the  brumal  blast ; 
hungry  he  crips  before  your  door.  Oh ! my  child, 
thou  in  gratitude  throw  a few  crumbs  to  poor  Red- 
breast.” 

The  Stork  is  in  Germany  ever  a welcome  guest, 
and  wheels  are ‘placed  on  the  roofs  of  houses  in 
Hesse,  in  order  to  encourage  the  storks  to  build 
their  nests  thereon.  Thek  presence  is  supposed  to 
render  the  building  safe  against  the  ravages  of  fire. 

I.  THE  TITIWA  BIRD  AND  THE  SEA 

The  bird  called  Tityan  or  Tittiwa  had  made  her 
nest  on  the  sea-shore.  One  day  the  tide  rising 
higher  than  usual  came  up  and  washed  away  the 
nest  with  her  young  ones.  Enraged  at  her  loss, 
she  set  to  work  to  dry  the  ocean  by  emptying  out 
its  waters.  She  began  to  take  up  the  water  in  her 
bill  and  threw  it  on  the  land.  Seeing  her  so  deter- 
mined, the  sea  became  alarmed,  and  after  a while, 
the  tide  returning  threw  back  her  young  ones  un- 
harmed up  on  the  beach. 

In  such  stories  as  these  we  see  the  characteristic 
difference  between  the  Greek  mind  as  represented 
in  Aesop’s  fables  and  the  Indian  spirit.  They  are 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


270 

not  SO  much  fables  as  parables,  in  depth  and 
subtility. 

2.  THE  LISTIA  BIRD  AND  THE  ELEPHANT 

A small  bird  known  in  the  hills  as  Listia  had 
built  her  nest  in  a bush  and  had  hatched  her  young 
ones  in  it.  The  female  bird  one  day  left  her  mate 
in  charge  of  the  nest  and  went  away  to  pick  food 
for  the  young  ones.  In  the  interval  an  elephant 
passing  by  ate  up  the  bush  and  killed  the  young, 
in  spite  of  the  distracted  cries  of  the  male  bird. 
The  female  returning  with  food  in  her  bill,  over- 
whelmed with  grief  at  her  loss,  resolved  to  die, 
unless  her  mate  would  slay  the  elephant  in  revenge 
for  his  barbarous  treatment  of  her  family.  The 
husband  tried  to  comfort  her,  assuring  her  that  he 
would  find  some  means  of  destroying  this  mighty 
foe  by  appealing  to  his  friends  for  help.  He  then 
repaired  to  the  woodpecker  (Kath  Khoriya)  and 
after  telling  his  sad  story,  added,  “ My  dear  friend, 

I am  imdone  unless  you  aid  me.  One’s  own  hand 
barely  reaches  a single  cubit,  but  the  hand  of  friend- 
ship extends  a ihottsand  leagues.”  The  wood- 
pecker promised,  and  went  m his  friend  the  black- 
bee,  who  after  hearing  all  about  the  case,  sought 
hri  friend  the  frog,  and  related  dae  circumstances 
to  him.  The  frog  also  promi^d  to  help.  Then 


BIRD  FOLKLORE 


271 


they  arranged  a plot  against  the  elephant.  They 
made  their  way  to  the  spot  where  the  elephant 
was  wont  to  rest.  The  black-bee  buzzed  in  his  ear 
tintil  he  was  soothed  to  sleep,  and  then  the  w'ood- 
pecker  pecked  out  his  eyes.  The  elephant,  wak- 
ing up,  could  not  make  out  what  had  happened 
to  him,  but  after  a while,  feeling  thirsty,  went 
staggering  about  in  his  blindness  trying  to  find 
some  water.  The  voice  of  the  frog  was  then  heard 
at  a distance,  and  the  elephant  naturally  thought 
he  would  be  able  to  find  water  in  that  direction. 
The  frog  went  on  gradually  in  front  of  him, 
croaking  as  he  went,  until  he  reached  a precipitous 
place,  and  the  poor  elephant  followed,  imtil  at  last 
he  fell  down  the  cliff  and  was  killed.  The  Listia 
bird  and  his  wife  were  then  satisfied  with  their 
revenge. 

The  above  story  reminds  us  sttongly  of  the  tale 
of  the  Dog  and  Sparrow  in  Grimm,  as  well  as  of 
the  cruel  vengeance  taken  by  the  cock  and  hen, 
the  duck,  egg,  pin  and  needle  upon  die  unfortu- 
nate Squire  Korbes. 

3.  A RASH  MOTHER  TURNED  INTO  A WILD 
DOVE 

There  is  a kind  of  wild  dove  in  the  hills  of 
Kumaun  and  Garhwal  which  flics  very  swiftly. 


272 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


During  spring  and  summer  it  sings  a sweet  song 
sounding  like  “ Pur  putli  purai,  purai,”  which 
means,  “ Oh  delicate  bird,  all,  all  (are  there).” 
The  song  is  accounted  for  in  this  way.  Once 
upon  a time  there  lived  a woman  and  her  daugh- 
ter. Having  gathered  some  wild  berries  one  day 
they  put  them  away  in  a sunny  place  outside  their 
cottage,  and  in  consequence  of  the  sun's  heat  they 
dried  and  shrank.  After  a day  or  two  the  woman 
remembered  the  berries  and  found  them  less  in 
quantity  than  before.  Getting  into  a furious  rage, 
and  believing  that  the  daughter  had  eaten  up  some 
of  the  berries  contrary  to  her  orders,  she  struck  her 
a blow  on  the  head  which  caused  her  to  die  on  the 
spot  The  next  day  there  was  a shower  of  rain 
which  wetted  the  berries  and  made  them  swell  up 
again  to  thdr  former  size.  Seeing  this,  and  under- 
standing her  rash  act,  the  unfortunate  modier  was 
seized  wih  remorse,  and  after  a while,  dying, 
was  turned  into  the  bird  which  still  sings  its  song 
of  repentance  vdnJy  calling  upon  dre  spirit  of  her 
daughter  in  the  woods. 

4.  AN  ANXIOUS  BSOTHER  TURNS  INTO  A 
WILD  PIGEON 

A‘ wild  pigeon  dn^i  his  song  “Bhai  bhukho, 
Bhai  bhukh^  bihtt^  - my  Inhthcr  is  hungry.” 


BIRD  FOLKLORE 


m 


The  song  is  accounted  for  thus.  A certain  man 
was  dangerously  ill.  His  brother  came  to  see  him  in 
the  evening.  The  sick  man  called  out  to  his 
family  to  prepare  some  food  for  his  brother  in  the 
above  words,  and  while  speaking  became  uncons- 
cious and  died.  This  last  thought  of  his  became 
as  it  were  a fixed  idea,  and  his  soul,  unable  to  rest, 
was  transformed  into  a bird  which  ever  cries  out 
“ Bhai  bhukho.” 

5.  FAITH  IN  GOD  SAVED  THE  PIGEONS 

The  following  story  reminds  us  of  Chaucer’s 
Chanticleer  and  the  dream  he  related  to  his  loving 
spouse : 

A pair  of  wild  pigeons  used  to  live  on  a tree 
in  a certain  forest.  The  male  dove,  while  asleep 
at  night,  saw  in  dream  that  a fowler  widi  a pair 
of  hawks  was  pursuing  them,  and  that  he  himself 
was  greatly  alarmed.  On  awaking  in  the  morn- 
ing, all  trembling  and  distressed,  he  related  the 
dream  to  his  wife,  the  female  dove.  After  hear- 
ing her  husband’s  story  the  she-dove  said*  “ Hus- 
band, we  have  no  need  to  fear  anything  in  the 
world  sc  long  as  we  have  harmed  no  one.  Let  us 
rest  assured  under  the  care  of  Heaven  since  we  arc 
innocent  creatures.”  While  they  were  thus  chat- 
ting together  a real  hunter  appeared  with  falcons 

18 


274  HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 

in  his  hand.  He  let  loose  the  hawks  after  the 
pigeons,  who  flew  up  into  the  sky.  The  fowler, 
impatient  to  have  his  prey,  shot  off  two  arrows, 
aiming  at  the  pigeons.  But,  as  it  chanced,  he  slew 
the  two  falcons  and  the  arrows  falling  down  again 
killed  the  man  himself.  Thus  the  doves  were 
saved,  and  the  confidence  of  the  females  in  the 
Divine  protection  was  justified. 

6.  THE  CUCKOO 

It  is  curious  to  find  the  cuckoo,  a bird  of  evil 
reputation  in  Europe,  regarded  in  India  as  a vir- 
tuous creature  and  even  as  an  injured  innocent. 
Its  habit  of  appropriating  the  nests  of  other  birds 
is  not  recognized,  and  in  the  following  story  the 
crow  is  represented  as  the  trespasser : 

A crow  and  a cuckoo  had  their  nests  in  the  same 
tree.  They  hatched  their  own  yoimg  ones,  but 
the  crow  slyly  took  the  young  ones  of  the  cuckoo 
and  put  them  in  her  own  nest  and  her  own  in  that 
of  the  cuckoo’s.  The  cuckoo  was  surprised  to  find 
the  substitution,  and  at  once  demanded  her  off- 
spring back  again.  The  crow  however  refused, 
claiming  them  as  her  own,  and  the  dispute  could 
not  be  settled  in  any  way.  The  cuckoo  had  at 
last  to  resort  to  the  court  of  the  king  of  the  country. 
The  young  ones  of  both  the  parties  were  medically 


BIRD  FOLKLORE 


275 


examined,  and  it  was  found  that  the  cuckoo  was 
undoubtedly  in  the  right,  and  her  claim  would 
have  been  allowed,  if  the  crow  had  not  gone  sec- 
redy  to  the  Chief  Judge  and  said  that  if  he  would 
give  a verdict  in  his  favour  she  would  carry  him 
to  heaven  on  her  wings  and  show  him  his  fore- 
fathers. The  judge  was  tempted  by  this  remark- 
able bribe,  and  gave  sentence  in  favour  of  the 
crow,  supporting  his  judgment  by  saying  that  it  is 
no  unusual  thing  for  dark-coloured  persons  to  be- 
get children  of  lighter  complexion,  and  for  light 
complcxioned  people  to  have  darker  offspring. 
The  judge  now  demanded  the  fulfilment  of  the 
crow’s  promise.  The  crow  took  him  on  her  wings, 
and  conveyed  him  to  a far  off  region,  where  he 
beheld  his  ancestors  gasping  and  moaning  in  all 
the  torments  of  hell.  He  was  beside  himself  with 
grief  and  horror  to  see  them  in  this  plight,  and  be- 
sought them  to  tell  him  the  reason  of  their  awful 
condition.  The  ancestors  replied,  “Dear  descen- 
dant, you  are  the  cause  of  all  our  trouble.  By 
having  given  a false  verdict  you  have  condemned 
us  all  to  hell,  and  on  your  departure  from  the 
world,  you  also  will  suffer  the  same  fate.”  The 
Judge  went  away  stricken  to  the  heart,  and  repent- 
ed to  the  last  day  of  his  life. 


276 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


The  following  story  combines  the  frequently 
occurring  type  of  the  fortunate  younger  son  with 
some  suggestions  of  an  Eastern  Dick  Whittington, 
and  of  several  other  nursery  favourites. 

7,  A WONDERFUL  MOUSE 

A certain  rich  banker  had  four  sons  by  one  wife 
and  one  by  another.  After  the  death  of  their 
father  the  four  first-named  brothers  drove  their 
younger  brother  from  the  house  and  would  not 
allow  him  any  share  in  the  business.  When  they 
went  to  the  chase,  the  younger  brother  followed 
them.  They  killed  a deer  and  carried  it  home, 
while  he  caught  and  brought  in  a dove’s  young 
ones  to  serve  for  soup  and  meat.  But  his  mother 
instead  of  killing  them  kept  and  fostered  the  young 
doves.  Next  day  when  his  brothers  caught  fish 
he  caught  a mouse,  which  also  his  mother  kept  as 
a pet  She  seems  to  have  been  fond  of  animals, 
for  she  had  in  addition  a cat  and  a dog  which  had 
been  driven  away  by  her  stepsons  on  account  of 
some  offence,  and  a crow  as  well. 

The  four  brodiers  went  to  trade  In  d foreign 
country.  The  younger  also  went  on  his  travels 
taking  with  him  only  his  cat  She  soon  made  him 
rich  by  bringing  him  npnifeers  of  gold  mohars  in 
her  mouth  from  tide  wealthy  houses  of  the  town. 


BIRD  FOLKLORE 


277 

His  brothers  hearing  of  his  prosperity  became  jeal- 
ous, and  went  to  entice  the  mouse  from  his  house, 
saying  that  they  wished  to  have  his  alliance  and 
help  as  the  most  ingenious  of  the  animals.  The 
mouse  promised  to  join  them  if  they  would  promise 
to  get  a buffalo  to  supply  him  with  milk.  They 
did  so.  While  sucking  the  milk,  the  mouse  spite- 
fully began  biting  the  udder  of  the  buffalo,  which 
ceased  to  give  milk.  The  mouse  informed  the 
brothers  that  the  buffalo  no  longer  served  them, 
because  it  had  been  defiled  by  their  touch  and  that 
dicy  must  get  him  another.  This  they  did  ; and 
the  mouse  pardy  sucked  the  milk  and  wasted  the 
rest.  Many  other  mischievious  tricks  he  played, 
till  at  last  the  four  brothers  seeing  him  so  hostile 
drove  him  away  from  dieir  house,  and  set  a trap 
at  the  door  to  catch  him  and  kill  him  if  he  came 
back.  He  was  too  wise  to  return,  and  took  up  his 
abode  again  at  the  yoimger  brother’s  house.  After 
this  the  modier  of  the  younger  man  addressed  the 
dog,  cat,  crow,  mouse  and  young  doves,  saying 
“ My  good  creatures,  I have  nourished  you  like  my 
chil^en  all  this  time,  now  I am  going  to  have  my 
son  married,  what  help  can  each  of  you  give  for 
this  "purpose  ? ” The  mouse  said,  “ I can  get  as 
much  paddy  as  you  need  to  feed  the  guests.”  The 


278 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


cat  said,  “ I can  supply  you  with  as  many  gold 
mohurs  as  you  require  for  the  marriage  expenses.” 
The  dog  said,  “ I will  steal  from  the  bazar  all  the 
ghee  and  treacle-cakes  that  you  need.”  The 
crow  said,  “I  will  get  you  a valuable  ring  for 
the  bride-groom.”  The  dove  said,  “ I cannot  sup- 
ply you  with  anything,  but  I can  save  you  if  you 
are  threatened  by  death  at  any  time.”  So  the 
marriage  took  place  with  great  splendour.  Un- 
fortunately the  wedding  ring  was  lost,  and  no  one 
could  tell  where  it  had  gone.  The  four  animals 
met  to  consider  how  they  should  recover  the  ring. 
The  crow  promised  to  find  it  wherever  it  might  be, 
the  mouse  to  snatch  it  away  and  the  dog  to  defend 
it  from  the  attacks  of  others.  After  a while  the 
crow  discovered  the  thief,  who  used  to  walk  about 
with  it  on  his  finger  in  the  daytime  and  sleep  with 
it  in  his  mouth  at  night.  One  night  the  mouse 
went  and  slily  thrust  his  tail  up  the  nostril  of  the 
thief  while  he  was  asleep,  and  in  sneezing  the  man 
threw  out  the  ring,  which  was  seized  by  the  cat, 
and  the  dog  running  about,  bit  him.  While  tak- 
ing the  ring  home,  the  cat  saw  a piece  of  meat 
which  tempted  him  to  put  the  ring  on  the  ground 
while  he  ate  the  juicy  morsel,  A hawk  dashed 
down  and  carried  it  off.  But  the  mouse  was  equal 


BIRD  FOLKLORE 


279 

to  this  emergency  also.  He  lay  down  as  if  dead, 
instructing  the  cat  to  seize  the  falcon,  when  the 
latter  should  pounce  on  him.  This  was  done,  and 
the  ring  was  recovered  from  the  falcon’s  body. 
The  dog  was  now  entrusted  with  the  ring,  but  as 
he  was  conveying  it  to  his  master,  he  drank  in  a 
stream  and  dropped  it  to  the  bottom.  They  all 
despaired  of  recovering  it ; but  the  mouse  again 
rose  to  the  occasion.  By  his  instructions  thev  set 
to  work  to  cut  through  the  bank  and  turn  aside 
the  course  of  the  stream  just  above  the  place  where 
the  ring  had  fallen  in.  The  stream  below  it  be- 
came dry  and  the  fish  began  to  gasp  and  die  for 
want  of  water.  One  after  another  was  opened, 
and  the  ring  was  at  last  found  and  given  to  dicir 
master. 

After  some  time  the  man  fell  ill  and  was  sum 
moned  to  the  mansion  of  the  dead  by  Death’s 
messengers.  The  mother  now  begged  the  dove 
to  redeem  her  promise.  The  dove  repaired  to  the 
kingdom  of  Death,  and  arriving  at  the  court  of  King 
Yama,  sang  such  a sweet  song  that  the  King  was 
pleased  and  asked  what  was  her  request.  She 
begged  that  the  life  of  her  kind  master  might  be 
spared.  The  King’s  Chancellor,  after  looking  into 
the  Book  of  Destiny,  announced  that  the  man’s 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


280 

appointed  days  were  ended  and  that  he  must  die. 
Touched  by  the  dove’s  entreaties,  however,  King 
Death  prolonged  the  man  s life  up  to  500  years,  and 
he,  his  mother  and  the  animals  continued  long  to 
live  in  happiness  together, 

8,  THE  FOX  AND  THE  PARTRIDGE 

A fox  entered  into  friendship  with  a partridge. 
Once  the  fox  said  he  was  hungry,  and  asked  for 
food.  The  partridge  went  to  the  door  of  a water- 
mill and  fluttered  there.  The  owner  of  the  mill, 
who  was  grinding  grain,  came  out  to  watch  her. 
The  partridge  took  him  to  a great  distance  by 
fluttering  before  him.  The  fox  ate  up  the  flour 
of  the  mill.  Then  they  met  again  in  the  jungle. 
The  fox  said,  “ My  friend  partridge,  I have  a great 
hankering  for  curds.”  So  they  came  to  a cow- 
herd where  curds  were  kept  for  sale.  So  he  flut- 
tered before  the  cowherd  ; he  laid  the  curd  on  the 
ground  and  went  after  the  partridge,  in  the  mean- 
time the  fox  ate  up  the  curd.  Then  the  fox  said 
to  the  partridge,  “ O friend,  make  me  laugh  hear- 
tily.” Once  a great  many  people  were  going  their 
ways,  so  die  partridge  flew;  and  sat  on  the  head 
of  a man  for  a second,  then  on  another’s,  so  in  this 
way  he  fluttered  about,  Evory  one  gave  a stick 


BIRD  FOLKLORE 


281 


to  the  head  on  which  the  partridge  sat,  and  so 
there  was  a beating  of  heads,  at  which  the  fox 
laughed. 


CHAPTER  V — Ghost  and  Demon  Lore 
I.  THE  KAYASTH  AND  THE  DEMON 

A CERTAIN  Kayasth,  who  was  on  his 
travels  in  search  of  a livelihood,  arrived  at 
a certain  city  in  the  evening.  Finding 
no  abode  in  the  city  he  was  told  to 
lodge  in  a certain  deserted  house  outside  the  city 
(supposed  to  have  been  haunted  by  a devil) 
which  had  been  deserted  by  its  owners.  The  tra- 
veller ignorant  of  what  had  caused  the  house  to 
be  deserted,  went  and  occupied  it.  As  soon  as  he 
had  prepared  some  victuals,  including  strong  drink 
for  himself  in  the  night,  a demon  of  hideous  form 
and  features  appeared  before  him,  expressing  his 
hunger.  The  poor  Kayasth  being  already  fright- 
ened with  his  terrible  form  and  stature,  could  not 
but  place  the  whole  of  his  food  before  him.  He 
devoured  it  all  with  immense  relish  and  satisfac- 
tion, leaving  nothing  for  the  owner.  He  said  to 
the  man,  “ Friend,  what  have  you  come  here  for?  ” 
The  man  replied,  “ Sirj  I have  come  here  seeking 
employment.”  The  demon  said,  “ You  had  better 
stay  on  here  for  the  present  and  prepare  food,  as 
nice  as  you  have  already  doiie,  for  me  every  night. 
Every  morning  you  will  find  Rs.2  under  yonder 
lamp.  You  can  purchase  necessaries  with  it.” 

282 


GHOST  AND  DEMON  LORE 


283 


The  man  continued  to  feed  the  jinn  for  years  in 
this  way,  and  sent  his  savings  from  the  daily  allow- 
ance to  his  home.  The  demon  used  to  appear  be- 
fore him  at  supper-time  in  the  evening  in  that 
house,  and  then  to  disappear.  The  Kayasth 
having  thus  found  enough  for  livelihood  in  the 
service  of  the  jinn  cheerfully  served  him  for  a 
very  long  time.  One  night  he  asked  permission 
of  the  demon  to  go  home.  The  jtnn  granted  it 
and  gave  him  immense  wealth.  Besides,  he  gave 
the  man  three  hairs  out  of  his  moustache  and  told 
him  that  he  would  come  to  his  help  at  any  time  if 
a little  bit  of  his  hair  was  burnt.  So  the  Kayasth 
returned  to  his  home.  After  some  time  the  king 
of  the  country  was  conquered  and  his  country 
taken  by  his  adversary,  and  the  king  took  to  flight 
into  the  forest.  The  Kayasth  hearing  of  his  defeat 
went  to  the  king  and  offered  his  help,  but  the  king 
laughed  at  him,  considering  him  to  be  txx)  inferior 
for  such  a difficult  task.  The  poor  man  instantly 
put  a piece  of  the  hair  the  jinn  had  given  him 
into  the  fire,  and  the  demon  appeared  at  that  very 
moment.  The  man  told  him  about  the  misfortunes 
of  his  king.  The  jinn  at  once  produced  lakhs  of 
demons  like  himself,  who  drove  out  the  foreign 
king  and  disappeared.  The  king  of  the  country 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


^84 

divided  his  kingdom  into  two  parts  and  gave  half 
of  it  to  the  Kayasth,  as  a reward  for  his  services. 
So  the  latter  was  made  a king  by  the  help  of  the 
ghost. 

2.  THE  PRINCESS  AND  THE  ENCHANTED 
SWORD 

A certain  prince  went  to  espouse  a beautiful 
princess.  The  latter  said,  “Oh  prince,  I cannot 
give  you  my  hand  in  marriage  unless  you  procure 
me  the  beautiful  tank,  on  the  bank  of  which  is  a 
terrace  paved  with  copper  sheets,  silver  stairs  lead- 
ing to  it,  with  a gold  throne  placed  in  its  centre 
together  with  a tree  with  emerald  leaves,  topaz 
btids,  diamond  flowers,  pearl  fruits,  which  I saw 
last  night  in  my  dream.”  The  prince  immediately 
repaired  to  the  forest  in  search  of  such  a scene. 
After  wandering  about  through  various  forests  and 
secluded  places  he  at  last  fortunately  saw  a dervish 
in  a jungle  at  evening  time.  Fearing  to  approach 
him,  the  prince  seated  himself  at  a distance,  in  a 
secluded  corner.  But  the  saint.  Who  had  observed 
him,  ctiquired  from  him,  “What  is  the  object  that 
has  brought  you  into  the  jungle?”  T’he  prince 
replied,  “Sir,  I have  a great  longing  to  marry  a 
certain  princessj  but  shti  WiU  not  accept  my  proposal 
until  I secure  her  the  objects  of  her  dream,  which 


GHOST  AND  DEMON  LORE 


285 


is  this:  A beautiful  tank  of  crystal  water,  on  the 
bank  of  which  is  built  a terrace  paved  with  copper 
plates,  silver  stairs  leading  to  it,  a gold  throne  placed 
on  the  centre  of  the  terrace,  together  with  a shining 
tree  of  emerald  leaves,  diamond  buds,  and  pearl 
fruits,  which  the  princess  saw  in  her  dream,  and 
she  wishes  to  receive  this  property  from  the  one 
who  desires  her  hand.  So  I have  been  roving  here 
and  there  in  the  jungles  for  many  months  in  search 
of  such  a scene.”  The  sage  said,  “Dear  prince,  I 
can  give  you  a clue  to  where  it  is,  but  it  is  very 
difficult  for  a human  being  to  obtain  it,  unless  he 
starves  for  several  days  and  nights  previous  to 
going  to  the  place  and  accomplishing  his  object 
The  prince  said,  “Sir,  I am  ready  to  4o  it  at  any 
expense  of  bodily  trouble  and  mental  determma- 
tion,  and  will  surely  act  in  the  way  you  instruct 
me.”  The  saint  said,  “Go  to  the  extreme  east  with 
this  enchanted  sword  I give  you.  You  will  find 
the  rank  there,  where  you  will  have  to  fast  for  the 
period  I have  adready  prescribed  for  you.  On  the 
eighth  day  seven  fairies  will  come  to  bathe  in  that 
one  after  another.  As  soon  as  the  first  copper 
fairy  has  bathed,  behead  her  with  this  sword,  she 
will  then  turn  into  a copper  terrace  j the  second  or 
the  sUver  fairy  will  become  silver  stairs  leading  to 


286 


HIMAJLAYAN  FOLKLORE 


the  copper  bank,  the  third  emerald  fairy  will  form 
an  emerald  tree,  the  fourth  or  the  gold  fairy  will 
become  a throne  of  gold,  the  fifth  or  the  topaz  fairy 
its  buds,  the  sixth  or  the  diamond  fairy  its  flowers, 
the  seventh  or  the  pearl  fairy  its  fruits.  Be  sufficient- 
ly firm  and  bold  in  the  pursuit  of  your  object.  I 
bid  you  goodbye  and  wish  you  success.”  The  prince 
immediately  set  out  in  the  direction  indicated,  and 
did  what  was  told  him  to  do.  When  he  arrived 
at  the  lake,  he  achieved  his  purpose  by  killing  the 
seven  fairies  one  by  one.  He  then  brought  the 
princess  there,  who  after  seeing  all  the  objects  of 
her  dream,  became  very  happy  and  married  the 
prince. 

3.  THE  PRINCE  AND  THE  DEMON’S  DAUGHTER 

There  lived  once  a demon  in  an  island  beyond 
the  seven  oceans.  This  devil  had  a beautiful 
daughter.  A certain  prince  being  enamoured  of 
her  set  out  to  obtain  her.  The  journey  to  that 
place  took  him  six  months.  On  his  arrival  there 
he  found  a large  and  beautiful  city  full  of  gold, 
silver  and  precious  stones,  but  devoid  of  human 
beings,  the  inhabitants  of  this  city  haying  all  been 
devoured  by  the  fiend.  He  saw  die  damsel  sitting 
near  a window  a big  palace.  No  sooner  did 


GHOST  AND  DEMON  U»RE 


287 


the  girl  see  the  prince  than  she  advised  him  to  go 
away  at  once,  and  said,  “Oh  human  being,  what 
evil  fortune  brought  you  here,  only  to  be  devoured 
by  my  father  who  has  just  gone  far  off  to  hunt  for 
human  beings  and  other  animals?  How  will  he 
spare  you,  who  have  come  to  this  barren  island  and 
fallen  into  his  clutches?  He  can  scent  human 
beings,  and  walks  hundreds  of  miles  in  a few 
strides.  So  you  had  better  run  away  widi  as  swift 
speed  as  you  possibly  can.”  Tlie  prince  said,  “Oh 
excellent  lady,  I have  come  here  only  for  your  sake, 
after  undergoing  a great  many  hardships  and 
troubles.  I cannot  leave  you  now,  whether  you 
kill  me  yourself  or  cause  me  to  be  eaten  by  your 
father.”  The  lady  thus  toudbed  by  the  speech  of 
the  prince  shewed  him  some  gourds  provided  by 
the  fiend  for  the  protection  and  defence  of  his  own 
life,  The  first  contained  mist,  die  second  thorns, 
Ae  third  water,  Ac  fourA  mountains  to  be  placed 
before  one’s  adversary,  and  Ae  iron  cage  in  which  a 
parrot  was  kqph  wAch  contained  Ae  soul  of  Ae 
d^fnnn  ,^.e.  Ac  dcaA  and  troubles  of  Ac  bird 
meant  those  of  Ae  fiend  himself).  She  Acn  in- 
structed him  m detail  how  to  kill  Ae  devil,  No 
so^  had  Ac  prince  taken  Ae  four  gourds  m his 
hand  than  Ae  devil  felt  giddy  and  feverish.  Per- 


288 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


ceiving  that  an  attempt  was  being  made  against  his 
life  he  ran  towards  his  home.  The  prince  dashed 
down  the  mist  gourd,  which  made  darkness  come 
in  his  way.  Then  he  broke  the  thorn  gourd,  the 
water  gourd,  and  the  mountain  gourd  one  by  one. 
All  these  threw  obstacle  after  obstacle  in  his  way 
and  gready  impeded  his  speed  towards  his  home. 
In  spite  of  all  these  impediments  in  his  way  he 
continued  his  journey.  When  he  had  come  near 
his  home  the  two  legs  of  the  parrot  were  severed, 
and  the  demon  became  lame.  He  however  dragged 
his  body  along  to  kill  his  enemy.  Just  as  the 
demon  was  close  to  his  antagonist,  the  latter  killed 
the  parrot  which  caused  the  death  of  the  demon. 
After  being  thus  delivered  from  the  demon  the 
prince  married  the  daughter  and  returned  to  his 
home  with  his  bride  triumphing  in  his  success  and 
good  luck. 

4.  THE  PRINCE  AND  THE  CELESTIAL  FLOWERS 

A cei:t^  king  who  had  already  lost  his  queen 
was  deprived  of  his  kingdom  by  another  potentate. 
He  retreated  to  the  forest  with  his  two  sons  and 
resorted  to  selling  firewood  in  die  city  for  their 
sustenance.  The  younger  brother  finding  it  too 
tedious  for  him  to  convey  wood  for  sale  to  die  town 
left  his  work  and  went  on  his  travels.  He  became 


GHOST  AND  DEMON  W>M 


289 

servant  of  a certain  banker,  assuming  the  attitude 
of  a dumb  man,  but  doing  work  like  a skilful 
man.  The  son  of  the  banker,  who  knew  titc 
daughter  of  the  king  of  the  town,  was  to  elope 
with  her.  They  had  consequently  sent  on  ahead 
money,  jewellery  and  precious  stones  laden  on 
ponies.  At  the  moment  when  the  banker’s  son 
was  to  start,  the  servant  had  him  arrested  and 
locked  up  by  the  banker,  and  with  the  permission 
of  the  banker  he  rode  a pony  and  went  off  to  seize 
the  riches  his  son  had  sent  away.  Supposing  that 
the  banker’s  son  had  set  out,  the  princess  also 
started.  Both  of  them  arrived  in  a certain  town 
in  the  evening.  When  she  saw  the  dumb  man  she 
was  afraid  of  him,  but  having  no  one  else  to  help 
her  she  made  him  signs  to  get  lodging  and  provi- 
sion, which  the  dumb  man  got  ready  for  her  to  her 
satisfaction.  They  both  slept  leather  placing  a 
dagger  between  them  as  a pledge  of  chastity. 
After  some  days  he  sent  the  banker  his  property 
and  himself  became  a servant  of  the  king  of  thr 
city,  getting  a thousand  rupees  a day,  with  the 
agreraent  ^t  he  should  do  the  work  which  could 
not  be  done  by  other  servants  of  the  king.  The 
high  pay  he  got  made  him  an  object  of  envy  to  the 
Other  servants  of  the  king,  and  the  king,  being 

19 


290 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


influenced  by  diem,  ordered  die  prince  one  day  to 
bring  him  the  flowers  of  parijat,  or  the  celestial 
flowers,  an  impossibility  for  any  human  being. 
After  having  obtained  sentinels  to  guard  his  house 
during  his  absence,  he  immediately  set  out  for  the 
purpose.  While  on  his  travels  he  found  a deserted 
town  with  only  one  damsel  living  in  it.  He  made 
acquaintance  with  her  and  played  chauparh  with 
her  for  some  time.  In  the  evening  she  told  him  to 
go  away  from  her  house,  for,  if  not,  her  father, 
a demon,  would  devour  him.  The  prince  said 
that  he  could  not  part  with  her  for  any  amount  of 
danger  to  his  life.  So  she  changed  him  into  a fly. 
When  the  demon  came  he  cried  out,  “Human 
axnt,  human  scent”  The  girl  said  all  the  people 
had  already  been  eaten  by  him  with  the  exception 
of  herself.  The  next  day  when  the  fiend  had 
gone  hunting,  she  changed  the  prince  again  into  a 
man.  In  this  way  they  enjoyed  each  other’s  com- 
pany not  for  days  only  but  for  months.  Cfee  day 
the  prince  requeued  the  woman  to  get  dtiher  her 
fatha:  or  himsdf  killed.  She  she  would  get 
rid  of  her  the  devil,  it  Sk  n%ht  when  the 
demon  came  she  compMaed  m hhn  and  said,  “Q, 
father,  I am  very  anxious  nowadays  for  you,  since 
your  own  brother  in  disguise,  I hear,  has  come  here 


GHOST  AND  DEMON  LORE 


291 


to  kill  you.  How  can  you  defend  yourself  against 
his  attacks.”  The  demon  replied,  “My  dear 
daughter,  do  not  be  afraid  for  my  life,  I cannot  be 
killed  by  any  one  in  the  world.  For  my  soul  is 
secure  in  the  body  of  a beetle,  which  is  again  secure 
in  the  body  of  a parrot,  which  is  kept  within  the 
iron-barred  cage.  This  cage  is  secured  again  in 
the  innermost  room,  there  being  six  outer  rooms 
duly  padlocked,  leading  to  it.  The  keys  of  all 
these  locks  are  with  me.  The  girl  eagerly  asked 
the  demon  further,  “You  are  likely  to  lose  the 
keys;  so  will  you  kindly  leave  the  keys  in  my  care 
for  my  peace  of  mind.?”  The  fiend  acceded  to 
her  wish  and  gave  her  the  keys.  The  girl  again 
said,  “Father,  my  eyes  are  always  looking  for  your 
coming  home;  will  you  kindly  tie  a bell  to  your 
neck  so  that  I may  hear  the  ringing  of  it  when  yon 
approtth  home,  for  tny  comfort?;  otherwise,  my 
mind  is  y,whys  uneasy  for  your  sake.”  The 
demon  inuncdiately  complied  with  her  request,  by 
putting  on  a bell  round  his  neck,  and  started  to 
hunt  human  beings  for  his  food.  The  very  next 
day  as  awn  as  she  opened  the  first  room,  the  demon 
felt  feverish;  on  unlocking  the  second  room  he  had 
a high  fever;  finding  that  he  had  been  deceived  by 
his  daughter,  he  ran  towards  home,  but  in  the 


292 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


interval  all  the  rooms  were  opened  and  the  parrot 
and  the  beetle  were  killed.  The  demon  died. 
The  prince  married  the  girl,  who  wished  him  to 
take  her  home,  but  the  prince  said,  “My  darling,  I 
have  to  fulfill  another  promise  to  the  king  (whose 
servant  I am)  of  bringing  him  the  celestial  flowers; 
so  you  must  remain  here  comforted  and  guarded 
by  servants,  until  I can  produce  the  flowers  before 
my  king.”  His  wife  said,  “Very  well,  you  are  at 
liberty  to  do  so,  but  go  to  the  remotest  jungles 
which  are  generally  inhabited  by  ascetics,  who 
alone  are  able  to  give  you  instructions  as  to  how 
and  where  the  flowers  are  to  be  obtained,”  So  the 
prince  went  to  the  jungles.  He  met  with  a Fakir 
to  whom  he  represented  his  need.  The  ascetic 
told  him  that  the  flowers  were  either  to  be  had  in 
the  heavens  or  in  the  world  under  the  earth.  He 
advised  him  to  continue  his  journey  onward.  The 
prince  did  so  and  came  across  another  ascetic,  who 
advised  him  also  to  go  on  to  gain  his  purpose. 
Then  he  met  with  a third  dervish  who  told  him 
that  on  a certain  night  all  the  heavenly  gods  and 
fairies  descend  at  a certain  place  on  the  earth, 
where  they  dance  to  the  tune  of  a flute  during  the 
night,  and  whenever  die  flute  is  blown  the  fairies 
;^ce  and  the  celestial  flowers  fall  down  on  them. 


GHOST  AND  DEMON  LORE 


^93 


They  disappear  next  morning.  So  you  must  go 
there  and  take  courage  and  use  the  opportunity  to 
bring  in  as  many  flowers  as  you  like.  The  prince 
accordingly' got  to  the  place  on  that  night  and  saw. 
the  show.  The  celestial  beings  disappeared  as 
soon  as  the  day  broke  and  left  the  flute  there.  The 
prince,  instead  of  bringing  the  flowers  he  wanted, 
took  up  the  flute  (the  chief  source  of  the  spectacle 
and  phenomenon,  and  also  the  flowers  which  the 
tune  of  the  flute  produced),  and  brought  it  to  the 
third  or  the  last  Fakir,  and  produced  the  enter- 
tainment afresh.  The  ascetic  expressed  a desire  to 
receive  the  wonderful  flute  from  the  prince,  who 
agreed  to  part  with  it  on  receiving  in  return  the 
self-striking  club,  and  the  self-binding  rope  from 
the  Fakir.  Both  agreed  to  the  conditions.  So  the 
prince  returned,  after  having  given  the  flute  to  the 
dervish.  While  on  his  way  he  commanded  the 
club  and  the  rope  to  beat  and  bind  the  Fakir,  and 
to  take  back  his  flute.  They  did  it  He  arrived 
at  the  hut  of  the  second  dervish  and  showed  him 
the  flute  and  its  manner  of  working.  The  latter 
was  so  enchanted  with  the  flute  that  he  asked  for 
it  in  exchange  for  die  self-cooking  vessel  and  sclf- 
disfiribating  provision  spoon  which  he  had.  The 
prince  having  bartered  his  flute  for  the  vessel  and 


294 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


die  Spoon,  resumed  his  way.  Again  he  ordered 
the  club  and  the  rope  to  bring  his  flute  back,  the 
next  moment  he  saw  his  own  order  complied  with, 
and  the  flute  placed  before  him.  Then  he  started 
and  met  with  the  first  dervish  and  showed  him  the 
flute  and  related  the  way  in  which  he  had  obtained 
it.  This  Fakir  also  wanted  it  in  return  for  the 
self-flying  bed  he  had.  The  prince  readily  agreed 
to  the  bargain,  and  gave  him  the  flute.  As  soon 
as  he  had  left  the  place,  mounting  the  self-flying 
bed  he  ordered  his  club  and  rope  to  get  his  flute 
back,  and  his  command  was  instantly  obeyed. 
Thence  he  went  to  the  daughter  of  the  demon,  and 
placing  her  and  himself  together  with  all  the 
riches  of  the  deserted  town  on  the  flying  bed, 
reached  the  destination  of  the  king,  who  had  sent 
him  for  the  celestial  flowers.  There  he  arranged 
to  show  the  display  one  night.  No  sooner  had  he 
tuned  the  flute  than  the  fairies  appeared,  and 
danced  so  bewitchingly  that  the  celestial  flowers 
poured  down  on  them  in  the  presence  of  the  king 
aUd  his  courtiers.  The,  king  and  his  retinue  were 
so  htsdnated  with  the  extraordinary  and  amazing 
seene  the  whdfe  asseMjly  heartily  thanked  and 
congratulated  him  on  his  supernatural  achievement 
of  his  purpose.  The  flowers  thus  produced  were 


GHOST  AND  DEMON  LORE 


295 


collected  by  the  order  of  the  king.  After  this  the 
prince  invited  the  king  and  his  courtiers  to  his  own 
lodging,  told  them  that  he  was  a prince,  and  that 
he  had  taken  service  on  account  of  his  poverty. 
After  having  feasted  them  he  begged  leave  from 
the  king  to  return  to  his  own  country.  Next  day  he 
rode  the  flying  bed  with  the  two  maidens  and  his 
riches,  and  arrived  in  his  own  country.  After 
having  conquered  tlie  foreign  king  with  the  club 
and  rope,  he  put  his  elder  brother  on  the  throne : 
himself  serving  as  a minister  to  him.  He  married 
the  daughter  of  the  king  he  had  brought  with 
him,  to  his  elder  brother,  the  king,  and  he  himself 
married  the  daughter  of  the  demon  who  was 
trained  in  a hundred  and  eight  arts. 

5,  THE  GHOST  AND  THE  SICE.  MAN 
Soflie  years  ago  a post  peon  arrived  at  a house 
at  night.  On  entering  it  he  found  a sick  man 
lying  on  his  bed  with  no  one  el^  in  the  hx3U^ 
The  sick  man  welcomed  the  peon  and  said  that  he 
should  stay  there  and  get  his  food,  pointing  out  ihe 
baskets  of  rice  and  flour,  tte  vessels  and  ghee  as 
wclL , The  peon  having  kindled  fire  began  to  cook 
his  food,  doing  everything  himself.  The  ipeon 
forgot  to  take  salt  for  his  food  with  him  to  the 
kitchen.  (It  is  fotbidden  to  a Hindu,  in  the 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLOUE 


296 

Kumaon  hills,  to  go  out  of  the  kitchen  when  the 
victuals  are  being  cooked,  unless  he  has  partaken 
of  them.)  So  the  peon  expressed  his  regret  to  the 
sick  man  that  he  had  not  taken  salt  with  him  for 
the  food.  On  this  the  sick  man  pointed  out  the 
vessel  of  salt,  hanging  to  one  of  the  beams  of  the 
house,  about  10  or  12  yards  off  from  the  bed,  at 
the  same  time  he  stretched  forth  his  hand  to  the 
beam  to  reach  the  salt.  This  extraordinary  scene 
so  terrified  the  peon  that  he  at  once  quitted  the 
place  naked,  leaving  his  clothes  and  badge,  and 
ran  for  shelter  to  another  village.  The  sick  man 
pursued  him  for  some  distance.  The  peon  reached 
another  village  with  great  fatigue  and  exhaustion 
at  midnight.  There  he  was  told  that  all  the 
inmates  of  the  house  had  died  of  some  epidemic 
contagious  disease.  All  of  them  were  burnt  by  the 
surviving  members  of  the  family,  but  the  one  who 
died  last  was  not  taken  away  by  any  one  to  be 
burnt  Everybody  was  afraid  to  approach  the 
house.  Next  day,  when  the  peon,  in  company  of 
many  of  the  villagers,  went  there  to  take  his  badge 
aad  clothes,  they  found  the  dead  body  lying  in  the 
bed,  and  they  also  noticed  that  flowers  of  mustard 
vyete  Peking  between  its  toes,  as  it  had  chased  the 
peon  durough  the  mu^d  fidds.  They  then 


GHOST  AND  DEMON  LORE  297 

concluded  that  some  ghost  had  entered  the  dead 
body  to  frighten  the  peon. 

6.  THE  GHOST  AND  THE  FIREWOOD 

Once  a traveller  arrived  in  the  evening  at  a place 
near  a burning  ghat  where  he  collected  some  pieces 
of  firewood  (remnants  of  the  funeral  pyre)  on  the 
bank  of  a river  for  his  own  use.  He  kindled  a 
fire  and  cooked  his  food  on  it  After  getting  his 
food  he  slept  near  the  fire.  At  midnight  a number 
of  ghosts  came  to  him,  each  of  them  crying,  “Give 
me  my  fuel,  give  me  my  fuel.”  He  was  frightened 
at  the  sight,  and  ran  away  to  a neighbouring 
village,  leaving  all  the  wood  and  fire.  [The 
remaining  wood  of  the  funeral  fire  is  considered  to 
be  the  property  of  the  dead  men  (ghosts).  The 
approach  to  such  wood  is  dreaded.] 

; 7.  A MAGICAi  CONTEST 

A certain  Brahman,  having  no  children,  went 
to  a Jogi  (acetic)  and  implored  him  to  bless  him 
with  progeny.  The  latter,  after  giving  him  some 
wonderful  medicinal  root,  claimed  the  first-born 
for  his  dikiple.  The  Brahman  agreed  to  fulfil  the 
cbndidcm,  as  soon  as  he  was  given  the  sons  so 
promised.  The  Jogi  then  departed.  The  man  in 
due  time  got  two  sons  who  grew  to  manhood.  The 


298  HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 

same  Jogi  came  to  the  man  and  asked  for  the  elder 
son,  who  was  readily  given  him.  But  the  man 
requested  the  ascetic  to  take  his  younger  son  also 
for  a training  under  him.  The  latter  granted  his 
request.  So  the  Jogi  took  both  the  sons  of  the 
man  with  him,  and  instead  of  teaching  his  art  to 
both  alike  excluded  the  younger  from  the  boon, 
and  began  to  train  the  elder  one,  supposing  him 
to  be  his  own  disciple,  inside  a room,  which  was 
shut  against  the  younger  one.  But  the  latter, 
being  smart  and  inquisitive,  gave  his  ears  and  mind 
to  what  was  taught  inside  to  his  brother,  by  steal- 
thily standing  close  to  the  door,  which  was  shut, 
and  attentively  hearing  what  was  taught  to  his 
brother  inside.  Once  the  Fakir  gave  each  a 
wooden  bowl  to  be  oiled.  The  elder  one  begged 
oil  and  clarified  butter  from  door  to  door,  for  the 
purpose  and  got  it  a little  oiled;  but  the  younger 
one,  on  the  contrary,  contrived  a better  plan  for  so 
doing.  He  purchased  bowlful  of  oil  on  credit, 
and  returned  it  next  day  on  die  plea  of  its  being  of 
a bad  quality  and  so  got  his  bowl  fully  greased  in 
the  process.  Finding  the  younger  one  more  in- 
genious than  the  other,  the  ascetic  drove  him  from 
his  house.  The  younger  lad  came  to  his  father 
and  told  him  that  he  would  metamorphose  himself 


GHOST  AND  DEMON  LORE  2<)9 

into  a nice  mare  which  he  would  sell  to  any  one 
for  Rs.  500  but  he  should  not  part  with  the  bridle, 
otherwise  he  would  come  to  great  troubles.  When 
the  boy  had  transformed  himself  into  a mare,  his 
father  took  him  to  market  for  sale.  The  very 
same  ascetic,  who  knew  him  to  be  the  boy,  pur- 
chased it  He  made  it  ova:  to  his  discipic  (the 
elder  brother)  with  histructions  that  she  should, 
get  fodder  and  water  at  home,  that  is  not  be  taken 
out  for  the  purpose.  The  disciple  acted  on  the 
ativice  of  his  tutor  for  a considerable  time.  One 
day  it  so  happened  that  the  diisdple  of  Ae  -aspetic, 
forgetting  the  counsel  of  his  instructor,  took  the 
mare  to  a river,  so  that  she  might  drink  water. 
No  sooner  had  the  mare  touched  the  water  of  the 
river  than  she  disappeared,  turning  into  a fish. 
On  hearing  this  from  his  follower  the  ascetic 
assumed  the  form  of  a fisherman,  to  catch  the 
counterfeited  fish-  When  the  fisherman  was  about 
to  catch  the  fish,  it  turned  itself  infe  a bee,  the 
fisherman  became  a hornet  to  kill  it.  Hic  bee 
then  transformed  itself  into  one  of  the  pearls  in  the 
wreath  worn  by  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  the 
country.  On  feding  some  sensation,  the  princm 
threw  oS  ha  garland  on  the  pavement  of  iM5r 
palarp-  No  soona  was  this  done  than  the  ascetic 


300 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


having  metamorphosed  himself  into  a cock  began 
to  eat  up  the  scattered  pearls  (with  a view  to  kill 
the  boy).  Just  before  the  boy  was  about  to  be 
devoured  by  his  adversary  he  transformed  himself 
into  a cat,  and  killed  the  cock,  his  enemy. 

8.  THE  GHOST  AND  THE  FOUR  WOMEN 

There  was  once  a well-to-do  man  in  a certain 
village.  One  night  a stray  hunting  party  of  a 
king  reached  the  village  in  a tired  condition.  They 
were  well  fed  and  taken  care  of  by  the  man  that 
night.  Next  morning  they  joined  the  king.  On 
inquiring  about  the  events  of  the  past  night  they 
related  the  hospitality  of  the  man  to  the  king.  The 
iniquitous  ruler,  instead  of  recognizing  the  good- 
ness of  the  man,  was  led  by  their  report  to  covet 
his  wealth.  He  directed  his  servants  to  plunder 
him  of  his  wealth.  The  party  accordingly  did  so. 
The  inmates  of  the  house,  the  old  man  and  his 
wife,  the  four  sons  and  their  wives,  left  the  house 
for  good,  with  hardly  anything  in  their  possession 
to  live  on.  But  the  wife  of  the  youngest  son  had 
concealed  sixteen  gold  mohars  on  her  person. 
"When  they  felt  hungry,  the  woman  gave  her 
father-in-law  one  gold  mohar  to  purchase  food 
with.  The  old  man  went  off  with  it  and  never 


GHOST  AND  DEMON  LORE 


301 


returned.  So  she  was  obliged  to  give  another 
mohar  to  her  mother-in-law  for  the  same  purpose. 
She  also  acted  in  the  same  way.  Then  each  of  the 
four  sons  was  charged  with  a mohar  to  buy  food 
for  the  family.  But  they  also  eloped  in  a similar 
way.  The  four  young  women,  thus  left  alone,  set 
to  work  with  the  money  they  had  got  in  their 
possession.  First  of  all  they  purchased  male  apparel 
for  themselves  and  wore  it  with  great  turbans  on 
their  heads  to  hide  their  braided  hair.  They  then 
accepted  service  in  the  court  of  the  same  king,  and 
appeared  as  tidy  and  energetic  young  men,  worthy 
of  service  in  every  way.  They  served  the  king 
for  a considerable  time  without  the  least  suspicion 
on  the  part  of  the  other  six.  One  night  on  the 
death  of  the  only  son  of  die  king  they  were 
ordered  to  take  the  dead  body  to  the  funeral  ghcit 
(spot  where  dead  bodies  u^d  to  be  burnt)  to  be 
burnt.  They  took  the  body  instantly  to  the  place 
in  spite  of  the  widespread  fear  of  a certain  ^ost 
said  to  appear  at  night  and  to  frighten  to  death 
tKngp  who  by  ill  chance  went  there.  No  sooner 
did  they  arrive  there  than  a ghost  with  horrible 
feaTEytres  appeared  brfore  them.  One  of  them 
clung  to  him  undauntedly  taking  hold  firmly 
Ms  matted  hair.  After  an  chstinatp  fight  the  evil 


302 


raMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


spirit  at  last  yielded  to  them.  They  would  not  set 
mm  free  unless  he  would  give  them  a promise  to 
effect  whatever  they  wanted  from  him-  Being  so 
constrained,  he  pledged  his  word  to  accomplish 
whatever  they  required  from  him.  On  these 
conditions  he  was  let  loose.  First  of  all  they 
ordered  him  to  make  the  dead  body  of  the  prince 
alive.  He  did  this,  and  the  son  of  the  king  was 
restored  to  life.  The  next  thing  they  wanted  of 
him  was  to  revive  all  the  dead  bodies  burnt  there 
during  the  last  hundred  years.  He  effected  this 
also.  Then  he  was  ordered  to  build  buildings  and 
furnish  them  for  the  accommodation  of  those  thtis 
revived.  This  was  instantly  done.  As  the  four 
disguised  women  did  not  go  back  the  same  night, 
the  king  sent  his  servants  next  morning  tp  look 
after  them.  They  saw  the  prince  alive  and  the 
other  wonderful  things  effected.  They  at  once 
went  to  the  sovereign  with  the  glad  tidings.  But 
ffie  ruler,  not  believing  at  all  what  they  had  sard, 
came  himself  there  out  of  curioaty  and  found 
his  cmly  son  alive,  to  his  unbounded  joy.  In 
fCiturn  for  which  he  gl^tiy  shared  half  of  his  king- 
dom with  the  four  pretended  mm.  (Evil  spirit 
^e  believed  to  pos^s  supernatural  powers.) 


GHOST  AND  DEMON  LORE 


303 

9.  THE  DEAD  MAN  WHO  MOVED  AND  TALKED 

Once  upon  a time  a certain  man  and  his  wife 
lived  in  a house  in  the  midst  of  a dense  forest  to- 
gether with  their  cattle.  The  man  fell  ill  and  died 
at  night.  _ The  next  morning  a relative  of  his  came 
to  inquire  after  his  health,  and  as  soon  as  he  had 
arrived  the  dead  man  began  to  move  and  talk. 
The  wife  of  the  deceased,  who  had  found  him 
quite  dead  in  the  night  was  happy  to  sec  him  alive 
on  the  arrival  of  her  kinsman.  She  said  with 
folded  hands,  “Dear  kinsman,  I have  no  proper 
words  to  thank  you  for  the  recovery  of  my  husband, 
who  was  perfccdy  dead  in  the  night,  but  no 
sooner  have  you  arrived  and  felt  his  pulse  than  he 
has  become  convalescent.  So  you  are  the  sole 
cause  of  a new  life  being  given  him.”  Her 
relative  was  also  delighted  to  find  him  alive,  and 
congramlated  her  on  her  good  luck.  Tire  woman 
then  asked  her  kinsman  what  food  she  might 
prepare  for  him.  The  dead  man,  now  possessed 
of  his  senses  and  lying  in  his  bed,  before  her  query 
was  answered,  interposed,  and  said,  “I  and  my 
kinsman  will  not  take  our  meal  now,  but  at  night 
together  (with  the  evident  view  to  prevent  his 
deparmre  from  the  place  after  eating  as  generally 
was  the  case).  You  must  go  today  to  a neighbour- 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLOKE 


304 

ing  village  to  invite  the  people  here  tomorrow 
morning,  as  I wish  to  see  them  on  account  of  the 
joy  I feel  at  my  recovery.”  So  she  went  away  as 
directed,  to  bring  the  neighbours  (meaning  to 
burn  the  dead  body).  They  ate  nothing  during 
the  day  but  in  the  evening,  the  dead  man  (ghost) 
told  him  (the  kinsman)  to  prepare  food.  He  did 
so.  While  so  employed  in  the  kitchen  he  wanted 
salt  and  expressed  his  wish.  The  dead  man  then 
stretched  forth  his  hand  to  a place  (where  salt 
was  kept)  five  yards  distant  from  his  bed  in  order  to 
fetch  the  salt  for  him.  This  supernatural  conduct 
of  ^e  ghost  so  frightened  the  man  that  he  ran 
away  for  fear,  and  the  ghost  pursued  him  until  the 
man  onbraced  a cow  tightly  in  the  cowshed  for 
fear  of  him.  (The  theory  is  that  the  cow  being 
very  holy  the  ghosts  and  demons  fear  to  approach 
it.)  On  the  withdrawal  of  the  ghost  the  man  ran 
home  with  his  wife.  The  next  morning  when  the 
wife  of  the  deceased  brought  die  neighbouns  to 
ho:  home,  diey  found  die  man  dead.  So  die 
dead  body  was  burnt  by  them. 

10.  A GHOST  IN  A MILL 

A man  once  at  |i%ht  was  in  a water-mill  shed, 
on  the  bank  of  a certain  riverj  whidi  was  used  as 
a burning  ghat  (place  where  dead  bodies  are  burnt) 


GHOST  AND  DEMON  LORE  305 

by  the  people  of  the  neighbourhood.  While  his 
grain  was  in  the  process  of  being  ground  in  the 
mill,  it  stopped  of  a sudden.  On  coming  out  he 
found  that  the  water  which  ran  through  the 
channel  to  work  the  mill  was  directed  into  the 
river  by  the  breaking  up  of  the  dam.  So  he  shut 
up  the  dam  a,gain  and  got  the  mill  moving  as 
before.  It  was  nearly  midnight  when  a ghost, 
assuming  the  appearance  of  a man,  entered  the 
shed,  and  asked  dje  man,  “Do  you  like  to  eat 
flesh?”  The  man  replied  in  the  affirmative,  but 
at  the  same  time  believed  him  to  be  nothing  but 
a ghost.  No  sooner  did  the  ghost  leave  the  shed 
to  bring  flesh  for  the  man  dian  the  latter,  all 
shivering  with  fear,  ran  away  to  his  village,  leav- 
ing his  com  behind  in  the  mill.  The  ghost  ran 
after  him  with  die  leg  of  a human  being-^&e  flesh 
he  had  promised  tD  brip^;  saying  repcate!<fly  in 
a loud  voice^  “He  was  just  here,  where  is  he  gmc 
to?,  he  was  just  here,  whore  is  he  gone  tor” 
The  ghost  pursued  him  to  his  own  village,  bm: 
could  not  enter  his  house.  He  went  with  othesrs 
next  morning  to  the  water-mill  to  bring  his  grain 
during  the  day  time,  for  he  Was  so  terrified  at 
the  seche  of  die  past  night  that  he  dared  not  go 


3o6  HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 

It.  THE  GHOST  AND  HIS  SON 

A certain  man  died  and  left  an  only  son  of  lo  or 
12  years  old.  When  the  said  body  was  being 
taken  to  the  burning  ghat  to  be  burnt,  the  boy  in- 
sisted on  accompanying  his  father,  but  the  other 
people  and  his  mother  prevented  his  doing  so. 
But  he  stealthily  went  to  a ridge  from  which  he 
saw  the  site  where  his  deceased  father  was  burnt. 
Supposing  that  his  father  was  made  to  reside  there 
(at  the  funeral  pyre)  he  began  to  go  there  at  night 
addressing  him  repeatedly,  “Father,  father,”  quite 
unconscious  of  his  father  having  been  a ghost,  but 
to  no  purpose.  One  night  while  doing  so  the  boy 
saw  his  father  (a  ghost  in  the  exact  appearance  of 
his  father)  whom  he  embraced  believing  him  to  be 
his  own  father,  and  told  him  that  while  at  home  he 
used  to  feed  him  well  with  ghee  and  milk,  and 
now  he  got  nothing  of  the  sort  since  he  (his  father) 
had  left  him.  On  this  the  ghost  pointed  out  the 
ruin  of  a certain  house  in  the  neighbourhood  to 
the  boy,  and  told  him  that  he  should  dig  there  and 
appropriate  the  riches  it  cwntaincd.  He  accord- 
ingly razed  the  waU  of  the  ruin  and  found  a jar 
of  money  under  it  The  ghost  never  appeared  to 


GHOST  AND  DEMON  LORE 


307 


12.  A GIRL  AND  HER  SNAKE  HUSBAND 

A man  had  a wife.  The  man  was  angry  with 
her.  He  said  to  himself,  “I  can  get  2 slabs  of 
stone  by  breaking  it,  but  cannot  get  anything  from 
my  wife;  she  is  foolish  and  useless.”  Thinking 
this  he  drove  her  away.  After  she  had  been  driven 
away  she  went  to  a field  and  began  to  live  there 
and  supported  herself  by  begging  alms.  One  day 
she  found  a small  thing  (stick  like  snake).  She  kept 
it,  put  it  in  a basket  and  on  the  next  day  she  saw 
it  was  filled  with  the  Sxiake.  Then  she  put  it  in 
a larger  basket.  The  next  day  it  had  again  filled 
the  basket.  Afterwards  she  went  to  her  husband’s 
house  and  began  to  live  unknown  to  the  husband. 
She  put  the  snake  into  a bam  {bha\ar).  Next  day 
she  saw  that  it  was  also  filled.  Her  husband  knew 
that  she  had  come  back  through  his  servant.  He 
ala)  took  no  care  of  her.  He  forgot  all  about  her 
doings,  forgot  that  he  had  driven  her  away  and  let 
her  stay.  She  told  her  husband  she  had  borne  a 
sonj  she  required,  she  said,  a house  to  keep  it  in. 
He  got  a house  of  three  storeys  built  and  she  put 
the  serpent  there.  Next  day  it  filled  the  three 
storeyed  house.  Now  the  serpent  placed  his  head 
on  the  threshold  and  entirely  filled  the  three 
storeys.  The  woman  told  her  husband  that  her 


3o8 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


child  had  grown  up  and  he  should  now  be  married. 
The  Brahman  husband  hesitated  for  a moment 
thinking' who  would  marry  this  serpent.  Seeking 
everywhere  he  could  not  find  any  wife  to  the  snake 
son.  He  found  a poor  Brahman’s  daughter  whose 
father  was  dead.  He  gave  the  girl’s  mother 
Rs.6,ooo  and  took  away  her  daughter  and  married 
her  to  his  son — the  snake.  She  was  brought  home. 
When  the  girl  grew  up  the  mother-in-law  told  the 
girl  to  apply  oil  to  the  body  of  her  son,  the  snake. 
She  was  told  by  her  mother-in-law  to  sit  in  the 
place  the  snake  would  leave  for  her.  She  went  on 
the  first  day;  the  snake  left  a space  for  her  and  put 
his  head  aside  from  the  threshold.  She  passed  the 
night  in  great  discomfort.  She  had  no  room  to 
lie  down.  She  wept  her  ill  fortune.  The  next 
day  when  night  came,  her  mother-in-law  told  her 


to  wait  on  him.  The  snake  left  some  more  room 
for  her  than  before.  She  applied  the  oil  to  him 
quite  easily  and  passed  the  night  with  comfort. 
On  die  third  day  the  girl  told  her  mother-in-law 
the  snake  had  given  her  more  room  now.  The 
modier-indaw  told  her  to  go  daily  and  to  see  what 
would  happen.  On  the  third  day  she  again  went 
n?  lam.  The  snake  left  all  the  three  storeys.  He 
his  body  small  so  that  die  could  pass  through 


GHOST  AND  DEMON  LORE 


309 

all  the  rooms.  On  the  fourth  day  the  .snake  left 
half  the  bed  for  her,  and  putting  off  his  outer  skin 
he  appeared  as  a beautiful  man.  She  went  widi 
joy  to  her  mother-in-law  and  related  all  that  had 
happened.  The  mother-in-law  went  to  look  but 
foimd  him  still  a snake,  because  while  his  wife 
went  to  her  mother-in-law,  he  put  on  the  skin 
«^;sua.  The  mother*^in'law  was  puzzled  and  told 
his  wife  to  bum  the  outer  skin  along  with  her  awn 
bodice.  A piece  of  Ms  outer  ^dn  fdl  when  she 
was  doing  so.  When  the  man  rose  from  sleep  he 
inquired  about  this  and  asked  what  had  become  of 
the  outer  skin.  She  said,  “I  don’t  know.  My 
bodice  has  also  gone.”  Then  she  went  joyfully  to 
her  mother'in4aw.  He  found  that  piece  of  outer 
skin  wMch  had  from  her  hands,  and  he 

ag^  made  it  lar^  and  covered  himself  with  it. 
She  told  her  mothar-m-law  die  had  done  so.  He 
Was  sdli  a man,  $he  went  and  found  him  stdl  a 
make,  ^ic  returned  to  her  daughter-in-law  and 
told  diat  die  had  not  burnt  the  mitar  skin  tmally. 
On  Ac  sixth  day  Ac  mo  Acr-in-law  told  her  Aat 
Ac  Apuld  tdee  her  boAte  and  bum  the  outer  skin 
wi A care.  The  daughtcr-indaw  went  on  Ae 

dxA  day  to  lum,  and  in  tM  night  Ane  wMn  he 
put  it  off,  Ac  took  it  dyly  and  burnt  it  wiA  Ae 


310  HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 

bodice  of  the  mother-in-law  and  slept  with  him. 
The  snake  man  rose  from  sleep  and  could  not  find 
the  skin.  She  said  she  did  not  know  who  had 
taken  his  outer  skin  and  her  bodice.  While  she 
went  to  her  mother-in-law  and  told  her  with  joy 
that  the  son  was  man  and  took  her  to  see  him. 
He  was  now  in  the  form  of  a man  and  could  not 
change  to  a snake.  The  mother  was  now  very 
happy. 

(A  treasure  buried  in  the  ground  becomes  a 
snake,  and  that  snake  if  kept  by  human  beings 
turns  into  a man.) 

13.  THE  BOY  AND  THE  DEMONESS 

A person  was  taking  15  goats  to  his  home.  He 
met  with  a demoness  (Rakshasii)  on  the  road.  She 
followed  him  like  a country  woman  or  villager. 
In  the  evening  they  lodged  on  the  road.  They 
both  ate  their  food  and  the  person  tied  his  goats 
and  went  to  sleep.  When  the  man  was  asleep,  the 
woman  devoured  two  goats.  Now  he  had  13  left. 
On  getting  up  early  in  the  morning,  seeing  two 
goats  less,  he  was  perplexed.  He  could  not  find 
out  about  them.  When  the  demoness  was  asked 
what  had  become  of  the  goats,  she  told  him  that 
she  did  not  know.  “You  and  I both  slept.  I 
don’t  know  tvhiJ  has  taken  away  the  goats.” 


GHOST  AND  DEMON  LORE  • ^IX 

Afterwards  he  went  towards  his  home.  Again  the 
woman  followed  him.  In  the  way  they  again 
lodged  by  the  road.  The  second  night  she 
devoured  four  goats.  Now  he  had  nine  left. 
When  she  was  asked  she  made  the  same  reply. 
In  this  way  she  devoured  all  the  goats.  One  day, 
the  demoness  in  the  shape  of  a country  wife  hid 
herself.  On  the  second  day,  she  appeared  in  a 
beautiful  disguise  of  a 15  years’  old  girl  and  came 
forward.  He  imagined  her  to  be  very  beautiful. 
He  told  her  he  wanted  to  marry  her.  She  agreed. 
He  took  her  home.  He  reached  home.  He  had 
four  more  wives  in  his  house.  When  night  came 
they  all  went  to  sleep,  she  devoured  one  of  the 
four.  On  the  second  night  she  devoured  the 
second,  on  the  third  the  third.  On  the  fourth  night 
it  was  the  mrn  of  the  fourth.  The  fourth  wife 
who  was  pregnant  went  away  wdth  his  son  of  14 
years  to  a neighbouring  house.  Taking  rest  for 
some  hours  she  told  her  son,  “The  new  wife  of 
your  father  has  devoured  all  your  step-mothers. 
Now  we  must  consider  a place.  When  I tell  my 
husband,  he,  instead  of  killing  her,  will  rebuke 
and  kill  me,  and  she  will  not  be  injured  by  him.” 
Afterwards  the  son  went  on  thinking  of  a place 
for  getting  rid  of  the  new  wife.  He  went  to  the 


312  ■ 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


bazar  juid  met  with  an  old  woman  who  used  to  wipe 
the  blood  off  the  demoness’  mouth.  The  boy  told 
the  old  woman  he  would  give  a gold  mohar  if 
she  could  ask  the  demoness  where  her  soul  lived. 
The  old  woman  was  an  intimate  friend  of  the 
demoness  and  the  demoness  used  to  come  to  her 
daily,  and  the  old  woman  used  to  kill  lice  on  her 
head  and  wipe  the  blood  from  her  mouth.  The 
boy  went  to  his  mother  and  told  her  that  he  had 
begun  to  make  a plan  for  killing  the  demoness. 
On  the  second  day  the  old  woman  asked  her  (the 
demoness),  when  she  came  to  her  as  usual,  where 
her  soul  lived.  She  replied,  “I  am  the  daughter  of 
a distinguished  demon  (Rakshash)  and  my  soul 
lives  across  the  seven  oceans.  There  is  a large 
peepul  tree  which  has  spread  its  branches  long  and 
which  is  a rest  for  travellers.  In  those  branches 
many  parrots  live.  On  the  top  of  that  tree  is  a nest 
and  there  is  a large  parrot  in  which  my  soul  lives.” 
Next  day  when  the  boy  came  to  the  old  woman,  he 
asked  her  if  she  had  inquired  about  the  demoness’ 
soul.  The  old  woman  told  him  that  she  had  asked, 
“If  you  g^ve  me  two  gold  raohars,  I will  show 
yom”  The  boy  gave  her  two  gold  mohars  and 
was  told  by  her  idhe  secret.  Now  the  boy  went 
home  nd  ibegan  to  think  how  he  should  manage 


GHOST  AND  DEMON  LORE 


313 

to  go  across  the  seven  oceans.  He  again  ret  ned 
to  the  old  woman  and  asked  her  to  inqnire  from 
the  demoness  how  he  was  to  cross  them.  On  the 
second  day  when  the  demoness  came  to  the  old 
woman  and  she  was  wiping  her  bloody  moudi  and 
killing  lice  began  to  tell  her  to  be  careful  and  not 
loose  the  thing  by  which  the  ocean  is  arossed. 
The  demoness  feH  into  the  trap  and  told  her  d\at 
she  had  a sandal  (of  one  foot)  which  was  kept  in  a 
box  under  her  bed  (which  she  had  brought  with 
her).  But  said  she,  “Don’t  tell  anyone.  I have 
told  you  these  as  my  close  friend.  You  must  con- 
ceal all  this  as  you  have  concealed  my  eating  men 
and  animals.”  There  in  die  man’s  (her  hudiand’s) 
house,  the  demoness  ate  all  the  horses  and  catde 
and  injured  some  of  the  suburbs  of  the  dty.  When 
the  demoness  had  gone  the  boy  came  hiding  (slyly) 
and  ai^ed  the  old  woman  if  she  had  inquired  from 
the  demoness.  The  old  woman  said,  “Yes.  I 
require  4 gold  mohars  from  you  for  telling  the 
secret.”  He  gave  her  4 gold  mohars.  Then  she 
informed  him  about  the  sandal  under  her  bed  in 
a box  in  her  chamber.  The  boy  returned  home 
dtpughtfully.  He  did  not  tell  anything  to  bis 
mother,  hi  the  night  he  disguised  himsdf  as  a 
faqir,  and  went  to  his  father’s  house,  where  she 


HIMALAYAN  FOLKLORE 


lived.  He  told  the  people  that  he  \vanted  alms. 
The  demoness  came  and  brought  some  flour  meal 
to  give  him.  The  faqir  told  her  that  he  did  not 
want  the  flour.  He  wants  to  see  the  owner  of  the 
house.  Then  hearing  this  from  the  upper  house 
the  father  came  downstairs  and  asked  him  what  he 
wanted.  He  replied  that  he  required  a night’s 
lodging  in  the  room  next  to  his  own,  and  gave  him 
fuel  for  burning.  He  lit  a fire  and  when  he  was 
given  food  he  ate  heartily.  At  two  o’clock  in  the 
morning,  he  prayed,  ‘Tf  I had  right  in  this  house, 
a stone  of  this  wall  will  slide  away  and  there  will 
be  a hole.”  According  to  his  words  the  stone 
went  aside  and  there  was  a hole.  He  went 
through  the  hole  secretly  to  the  next  room,  where 
his  father  and  step-mother  were  lying.  He  took 
away  the  trunk  under  the  bed  and  came  back 
through  the  hole.  Again  putting  the  trunk  into 
fire  (to  open  it)  he  took  out  the  sandal  and  again 
restored  the  trunk  and  came  back  and  smoked 
tobacco,  knowing  that  there  would  be  questioning 
about  the  hole.  He  prayed  it  might  be  closed  if 
he  had  any  right  in  that  house.  The  hole  became 
as  before;  and  at  4 o’clock  he  went  towards  the 
seven  oceans.  He  applied  the  sandal  on  one  of  his 
fet  and  by  its  help  crossed  flic  seven  oceans  in  a 


GHOST  AND. DEMON  LORE 


315 


moment.  At  6 o’clock  he  was  by  the  peepul  tree 
and  saw  many  parrots  there.  On  the  top  he  saw 
the  large  parrot  sitting.  He  had  taken  a sword 
with  him  before  crossing  the  ocean.  Slowly  he 
climbed  up  the  tree  and  prayed  to  God  that  the 
life  of  that  parrot  would  not  be  taken  from  her, 
but  it  would  fall  down.  He  at  once  darted  on  the 
parrot,  and  hit  it  with  his  sword  and  cut  the  parrot’s 
feet  and  wings.  The  pain  of  the  parrot  soon 
affected  the  demoness  there.  She  began  to  die. 
He  took  the  parrot  still  alive  with  him  and  crossed 
the  seven  oceans  and  appeared  before  his  father 
and  told  him  all  that  had  happened.  He  was 
much  praised  by  his  father  and  country  men. 
The  demoness  came  out  and  asked  him,  “What  is 
this?”  Showing  her  the  parrot  she  replied,  “This 
is  my  life.  Don’t  kill  it  any  more.  I will  give 
you  many  lakhs  of  rupees  from  my  father’s  house. 
The  boy  refused  and  before  all  the  people  and 
before  his  father  and  mother  he  killed  the  parrot 
and  the  demoness  thereupon  died. 


