Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  this  book  is  in 
the  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924089930774 


CORNELL  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARy 


3   1924  089  930  774 


In  compliance  with  current 

copyright  law,  Cornell  University 

Library  produced  this 

replacement  volume  on  paper 

that  meets  the  ANSI  Standard 

Z39.48-1992  to  replace  the 
irreparably  deteriorated  original. 

2001 


CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


T^o.  Registered  under  Act  xxv  of  1867. 


PROVERBS  &  FOLKLORE 

OF  KUMAUN  AND  GARHWAL 

COLLECTED     BY 

PANDIT  GAEA  DATT  f  RETI 

(Late  Extra  Assistant  Commissioner) 


Pbinxed  at  the  Lodiana  Mission  Press 


> 
M.  Wtlie,  Manager. 


1894, 
All  rights  reserved. 


Wh 


This  Book  is  dedicated  by  kind  permission 
TO 

EDMUND  WHITE  ESQ.,  C.  S. 

Late  Director  of  Public  Instruction, 
N.   "W.  P.  &  OXIDE, 
as  a  token  of  gratitude  for  Hs  patronage  of  literature, 
and  great  services  in  the  cause  of  Education. 


PREFACE, 


The'present  collection  of  proverbs  Las  beeu  made  in  the  re- 
mote and  secluded  districts  of  Kumann  and  Garhwal,  which  form 
a  portion  of  the  Sub-Himalayan  region,  formerly  considered 
inaccessible  by  the  people  of  the  rest  of  India  on  account  of  their 
difficult  natural  features,  and  which  exhibit  both  in  physical  aspect 
and  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  people  some  remarkable  di- 
vergences from  the  rest  of  India.  Its  folklore  ma}'  therefore  be 
considered  specially  interesting. 

The  excellent  collection  of  Hindustani  proverbs  made  by  Dr. 
S.  W.  Fallon,  though  it  contains  many  sayings  current  in  Kumaun 
in  a  slightly  modified  form,  yet  lacks  a  great  number  of  the  local 
and  peculiar  proverbs  found  here.  These  I  have  myself  taken 
down  from  the  lips  of  aged  people  in  the  Province.  They  may 
not  appear  very  enticing  to  some  reacjers,  but  they  are  at  any  rate 
an  addition  to  the  archiseology  and  antiquities  of  India,  which  the 
Government  has  done  so  much  to  collect  and  render  accessible  to 
students. 

In  this  belief  I  have  been  induced  to  collect  and  translate 
the  proverbs,  maxims,  sayings,  and  phrases  and  to  illustrate 
the  Folklore  of  these  hills,  during  a  course  of  years  in  the  service 
of  Government  as  a  Deputy  Collector  in  Garhwal  and  Knmaun, 
where  I  sought  and  obtained  my  information  from  old  men  of 
respectability  and  knowledge.  I  hastened  to  collect  them  as  I  was 
told  that  a  good  deal  had  already  been  lost.  For  with  the  changes 
of  time  everything  of  antiquity  is  receding  further  out  of  sight, 
and  is  liable  to  disappear  altogether. 

On  shewing  a  part  of  this  work  to  Mr.  Edmund  White,  C.  S., 
Director  of  Public  Instruction,  N.  W.  P.  and  Oudh,  I  was  encour- 
aged bj'  him  to  complete  it  for  submission  to  Government.     When 


the  specimen  pages  were  submitied  the  work  was  approved  of  by 
many  learned  Europeans  both  in  England  and  in  India.  It 
may  not  be  out  of  place  to  quote  the  opinions  of  a  few  of  these 
gentlemen  : 

On  submitting  the  specimen  copies  to  Government  N.  W.  P. 
and  Oudb,  the  Director  of  Public  Instruction  N.  W.  P.  and  Oudh 
said: 

"The  work  of  Pandit  Ganga  Datt  is  one  of  much  interest 
and  value  in  connection  with  the  Folklore  of  the  Province  and 
well  deserves  the  encouragement  of  Government." 

Sir  W.  Muir,  Late  Lieutenant  Governor  N.  W.  P.  and' 
Oudh  writes: 

"Your  letter  and  pamphlet  and  sheets  received.  They  are- 
very  creditable  to  you." 

Sir  A.  E.  Elliott,  Lieutenant  Governor  of  Bengal,  says: 

"I  have  read  your  proverbs  with  much  interest.  They  are 
well  worth  publishing." 

0.  J.  Conn  ell.  Esquire,  C  S.,  Collector  and  Magistrate  of 
Bareilly,  says: 

"Many  thanks  for  the  specimen  pages  of  your  collection  of 
proverbs.  They  should  be  very  useful  and  interesting  when  they 
are  published  in  a  complete  form." 

D.  C.  Baillie,  Esquire,  C.  S.,  Superintendent  of  Census 
operation,  N.  W.  P.  and  Oudh,  writes  : 

"A  collection  of  one  thousand  five  hundred  proverbs  of 
Kamaun  and  Garhwal  explained  and  illustrated  on  the  same  lines 
as  the  specimen  proverbs  you  have  sent  would  certainly  be  most 
interesting." 

S.  Eardley  Wilmot,  Esquire,  Conservator  of  Forest,  writes: 

"Many  thanks  for  sending  me  the  specimen  pages  of  your 
proverbs  and  Folklore  of  the  Provinces  of  Kamaun  and  Garhwal. 
I  am  sure  the  subject  is  one  which  cannot  fail  to  be  of  interest  not 
ouly  to  those,  comparatively  few  in  number,  who  reside  in  or  visit 


Ill 

'these  districts  but  also  to  those  who  wish  to  improve  their  know- 
ledge of  the  people  of  India." 

W.  Young  Esquire,  C.  S.,  Judicial  Commissioner  and  High 
Court  Judge,  Allahabad,  saj's  : 

"I  think  that  the  collection  of  proverbs  is  exceedingly  inte- 
resting judging  from 'the  specimen  shewn  to  me  by  the  Author, 
and  he  tells  me  that  they  are  quite  original  and  not  to  be  found  in 
Fallon's  Book." 

The  specimen  pages  have  also  been  kindly  approved  of  by 
the  North  West  Provinces,  Madras,  Bengal,  and  Punjab  Govern- 
ments. 

My  collection  (under  instructions  from  the  Director  of  Pub- 
lic Instruction  N.  W.  P.  and  Gudh)  includes  all  the  proverbs  which 
are  in  vogue  amongst  the  hill  people  without  any  reference  to  the 
fact  that  parallel  proverbs  are  also  in  use  in  the  Plains.  At  the 
same  time  I  have  not  included  those  Sanscrit  verses,  generally 
used  by  the  learned  class,  nor  those  verses  in  the  Plains  Hindus- 
tani dialect  which  are  used  by  others. 

These  proverbs  give  an  insight  into  the  character,  habits, 
customs  and  traditions  of  the  people  who  inhabit  the  districts  of  Ku- 
maun  and  Garhwal.  To  enable  European  gentlemen  to  understand 
them  better  I  have  briefly  explained  the  appositeness  of  the  pro- 
verbs, axioms,  sayings  and  phrases  to  particular  occasions,  as  well  as 
the  customs  and  manners  out  of  which  they  arise. 

A  description  of  the  country  where  the  proverbs  are  used  is 
briefly  given  in  the  Introduction  (hereafter  printed)  kindly  contri- 
buted by  the  Rev.  E.  S.  Oakley,  Principal  of  the  Eamsay  College 
at  Almora,  who  has  also  helped  me  by  revising  the  work  and  cor- 
recting the  Proof-sheets.  I  must  also  acknowledge  my  indebted- 
ness to  H.  0.  Budden  Esq.,  the  Revs.  J.  Messmoro  and  G.  M. 
Bulloch,  and  Mr.  M.  Harris,  Almora,  who  have  at  different  times 
assisted  me  in  preparing  the  volume. 

The  transliteration  of  the  proverbs  is  according  to    Duncan 


IV 


Forbes'  Hiudastani  Grammar  (vide  pages  136  and  137)  with  due 
regard  to  the  hill  accentuation,  so  that  the  pronunciation  of  the 
same  by  any  European  may  be  clearly  intelligible  to  hill  people. 

This  is  my  first  attempt  to  put  my  collection  of  proverbs  and 
illustrations  of  Folklore  into  type  :  should  this  first  edition  find 
sale  the  second  one  will  appear  in  an  improved  and  more  attrac- 
tive form. 

In  conclusion,  I  must  say  a  word  about  the  difficulty  of 
classifying  under  appropriate  headings  such  a  collection  as  this. 
No  one,  unless  he  had  actually  attempted  such  a  task,  could 
appreciate  the  difficulty.  I  have  done  what  I  could  in  this  direc- 
tion, and  must  ask  indulgence  from  those  readers  who  may  see 
imperfections  in  this  or  in  other  features  of  my  work. 

Perhaps  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  caution  my  readers  against 
misunderstanding  some  of  these  homely  sayings,  and  regarding  as 
indications  of  the  "depravity"  of  the  people,  maxims  which  are 
obviously  framed  in  an  ironical  sense  and  not  seriously  meant. 


Kapina,  Almoea.  ) 

The  9th  November,  1822.   j  GANG  A  DATT  UPRETI. 


INTRODUCTION. 

The  Oriental  must  have  his  epigram.  It  is  one  of  the  chief 
necessaries  of  his  life,  and  an  untold  solace.  With  a  shrewd  apo- 
phthegm for  every  occasion  he  can  defy  all  "the  slings  and  arrows 
of  outrageous  fortune  ;"  and  a  sententious  phrase  robs  even  defeat 
and  disappointment  of  their  sting. 

The  wisdom  of  the  East  consists  in  such'  sentences  and  pro- 
verbs rather  than  in  any  sustained  effort  of  the  reason,  and 
consequently  they  assume  much  greater  importance  than  in  Western 
lands,  and  furnish  better  materials  for  a  thorough  study  of  the 
character  and  conditions  of  an  Asiatic  people  than  any  other  source 
of  information  can  supply.  We  are  indebted  to  Pandit  Ganga 
Datt  Upreti  for  a  complete  collection  of  the  proverbs  and  folk- 
sayings  of  Kumaun  and  Garhwal,  which  he  has  diligently  gathered 
together  during  a  life-time  of  public  service.  Himself  a  native  of 
the  province,  and  having  spent  long  periods  in  different  and  some- 
times remote  parts  of  it,  he  has  enjoyed  peculiar  advantages  for 
carrying  out  such  a  task.  These  researches  have  been  the  favourite 
relaxation  of  his  leisure  hours:  and  the  result  which  appears  in 
this  volume  is  a  valuable  addition  to  our  knowledge  of  the  people, 
and  cannot  fail  to  be  interesting  to  many  readers  not  only  in 
India,  but  also,  it  is  hoped,  in  Britain  and  America.  They  present 
a  picture  of  primitive  manners  and  a  naive  self-  revelation  which 
-will  be  delightful  to  the  student  of  human  nature,  and  will  be  of 
special  value  to  all  who  are  called  on  in  the  course  of  duty  to  enter 
into  close  relations  with  the  people  of  India. 

The  great  merit  of  this  collection  is  that  it  has  been  gathered 
entirely  from  original  sources — taken  down,  in  fact,  from  the 
lips  of  the  people  ;  and  is  in  no  sense  a  mere  literary  compilation. 


Those  who  have  a  wide  acquaintance  with  Indian  folk-lore  will 
at  once  perceive  that  many  of  the  sayings  and  proverbs  included 
here  are  not  peculiar  to  the  province  of  Kumnun  and  Garhwal,  but 
are  common,  sometimes  in  sliohtly  altered  form,  thron/jhout 
Kortl.ern  India,  i^rd  rot  a  few  of  them  will  be  found  scattered 
about  in  various  works  of  reference.  The  Pandit  is  aware  of  this, 
but  his  intention  has  bpen  to  make  a  complete  collection  of  the 
proverbs  of  his  own  province,  omitting  nothing  that  is  commonly 
prevalent  ;  and  on  the  whole  this  seems  the  most  satisfactory  plan. 
Each  proverb  and  story  is  a  genuine  popular  saying,  derived  not 
from  books,  but  from  the  Jiving  speech  of  the  people,  and  so 
possesses  an  intrinsic  value.  The  stories  given  are  such  as  are 
usually  related  by  village  wise-acres  and  rustic  philosophers  in 
illustrating  or  expanding  a  particular  proverb,  and  many  of  them, 
ns  well  as  many  of  the  proverbs  themselves,  are  quite  peculiar  to 
the  province,  and  are  now  printed  for  the  first  time. 

By  translation  into  another  language  it  is  inevitable  that 
popular  sayings  should  lose  much  of  their  force  and  pungency. 
Ingenious  plays  on  words  are  completely  lost,  rhj-thm  and  rhvme 
are  both  sacrificed,  and  nothing  is  left  but  the  bare  bones  of  tho 
proverb.  The  present  collection  forms  no  exception  to  the  rule. 
The  brevity,  point,  and  ingenuity  of  many  a  saying  have  vanished 
in  the  English  translation,  nor  was  there,  as  a  rule,  any  possible 
means  of  retaining  them.  If  poetry  cannot  be  satisfactorily  tran- 
laled  into  another  language,  still  less  can  proverbs.  Their  power 
often  depends  on  subtle  associations  of  thought  and  language  which 
no  earthly  skill  can  render  into  another  tongue,  while  cumbrous 
attempts  to  throw  them  into  poetical  form  are  only  so  much  tim& 
wasted. 

The  proverbs  are  translated  from  the  Kumauni  and  Garhwali 
dialects,  which  are  off-shoots  or  rather  sisters  of  the  Hindi,  and 
differ  from  the  high  or  standard  form  of  that  language  only  in 
grammatical  forms  and   a  few  peculiarities  of  pronunciation.     £n 


in 


many  cases  a  saying  current  in  the  plains  of  India  seems  to  have 
simply  been  turned  into  the  dialect,  though  there  are  many  others 
which  are  quite  local,  and  from  their  uature  and  allusions  could 
only  have  become  current  in  a  mountainous  countrj-. 

The  province  of  Kumaun  and  Girhvval  extends  for  about  one 
hundred  miles  east  to  west  and  one  hundred  and  ten  miles  north  to 
south  along  the  sourthcrn  slopes  of  the  Himalij'as,    bej'ond    which 
lies  the  mysterious  land  of  Tibet,  from  which  the  province   is    sepa- 
rated by  the  snowy  range.     In  this  part   of  the    range    there    are 
several  peaks  exceeding  twenty   thousand    feet   in    height.     These 
stupendocs  features  in  the  landscape  are    visible   from    most   parts 
of  the  province  and  add  a  striking  grandeur  to   the   scenery.     The 
whole  country  consists    of  an    intricate    maze    of  mountains   and 
glens,  through  which  flow  several  rivers  and  innumerable   streams, 
all  tributary,  either  directly    or    indirectly,    to    the    G;inges.     The 
hilly  ranges  of  this    sub-Himalayan    region    vary   in    height    from 
eight  thousand  to  five  thousand  feet,  the    valleys    often  descending 
to  a  level  of  only  two  thousand  or  three    thousand    feet   above   sea 
level.     The  hill-sides  are  usually  very  steep   and    frequently    quite 
preicipitous,  clothed  in  most    part    with    forests    of  fir,    and  above 
the  level  of  six  thousand  feet,  with  giant  rhododendron,    holm-oak, 
and  beech.     Towards  the  south  the  higher  ranges  of  hills  abruptly 
descend,  being  succeeded  b^'  a  narrow  stretch  of  low  broken  country 
called  the  Bhabar,  and  then  by  a  gradual  slope  towards   the  great 
plain  of  Upper    India,    which    is    named    the    Terai.     This   lower 
belt  is  from  two  to  fifteen   miles    broad,    and   is    part    of   the    pro- 
vince, having  always  been    much    used    by   the    hill    people,    who 
drive  their  herds  of  cattle  thither  for  forage  during  the  dry  months. 
In  some  parts  of  the  province,  especially  around   the  capital   town 
Almora,  the  hills  are  very  barren.     Bishop  Heber  sang  of 

"Bleak  Almora's  barren  steep;" 
but  generally  Kumaun  may  be    called    a    forest    land.     After   and 
during  the  rains  the  grass-covered  slopes  and  verdant  valleys  are  q 


lY 


lovely  sight.  Himalayan  landscapes  are  distinguished  more 
especially  by  their  yastness  :  range  after  range  of  mountains  fade 
away  into  the  blue  distance,  crowned  towards  the  north  by  the 
lowering  "snowy  summits  old  in  story,"  with  their  well-defined 
peaks  of  Nanda  Devi,  Panch  Chule.  Trisiil,  and  Badri  Nath.  As 
the  traveller  advances  into  the  province  new  vistas  are  disclosed 
at  every  turn  of  the  road,  as  it  winds  along  the  steep  mountain 
sides  ;  and  the  mingled  charms  of  forest,  cliff,  glen,  and  distant 
snowy  peak  combine  to  form  landscapes  of  singular  beauty.  The 
only  drawback,  as  a  rule,  is  the  absence  of  water  from  the  scene, 
though  near  Naini  Tal  this  defect  is  abundantly  supplied,  and  the 
blue  waters  of  two  or  three  lakes  glancing  in  the  brilliant  sunshine 
amongst  the  fir-clad  hills  make  the  view  from  any  of  the  neigh- 
bouring heights  one  of  the  finest  in  the  world. 

The  Pindari  glacier,  at  the  base  of  the  great  snowy  range^ 
is  a  favourite  object  for  tourists,  and  a  moderately  good  road  with 
rest-houses  placed  at  suitable  intervals,  leads  to  it.  The  scenery 
at  some  points  is  indescribably  grand.  The  celebrated  shrines 
of  Badri  Nath  and  Kedar  Nath  in  Garwhal,  also  situated  among 
the  snows,  are  yearly  visited  by  many  thousands  of  Hindu  pilgrims 
from  all  parts  of  India  and  even  fiom  the  extreme  south.  These 
temples  are  specially  sacred  as  being  intimately  associated  with 
the  leading  deities  of  Hindu  mythology.  Indeed,  the  Himalayas, 
as  might  he  expected  from  their  striking  physical  features,  play 
a  large  part  in  Hindu  story  and  legend,  and  may  be  called  the 
Olympus  of  India;  every  peak,  pool,  and  river  has  its  tradition 
relating  to  the  gods,  and  such  a  degree  of  sanctity  pertains  to 
these  mountains  that  even  the  sight  of  them  is  said,  in  one  of  the 
sacred  books,  to  remove  the  sins  of  the  beholder,  as  the  dew  is 
dried  up  by  the  morning  sun. 

The  population  is  distributed  mostly  in  small  hamlets,  perched 
here  and  there  on  the  steep  sides  of  the  mountains,  and  often  almost 
inaccessible,  so  that  the  proverbs  in  this  collection    which    refer    to 


people  who  have  never  been  away  from  their  native  villages  are  no 
exaggeration.  When  one  looks  at  some  of  these  villages  hanging 
like  birdnests  on  the  sides  of  the  precipitous  hills,  approachable 
only  by  the  faintest  goat-track,  one  cannot  help  wondering  how 
human  beings  can  either  reach  them  or  get  away  from  them. 
There  are  a  few  larger  towns,  among  which  we  O'ay  mention 
Almora,  the  capital,  Srinagar  and  Pauri  in  Garhwal,  and  the  two 
European  health-resorts,  Kanikhet,  occupied  by  British  troops, 
and  Naini  Tal,  the  beautiful  summer  headquarters  of  the  North  West 
Provinces  Government. 

The  agriculture  of  the  province  is  necessarily  of  a  limited 
character,  owing  to  the  hilly  nature  of  the  ground.  Yet  it  is 
■wonderful  what  human  perseverance  has  done  to  overcome  these 
difficulties.  The  hill-sides  are  scooped  into  a  number  of  terraces, 
supported  by  rough  walls.  In  some  places  as  many  as  a  hundred 
of  these  narrow  terraces,  each  of  which  is  a  cornfield,  may  bo 
seen  one  below  another,  occupying  the  whole  of  the  steep  side  of 
a  hill.  The  principal  grains  grown  are  different  kinds  of  millet, 
wheat,  and  rice.  Tea  is  successfully  grown  in  several  parts  of 
the  province  by  Europeans.  The  best  kinds  of  tea  are  of  excellent 
quality  and  are  preferred  by  many  to  any  other  growth. 

The  population  of  the  province  presents  great  variety  as 
regards  caste  and  origin.  The  aborigines  exist  in  the  servile 
race  of  Doms,  who  are  dark,  short  and  somewhat  negro-like  in 
appearance.  They  have  for  centuries  been  in  a  state  of  subjection  to 
the  Hindu  castes,  and  are  still  regarded  by  them  as  unclean  and  de- 
graded. In  former  days  a  Dom  who  touched  the  drinking-vessel  or 
hnqqa  (tobacco  pipe)  of  a  Brahmin  was  at  once  put  to  death.  A  Dom 
was  not  allowed  to  wear  a  garment  which  reached  below  the  knees. 
One  of  their  customs  which  especially  causes  them  to  be  abhorred 
by  the  fastidious  Hindu  is  that  of  eating  the  carcases  of  cowh  or 
bullocks  which  have  died  a  natural  death.  They  are  chiefly 
employed  as  carpenters,    masons,  blacksmiths,    and    day-labourers 


VI 

of  various  kinds.  It  would  be  interesting  to  know  something  of 
their  religious  beliefs,  but  little  has  yet  been  determined  on  this 
point.  They  have  adopted  Hinduism  to  a  large  extent,  though 
they  generally  worship  the  Dioty  under  the  name  of  Nirakar 
(the  Formless).  These  Doins  have  a  tradition  that  they  were  the 
original  inhabitants  of  the  country,  and  that  they  were  employed 
by  Mahadov  as  drummers  on  the  joyful  occasion  when  he  adopted 
the  Himalaya  mountains  as  his  residence. 

According  to  a  tradition  of  the  Donis,  as  well  as  from  other 
evidence,  it  appears  certain  that  the  next  comers  into  the  country 
were  the  Khasas  or  Khasiyas,  whose  descendants  form  the  prin- 
cipal part  of  the  pofiulation.  They  were  probably  among  the 
first  invaders  of  India — an  Aryan  race  hailing  from  central  Asia 
and  at  one  time  widely  spread  over  Northern  India — though 
distinct  from  and  earlier  than  the  well-known  Aryan  invasion 
of  the  Punjab.  They  now  form  a  separate  race  or  caste  only 
in  Kuraaun  and  Garhwal.  They  have  been  influenced  greatly 
in  the  course  of  ages  b^'  contact  with  the  IJrahmins  and  other 
Hindus  of  the  plains,  and  differ  little  from  the  orthodox  Hindu, 
They  are  distinctly  Aryan  in  features,  and  are  the  cultivators  of 
the  soil  and  the  coolie  caste  of  Kumaun. 

The  third  class  of  inhabitants  may  be  included  under  the 
general  designation  of  immigrants  from  the  Plains  of  India,  It 
is  related  that  a  certain  rajah  named  Kanakpal  belonging  to  the 
Lunar  Race  visited  Garhwal  in  the  seventh  century  with  his 
followers  on  a  pilgrimage  to  the  sacred  shrines  of  Kedar  Nath 
aud  Badri  Nath,  and  afterwards  conquered  the  country.  The 
successors  of  his  dynasty  still  rule  in  Tihri  or  Independent 
Garhwal.  At  that  time  Kumaun  was  broken  up  into  a  number 
of  petty  Khasiya  kingdoms,  until  a  dynasty  was  founded  iu  the 
tenth  century  A.  D.  by  Som  Chand,  said  to  be  a  scion  of  a  royal 
family  residing  at  Jhansi.  There  are  very  conflicting  accounts 
of  the  manner   in   which  he    established    his    power    in    Kumaun. 


VII 

What  is  certain  is  that  the  Chand  dynasty  reigned  in  the  country 
(not  always  over  tho  whole  of  it,  and  with  interruptions  of  Khasiya 
revolts,  Roliilla  invasions  etc.)  until  the  end  of  the  last  century, 
when  the  Gorkhaiis  of  Nej:ial  invaded  the  country  and  established 
their  rule  in  Kumaun.  So  violent  were  the  methods  of  the  con- 
querers  and  so  oppresr^ive  their  government  that  to  this  day  any 
act  of  tyranny  is  s[ioken  of  as  "Gorkhiyani"  (rule  of  the  Gurkhas). 
In  1815  the  British  took  possession  of  the  province,  in  retaliation 
for  agressions  by  the  Nepal  Kingdom. 

As  an  example  of  the  legendary  history  of  Kumaun, 
(regarding  which  a  large  collection  of  stories  and  traditions  has 
been  gathered  by  Pandit  Ganga  Datt  U[ireti,  and  will  probably 
be  issued  by  him  in  a  separate  volume),  the  following  account 
of  the  foundation  of  Almora,  the  capital  town,  may  be  found 
interesting: — 

About  six  hundred  years  ago,  when  the  Chand  Rajahs  held 
their  court  at  Champawat  in  eastern  Kumaun,  the  reigning  king 
•was  one  day  hunting  on  the  Almorah  hill,  which  was  at  that  time 
covered  with  dense  forest,  a  h;ire  suddenly  started  up  before  him, 
and  he  began  to  pursuo  it,  whereupon  it  was  transformed  into  a 
tiger,  and  on  reaching  the  top  of  the  hill  disappeared.  Tiie  king 
consulted  his  Brahman  astrologers  concerning  this  strange  event. 
They  all  accepted  it  as  a  most  favourable  omen,  and  counselled 
the  king  to  found  his  capital  on  the  spot  where  the  tiger  had 
disappeared.  The  site  was  accordingly  examined,  prior  to  begin- 
ninf  building  o[)erations,  and  a  large  crowbar  was  driven  into 
the  "round.  It  sank  so  deep  that  the  astrologers  declared  it  had 
pierced  the  back  of  the  Seshnag,  or  great  serpent  which  the 
Hindus  suppose  to  support  the  universe,  and  they  accepted  the 
fact  as  a  sign  that  the  king's  dynasty  should  endure  for  ever. 
But  the  king,  impelled  hy  curiosity,  insisted  on  the  bar  being 
dragged  out  of  the  ground,  and,  sure  enough,  the  point  of  it  was 
seen  to  be  stained  with  blood.     Thereupon  the  astrologers  in  wrath 


Till 


declared  that  as  a  punishment  for  the  rajah's  presumption  and 
unbelief,  his  descendants  should  reign  but  for  a  few   generations. 

Were  it  not  for  this  valuable  information,  we  should  na- 
turally suppose  that  the  real  reason  of  Almora's  selection  as  the 
capital  was  the  abundant  supply  of  water  there,  and  the  excellent 
quality  of  the  soil  on  the  slope  below  the  ridge,  where  an  im- 
mense amount  of  grain  is  grown  for  the  food-consumption  of  the 
people. 

The  Chand  dynasty  attracted  many  Brahman  families  from 
the  plains,  who  settled  in  Kumaun  and  have  multiplied  exceeding- 
ly, so  that  this  province  contains  an  unusually  large  proportion 
of  the  Brahman  caste.  Many  of  them  have  entered  Government 
service  and  prospered.  Perhaps  nowhere  in  India  is  the  worldly 
as  well  as  the  spiritual  predominance  of  the  Brahman  so  marked 
as  in  Kumaun  and  its  capital  Almora. 

The  Bhoteas  are  a  Mongolian  tribe  inhabiting  the  northern 
parts  of  the  province.  They  carry  on  a  trade  between  Tibet  and 
India,  conveying  borax  and  other  commodities  on  the  backs  of 
their  sheep  and  goats  over  the  high  passes  of  the  snow  range, 
from  Tibet.  They  have  a  distinctly  Chinese  appearance,  and  their 
residence  in  the  cold  climate  of  the  snows  gives  many  of  them 
quite  a  fresh  colour.  They  dress  in  thick  woollen  garments  and 
woollen  mocassins,  and  are  a  cheery  good-humoured  folk,  though 
unfortunately  somewhat  given  to  ardent  spirits.  They  say  that 
if  they  washed  themselves  they  could  never  endure  the  intense 
cold  of  those  altitudes, consequently  they  remain  unwashed.  They 
own  much  land  (mostly  fallow)  in  the  northern  part  of"  Kumaun, 
and  some  of  them  are  quite  wealthy,  the  Hindus  in  some  places 
being  their  labourers  and  servants.  Another  industry  which 
they  practise  is  that  of  weaving  carpets  and  blankets,  which  they 
also  bring  down  to  the  markets  of  Bageshwar  and  Almorah. 
They  still  acknowledge  some  kind  of  fealty  to  the  Tibetan  govern- 
ment,  though  they  arc   really   British  subjects.     Through  contact 


IX 


with  the  Hindus  they  are  rapidly  adopting  Hindu  customs  and 
ceremonies,  but  are  looked  down  upon  by  the  Hindus  and  re- 
proached for  drinking  tea  with  the  Tibetans  when  visiting  Tibet. 
This  custom,  though  contrary  tc  Hindu  caste  rules,  they  cannot 
avoid,  as  the  merchants  of  Tibet  will  conclude  no  bargain  without 
the  friendly  preliminary  of  drinking  tea. 

In  character  the  (Hindu)  people  of  Kumaun  and  Garhwa], 
as  becomes  a  mountain  race,  are  sturdier  and  more  independent 
than  the  Hindus  of  the  plains.  They  have  enjoyed  great  advan- 
tages, particularly  under  the  long  and  benevolent  rule  of  the 
"king  of  Kuraaun,"  Sir  Henry  Ramsay,  late  Commissioner  of  the 
province.  In  former  days  the  Kumaunis  bore  an  excellent 
character  for  honesty,  simplicity,  and  good-nature,  and  it  is  to  be 
hoped  that  they  will  continue  to  keep  this  reputation. 

It  would  be  an  enjoyable  task  to  give  a  sketch  of  the  his- 
tory of  the  country  from  early  times,  abounding  as  it  does  in  the 
romantic  incidents  always  to  be  met  with  in  the  history  of  a 
mountain  people.  But  such  an  account  would  take  up  too  much 
space,  and  we  can  only  recommend  the  reader  who  desires  further 
information  to  consult  the  large  and  valuable  treatise  on  the  sub- 
ject (Gazetteer  of  the  North  West  Provinces,  vol  XI)  written  by  the 
late  Mr  E-  T.  Atkinson.  Kumaun  is  closely  connected  through 
its  early  history,  and  by  reason  of  its  containing  the  sacro-sanct 
Himalayas,  with  the  entire  legendary  system  and  mythology  of 
India,  (the  references  to  it  in  the  ancient  Sanskrit  scriptures  being 
very  numerous)  while  in  many  ways  the  story  of  the  country  illus- 
trates and  throws  light  on  the  most  interesting  questions  of  history 
and  archaeology. 

Almora,  Nov.  7th.  1892  E.  S.  0. 


CONTENTS. 


Subject.                               A 
Ability            ...             

Fage. 
1 

1 

Absenf-miTifipfine^^          ......                    ...... 

1 

Acp,i(i(*nf               k                ...                    a..... 

2 

Adversity        ...             

Advice  (bad)   ...             

Aggravation  of  Evils      

Agriculture      ...             

Alternative       ...               ••..••                   ••••.. 

2 

4 

4 

4 

6 

6 

B 

Baniyas  or  shop-keepers    ...                ••..». 

Betrayers        ...             

Bitt,er feelintr  ...              ......                   

7 

5 

9 

Bravery  and  Courage     

Bribery  and  Gifts           

c 

Calamity          ...             

Caste                ...             

10 

12 

13 

14 

Character         ...             

14 

Charity  and  Alms           

16 

Chastity  and  Unchastity    ...                

19 

Cheats             ...            

19- 

Clear  Conscience            

21 

Comfort  and  Discomfort     ...                

22 

Common  Property          

Consolation  and  Encouragement           

2.!? 

23 

Suhject. 

Contentment  .•. 

D 

E 
F 

Fage. 
27 

Courage  under  despair  

Coward             ...              ...... 

29 

29 

Critical  periods                

Debts,  Loans,  and  Surety  ... 
Deceit              ...             

30 

30 

33 

Deferred  hopes                

■ 36 

Dependence    ...             

37 

Dilatory  habits                

38 

Dilemma          ...              

38 

Disappointment.             

41 

Dishonesty      ...             

42 

Disinterestedness            

43 

Distress           ...              

44 

Disunion          ...             

46 

Doff  in  the  manser         

47 

Dnplioity         ...              

47 

Economy  or  frugality    

47 

Envy                ...             

4Q 

Evil  propensities  and  habits 

51 

Extravagance   ...             

51 

Falsehood        ...             

KA 

False  alarm     ...             

^f\ 

False  hopes     ...              

Ka 

False  modesty                 

Kft 

False  promises                

fifi 

Family  or  household      

59 

Subject.  Page 

Fate  or  destiny                . 59 

Fault-finding  ...             67 

Fear  or  Servility            69 

Folly  or  imprudence       69 

Foolish  ambition            ......                 80 

Fops,   boasters,  and  fastidious  people  82 

Forbearance    ...             84 

Force  or  Compulsion      86 

Friendship  and  Estrangements  ......                 88 

Future  apprehensions  or  contingencies     ...                 89 

G 

Gambling        ...             90 

Gifts  from  relatives        90 

Gift  of  the  gab                90 

God's  judgments             92 

Good  luck       ...             93 

Good  or  bad  signs  or  omens                  96 

Good  words    ...             101 

Gratitude        ...             101 

Great  men       ...             102 

Greed              ...             104 

Guilty  conscience          105 

H 

Habits  and  nature          106 

Health            ...             114 

Help               ...            ......                114 

Helpfulness  (true)          115 

Home             ...            115 

Hope               ...             116 

Hypocrites      ...             116 

Hunger  the  best  sauce  ...... 118 


Subject.                                 I 

Tage 
119 

111  recompense                

Ill  luck            ...             

119 

122 

Immodesty      ...              

Impossibilities                

Improper  friendship      

Improper  union              

Inadequate  or  insufficient  help             

122 

123 

125 

126 

126 

127 

Incompetency                 

Incongruity    ...             

Independence ...             

Indifference    ...              

127 

130 

130 

134 

Indulofence      ...              

134 

Industry         ...             

Infiaence         ... 

135 

141 

Inheritance     ...              .••••.                   

141 

Injustice  and  Oppression  ...                 

Innocence       •.•             

141 

157 

Inopportune  acts            ......                 

Insignificant  or  unprofitable  business  

Interference    ... 

158 

161 

162 

Intoxicating  drugs         

Irony              ...             ..,,..                 

Irretrievable  losses         

163 

164 

174 

J 

Jealousy          ...             ......                 

Joint  property                

K 

Kindness         ...             

174 

175 

I7(i 

King  and  his  subjects    

176 

Subject.                              L 
Lame  excuse    ...             

Page. 
177 

Laziness,  Sloth,  or  Sluggishness            

ISI 

Litigation  and  Justice    

1«8 

Management  (bad)           

101 

Meanness         ...             

lOj 

Meritorious  acts,  goodness,  or  virtue  and  honesty 

, IQ/i 

Middle  or  moderate  course                     

902 

Miscellaneous                 

90^ 

Miser               ...             

211 

Mock  modesty                

2T2 

Modesty           ...             

9iq 

Money            ...              

....             91^ 

Motives           ...              

211 

Munificent     men  &  heroes                    

2T4. 

Mutability  of  worldlj'  wealth                 

Mutual  respect                

215 

2]fi 

National  unity                .... 

217 

Natural  capacity  or  genius                      ,... 

21  7 

Nature  of  world  and  human  nature      

917 

New  compared  with  old     ...                  .... 

, 218 

Novelty         ...               .... 

21Q 

0 

Obstinate  and  stubborn  people             .... 

210 

Old  aTe           ... »                  .... 

220 

One  in  distress  wishes  another  to  be  so     ...                 .... 

200 

One's  own  deeds  etc.,  never  bad           .... 

226 

One's  own  faults  and  failings .... 

226 

Opportune  acts               ,,.. 

226 

Opportunity    ...              

226 

VI 


Subject. 

Paramours       ...              

P 

Q 
R 

on        ...... 

:'s  deeds 

Page. 
228 

Patience           ...             

229 

Patronage        ...              

229 

Peculiarities  of  low  hill  people 
Perseverence  &  Determination 

230 

231 

Petty  transactions            

Polygamy        ...              

Poor  people     ...              

Poverty            ...              

Power  and  Position         

23r 

236 

237 

242 

244 

Precept  and   Practice      

Pride  and  Haunrhtiness   

246 

247 

Prosperity  and  Affluence    ... 

Prostitutes        ...              

Prudence  and   Precaution 

Quarrels  and  Discords     

252 

256 

257 

286 

289 

Readiness  for  contingencies 
Regret,  repining,  or  dissatisfacti 
Rejoicing  at  other's  calamity 

Relationship                      

Remedy             ...              

Reputation        ...              

Requitals  and  retribution 
Responsibility  or  liability  for  one 
Ridicule  and  laughter 
Rivals               ...              .      • 

291 

291 

3oi 

302 

313 

315 

316 

316 

326 

327 

Ruinous  and  fruitless  efforts 

328 

Vll 


Subject.                                S 
Secrets             ...             

Page. 
332 

Self-esteem      ...            ...... 

333 

Self-help  and  exertion    

Self-interestednesa          

334 

335 

Selfishness        ...             ......                 ...... 

338 

Rhamelessness ...             ......                 ...... 

342 

Simpletons       ...             

Slanderers  and  whisperers  ...                 ...... 

Social  habits  and  cnstoms  ...                 ...... 

344 

345 

346 

Societj             ...             ...... 

Solitary  man    ...             ......                 ...... 

Stolen  property                ......                 

Suspicion          ... 

Sympathy        ...             

T 

Temptation      ...             

Thieves,  pick-poctets  and  bad  characters ... 

Things  in  which  one  has  no  concern 

Trust  in  proridence        ...... 

Truth  and  Sincerity ...... 

IJ 

Unanimity       ...             ......                 ...... 

Unavoidable  expences  and  things          ...... 

Uncertainty  of  life  and  worldly  things 

Ungratefulness                ......                 

Unrequited  affection       ......                  ...... 

Usefulness        ...              ......                  ...... 

351 

351 

352 

3^2 

353 

354 

355 

356 

356 

„      357 

358 

360 

360 

366 

366 

366 

TTsplpssness       •••               •««■*•                   *•"•« 

367 

V 

Vacillation  ...                   ......                   ...... 

372 

Vanity,  assumption  and  pretension       

Virtue  of  necessity         r-.-,                 ...... 

Visiting  foreign  country ...... 

373 

376 

, 376 

Till 

Suhject.  W  ^m- 

•  377 

Want  of  appreciation  

Want  of  sympathy  •  ^'^^ 

Wickedness      --.  •  • 

Wilfulness        ...  l^'^ 

Witness  ...  ••••••  

^  ...  384 

Women  •••  

Wort  and  >*ages  °°' 

World  ^^^ 

.  r.  388- 

Appendix         ...  •••.••  •••••• 


PROVERBS  &  FOLK-LORE  OF  KUMAUN 
&  GARHWAL 


ABILITY. 

1  ^^  fi[^TT  «T58^  f%    ^T^    ^TI«iT    ^   f5|%T.      Sarbi 
sbikara  masurai  ki  dala  barabara  ke  nibo. 

Is  not  even  rotten  meat  better  than  ddla  o  masura  {vetch)? 

E.  g.  Ability,  though  of  a  very  iuferior  kind,  is  better  than 
incompetence.  Masura  is  a  kind  of  pulse.  {Lentil  urvum  Idrsutum 
or  cicer  lens). 

2  ^I^  ^  ^IT  ?TTT51T?T   KT^T  f^^r   %m^.       Cbora  jai 
mora  maranata  bbabara  rito  bai  janu. 

If  thieves  killed  peacocks  the  jungle  would  have  become 
clear  of  them. 

I.  e.  If  fools  are  to  do  the  work  who  will  ask  for  wise  tuen  ? 

3  ^^T  f^^T^  TT''C«TI?T  ^T'f  ^T  'T^.    Kawa  sbikara  marana 
ta  baja  ko  pala. 

If  a  crow  could  hunt,  what  need  could  there  he  for  keep- 
ing a  falcon? 

Used  to  show  that  if  illiterate  and  ignorant  people  could 
be  of  use  there  would  be  no  necessity  for  getting  the  services  of 
learned  and  wise  people. 

ABSENCE  OF  MASTER. 

1  5H5.f^f%  ^  TiTS  g^T  517=^^..    Jakba  bili  ni  takba  uiisa 
nacbani. 

When  there  is  no  cat  mice  dance. 

C.  f.  "When  the  cat  is  away  the  mice  will  play."  People  are 
iiable  to  go  wrong  when  there  is  no  control  whatever  over  them. 

ABSENT  MINDEDNESS. 

1  ailf^  ^^f  II  5[^T  ^  sll^r.      Godi  mc  laraka  sbabara 
me  dhandola. 


(     2     ) 

The  child  is  in  one's  arms,  but  search  is  made  for  him 
throughout  the  town. 

Applied  to  one's  missing  a  thing' which  is  near  at  hand  all 
the  time — like  the  old  lady  looking  for  her  spectacles,  which 
are  all  the  time  on  her  own  nose. 

2  ■^Tl  «IT^  "^^f  'S'^^T^T.     Bana  banai  balada  harano. 

The  bullock  disappeared  while  in  the  act  of  ploughing. 

One  wonders  at  his  own  carelessness  when  he  loses  sight  of 
the  tool  with  which  he  is  working. 

ACCIDENT. 

1  ^l«!%f^  ^JZ  fS^Wl.     Analai  ki  cliota  kanala. 

One  who  aimed  at  the  anald  {i.  e.  the  lower  edge  of  a  field) 
hit  the  kandld  {i.  e.  the  upper  edge). 

Applied  to  some  attempt  which  has  resulted  differently  from 
what  was  intended  or  expected. 

2  ^^T^T  %j  ^T1%  ^13  ^I  5^*T.     Ba3'ala  ko  lagano  bota 
ko  dhalanu. 

The  tree  fell  down  as  the  wind  bleio. 

E.  g.  An  old  rotten  tree  fell  before  the  blast  of  an  ordinary 
wind.  Used  by  an  innocent  person  saying  that  he  was  blamed  for 
nothing,  for  the  ruin  or  catastrophe  was  certain  to  occur.  Every 
effect  must  have  a  cause.  People  must  find  an  explanation  (in  a 
wrong  sense)  for  every  misfortune. 

ADVERSITY. 

1  ^jw  ^I  ?:rT^T  fTfT^T   Tl'flt  "^'5  ^T  ^Z^  ^fT^l.       Nawa 
nau  itaro  tataro  pani  pena  ko  phutyun  pataro. 

Such  a  gi  eat  name  and  such  a  great  fame  but  a  broken 
vessel  {lota)  to  drink  xoater  with. 

Applied  by  one  who  bemoans  present  adversiiy  followinof 
former  prosperity. 

2  l[^  f^^^  ^^^  *fi^  ^^r  M^^  ^^  fsr^'sTT.      Eka 
rikha  ki  dara  le  bhurha  paitho  wan  tina  rikha  nikala. 


{     3    ) 

To  save  himstlffrom  one  bear  he  entered  a  hedge  where 
he  found  three. 

Out  of  the  frying  pan  into  the  fire. 

Tborhi  udhariyo    jyada   udharalo  jo   sudharano   lagai  so 

puro  h  olo. 

The  portion  of  the  wall  which  has  given  way  is  sure  to  fall, 
and  also  to  fall  further ;  and  the  portion  which  is  being  built 
or  repaired  is  sure  to  be  finished. 

C.  f.  Adversity  and  prosperity  do   not   come   alone   but  in 
train."  "It  never  rains  but  it  pours." 

4  ^Tf^3l4')'  '^ir  TI^  ^^Wf^  jf^  ^T?/.      Ghara  ki  jali   bana 
gayun  bana  men  duni  aga. 

Being  burnt  out  of  my  home  I  fed  to  the  jungle  where  I 
found  a  fire  twice  as  fierce. 

C.  f.  "Out  of  the  frying  pan  into  the  fire. 

5  ^Tf%  5»*IT  ^^T  ^f^T.     Thori  jaga  gilo  ato. 
Narrow  quarters  and  thin  gruel. 

Used  to  denote  wretched  circumstances. 

6  »fit^  'if?^  IT  ^T^T^  SRTT  ^TH^.     Pbanda  phutali  ta 

karadorhi  kya  thambhali. 

If  the  stomach  is  ruptured,  the  waist  chain  {worn  by  mcfi 
as  an  ornament)  will  not  be  able  to  -tupport  it. 

This  means  that  if  one's  fate  is  adverse  his  friends  and 
relatives  cannot  help  him  :  they  are  only  ornaments  in   prosperity. 

7  cRH'^^'at  ^T  ^T^T  ^%T«    Kamabakhati  ko  ato  gilo. 

The  dough   of  an  unlucky   man  is   too   thin  to  irmke 
bread  with. 

I.  e.  Nothing  prospers  in  the  hand  of  an  unlucky  man. 
Illustrated  by  the  following  story  : — 

There  was  a  family  which  consisted  of  husband,  wife,  and 
son.     The    family'    being    in    very    poor    circumstances    began  to 


(     4     ) 

offer  their  prayers  and  penances  to  Maliodeva  a  god  who  seeing 
their  sustained  piety  and  devotion  was  pleased  with  them. 
He  appeared  to  them  and  said  be  would  grant  one  boon  t* 
each.  On  this  they  asked  permission  to  be  allowed  to 
present  their  requests  the  next  day,  accordingly  the  wife  asked 
that  she  might  become  a  queen  ;  instantly  she  became  a  most 
beautiful  woman.  Just  then  a  king  passing  by  that  way  became 
enamoured  of  her,  and  carried  her  off.  After  this  the  husband's 
turn  came,  He  on  hearing  that  his  wife  had  been  taken  away  by 
the  king,  was  sore  distressed  and  moved  the  deity  to  ■  change  his 
•wife  (who  had  already  become  a  q-ae.en)  into  a  sow  and  send  her 
to  him.  This  also  eame  to  pass.  After  this  the  son,  who  saw 
what  had  happened  before  to  his'  father  and  mother,  went  t* 
Mahadeva  and  said  that  he  wanted  nothing  but  to  have  his 
mother  become  the  wife  of  his  father  as  befere.  The  deity 
granted  this  also-. 

ADVICE  (BAD.) 

1   rf^T  ^X  ^Tf%  ?i^T   ^^  ^^'      Tero  ghara  halidyuBlo 
main  ke  delai. 

What  wiliyou  give  me  if  I  ruin  your  house  1 
Applied  to  one  vfho  gives  bad  advice. 

AGGRAVATION  OF  EVILS. 

1  ^r'^TTT  ^<!!«     Dada  ma  lima. 

Applying  salt  to  a  hum, 

"To  add  insult  to  iniu^3^" 

Used  by  one  whose  feelings  are  hurt  when   he  is   in-  distress-. 

2  »rfx:^T  ^I^T  '^'t^T  '^%T^T«     Marija  syapa  ka  ankba? 
kbachorana. 

To  prick  the  eyes  of  a  dead  snake. 

Applied  to  one  who  slanders    or   insults    an    enemy    who    is 
dead  or  is  m  distress  or  poverty.     Hitting  a  man  when  he  is  down. 

AGRICULTURE. 

1    g^Tl^^lft  ^^^  ^'S^  '^'SZ  '^TWi^  f^^2  ^I»J.     Uttam=* 
kk^ti  madbyama  bannja  akbata  cbakari  bikata  joga. 


(     5    ) 

Agriculture  is  best,  cominerce  comes  next,  service  is  full  of 
trouble,  but  the  life  of  an  ascetic  is  the  most  difficult  of  all. 

Advice  to  all  to  follow  the  professions  of  agriculture  and 
commerce,  and  dissuading  them  from  taking  service,  or  becoming 
hermits. 

2  tjj^  ^VT«!»Ti:^  ■^T5iT  td  Jigi»r«  Dhana  padbana  madnwa 
raja  gyun  gulania. 

Rice  the  head  man,  millet  the  king,  and  wheat  the  slave. 

Applied  by  hill  people  to  indicate  the  A'arying  amounts  of 
their  staple  crops.  Also  interpreted  thus,  that  the  paddy  is  sold 
and  the  proceeds  of  it  go  to  the  head-man  of  the  village  in  payment 
of  revenue  or  rent  :  the  wheat  is  utilized  in  satiifying  Chaprdsi» 
(peons)  and  government  messengers  &c,  whereas  the  millet  is  the 
only  support  of  the  family. 

3  5T  %T  ^^T  "l^^  %T  ^^T.  Dura  ko  sero  najika  ko  kero. 

Irrigated  fields  at  a  distance  are  of  no  more   value   than 
the  small  plots  of  ground  near  the  house. 

The  plots  close  to  one's  house  are  as  valuable  as  irrigated^ 
land  which  is  far  off,  inasmuch  as  it  requires  more  trouble  andl 
expense  to  cultivate  it. 

4  ^^T  ^  ■^l^.'^TII  ^1T^.    Maila  ki  bala  khaya  kl  gala. 
Manure  produces  fine  crops  and  good  food  fat  cheeks. 

Spoken  in  praise  of  good  tillage  and  generous  diet. 

5  iffTf  'a^T  %fTT«     Kheti  khasama  seti. 

The  tillage  {prospers  only)  when  the  master  is   there,  or  it 
veeds  clase  personal  attention. 

Applies  to  other  business  also. 

6  ^^^J  TT5IT  «r^  ^%T  fT^  *T15jr.  Maduwa  raja  jaba  sekaiB 
taba  taja. 

Maduwd  {millet)  is  a  king,  for  itbecomes  fresh  when  h^emtedL 

Poor  people  make  bread  of  the  maduwa  flour  which  they 
take  with  them  on  a  journey.  They  heat  the  eakes  before  they 
eat  them.  This  process  makes  lliem  as  fresh  as  if  they  were 
eooked  at  the  moment. 


(     6     ) 

7  ^t:^  '^r{  %j  QTTT^  73.      Barklie  liyun  ta  ko   samala 

gyun. 

1/  snow  falls,  who  will  be  able  to  gathei'  in  all  the  wheat ! 
(eV  will  be  so  plentiful). 

This  is  applicable  to  high  table  lands  ;  for  the  rain  that  falls 
there  runs  down  the  slopes,  but  the  snow  melts  gradually  and 
soaks  into  the  ground,  and  thus  causes  better  crops. 

8  H^  ^■^  '^^  TT5I«     Mala  kbeti  bala  raja. 

The  tillage  depends  on  manure,  and  the  reign  on 
strength  {^army). 

Used  to  appreciate  the  power  of  manure. 

ALTERNATIVES. 

1  ^%  fsi^^T  ^^^^  f^TT^^  ^i  ^%^  ^\W^m  ^I^r  HIT 

%%  ^^^r  31^  ^1  ITT'  Jfiiie  ni  dekho  syii  u  dekha  biralu, 

jaile  ni  dekhi  bau  u  deklia  .bau   ko   bhai,  jaile  ni   dekho 

thaga  u  dekha  nai. 

Whoever  is  anxious  to  see  a  tiger,  or  a  bride  or  a  cheat 
should  gratify  his  curiosity  by  looking  at  their  miniatures — 
viz,  a  cat,  the  bride  s  brother,  and  a  barber. 

This  is  quoted  when  for  some  greater  thing  or  business 
a  lesser  is  made  to  answer.  E.  g.  if  a  priest  prescribes  a  buffalo 
for  sacrifice  the  man  offers  only  a  cook. 

ANGER. 

1  ^'^T'^^T  ^T^T^*     Gussa  barho  hosyara. 

Anger  is  very  wise. 

I.  E.  Anger  breaks  out  against  one's  subordinates,  not 
against  those  who  are  one's  superiors. 

2  =^%isrT  ^T^TfT  ^T^  ^^^OT  ^T^r"^*  Chabauna  ka  danta 
aura  dekhuna  ka  aura. 

The  molar  teeth  are  different  from  those  that  are  seen. 

To  show  one's  teeth  represents  anger,  but  to  grind  the  teeth 
is  a  sion  of  great  rage — represents  different  degrees  of  anger. 


f     7     ) 

apani  mo  buddbi  khowa  birani  mo. 

Anger   ruins   one's    own   family,    but  wisdom    that  of 
one's  enemy. 

Caution  against  losing  one's  temper. 


BANIYAS  OR  SHOP-KEEPERS. 

1  JJ^I.'g  \j  Jfill  f%?lT  >ff^^  ^'5  f^'^J'      Gangoli  ko  kana- 

kiya  bhali  kai  dana  kiya. 

This  man  who  brinfis  flour  {to  sell)  is  of  Gangoli  (a  par- 
gana  of  the  Kamaun  district)  you  should  cheat  him  well. 

A  resilient  of  Ganjroli,  though  seemingly  simple,  is  very 
cnnning.  Once  a  man  of  Gangoli  brought  some  flour  to  Almora 
for  sale.  The  Baniya  who  was  to  buy  it  had  received  a  hint  from 
his  friend  (another  Baniya)  in  the  words  of  the  proverb,  "to  deceive 
him  well."  The  man,  though  he  understood  the  hint,  kept  silent, 
keeping  his  own  counsel,  but  when  he  sold  his  flour  and  received 
the  price,  he  replied  to  the  baniyas  as  below,  and  disappeared. 

2  jri5ijf€  ^r^T^r  ^^"^  ^rz  ^i%  ^^  ^z  ^r^r*    Grangoii  ko 

lato  pancha  banta  khadi  eka  banta  ato. 

The   dumb   {simpleton's  of  Oangoli  {who  has    brought) 
5  parts  of  powdered  chalk  mixed  with  one  part  o   real  flour 
for  sale. 

This  mortified  the   Baniyas  and   gave  them   a  good   lesson. 

Illustration.  This  trait  extends  even  to  the  'bullocks  of 
Gangoli.  A  story  is  related  that  once  a  Gangoli  bullock  was  pitted 
aoainst  another  bullock,  the  contest  consisting  in  drinkins  from  a 
pool.  The  animal  which  drank  the  most  water  was  to  be  declared 
the  victor.  The  Gangoli  bullock  kept  his  mouth  in  the  water 
feigning  to  drink  without  intermission.  The  other  animal  thinking 
his  antagonist  was  continually  drinking  exerted  himself  to  the 
utmost,  and,  being  unable  to  endure  the  strain,  fell  down  and  died, 

3  '^f5?l7  %  ^^I^r  "^r^r*     Baniya  hai  sayano  baulo. 

Any  man  more  acute  than  a  Bania    (merchaiit)    is    a 
madman. 


(     8     ) 

Another  name  for  a  Bania  is  "Sau"  or  "Saha"  which  also 
means  one  hundred,  and  so  villagers  say  he  is  called  "Sau  '  because 
he  has  a  hundred  cunning  ways. 

4    %T^  Jl"?  ?^T^r  W>  ^^.  ^^«     Sau  jyu  gurba  kliawau 
lekba,  lekha,  lekha. 

0  Sir,  come  and  eat  some  treacle  !    tvrite  it  down,   write 
it  down,  write  it  down  ! 

(The  Baniya  invites  a    simple    fellow  to    come    and    eat    his 

wares  ;  but  at  the  same    time  instructs    his  servants    to    make   an 

entry  in   the    account-book     against   him,  for    the    price    of  the 

article   eaten).     An    ironical    phrase  used  against  Banij-as,    who 

are  outwardly    very    polite    when   offering  their    commodities   for 

sale,  but  internally  wishing  to  deceive  their  customers    or   visitors 
or  guests. 

5  ^-^sj  %  ^^\m  ^f^igj  ^f^^T  %  ^?ITWT  I^IT.     Sabana  hai 

sayano  Baitiya  Baniya  bai  sayano  gawara. 

The  Baniya  who  is  most  sly  is  exceeded  by  a  villager 
in  craft. 

I.  c.  The  Banij'a  is  the  most  cunning  of  all,  but  he  is  no 
match  for  a  villager. 

This  is  used  to  imply  that  no  one  can  cheat  a  Baniya 
except  a  villager,  or  that  no  respectable  man  can  cheat  a  Baniya 
(shop-keeper). 

6  5TT  ^^T  %r  I^T  ^?T  *fiT«      Kurba  paitbo   sau   garba 
paitbo  jbau. 

The  entry  of  a  Baniya  into  one's  house  and  that  of  jhau 
{a  kind  of  wild  plant  which  overgrows  fields)  into  a  field 
{is  ruinous). 

Applied  to  debt  contracted,  or  credit  accounts  entered  into 
with  a  Baniya,  since  the  transaction  will  surely  ruin  the  person 
concerned,  just  as  a  single  plant  of  Jhau  rooting  itself  in  a  field 
will  overgrow  the  whole  field. 

BETRAYERS. 

1  K^T  ^I^T  %  >TT1T  ^^K  ^IIT^  ^^r^rTK  ^m?;.    Bbalo 
holo  kai  Bha2;a  bulai  Bbaga  le  bhadra  men  taf  lajrai. 


f    9     ) 

Bhdgd  was  sent  for  in  order  to  do  good,   but  she  on  the 
contrary  put  the  pan  on  the  fire  in  an  inauspicious  moment. 

The  cooking  of  sweetmeats  for  festivities  such  as  tonsure 
marriage  &c,  &c,  must  be  commenced  in  an  auspicious  moment. 
"Bhadra"  is  an  unlucky  portion  of  a  certain  day  or  night  which 
is  always  avoided  by  consulting  an  almanack.  Used  of  one  who, 
being  depended  on  for  help,  betrays  one. 

2  »l^  ^^K  tz  TT^^T*    Grurha  dibera  inta  marano. 

To  allure  one  with  gui'ha  (treacle)  and  then  to  smite  him 
with  a  bric'c. 

Applied  to  one  who  betrays  another  after  having  taken  him 
into  his  confidence.  Such  persons  are  generally  likened  to  a  jar 
which  is  full  of  poison,  but  a  little  milk  is  put  on  the  top  of  the 
jar  to  tempt  people  with. 

3  »l^  cRj  m^  f^^f^T'    Crurlia  ka  satha  bikha  dino. 
With  the  sweet,  poison  is  given. 

A  pleasant  manner  covering  an  intention  to  deceive. 

BITTER  FEELINGS. 

1  ^f%3  vr2  ^^l  5^«     Aditha  bheta  dukhana  thesa. 

We  are  sure  to  meet  with  a  man  we  dislike  and  hate,  and  a 
sore  part  of  the  body  is  sure  to  be  hit. 

2  ^ifT  ^^^  ■^I^'tt  ^T^TT  l\^  ^T.     Paile  ta  ullu  basa  ni 
basa  ta  gu  khaun  kara. 

Owls  generally  remain  silent,  but  whenever  they  open  their 
mouths  they  make  a  very  melancholy  and  horrid  sound. 
A  gruff  and  surly  person. 

3  ^g|t  ^T  ^^  5)^r  'ntrgfl-  ^  v;m  »fiT?r«    TelcLi  ko 
tela  jalau  masbalachi  kl  gana  phatau. 

The  master's  oil  is  being  used,  but  the  torch-bearer  is  afraid 
of  wasting  it. 

Applied  to  one  who  is  jealous  of  another's  generosity. 

B 


(     10     ) 

4  TT51T  %1  ^TT  5iT^  V%Til  %T  f%^T  ^TZT.       Raja   ko 

bhandara  jawa  mnhata  ko  liiyo  phatau. 

As  the  treasure  of  a  king  is  being   spent  the  heart  of  the 
treasurer  is  rent. 

This  refers  to  one  who    prevents  another  from  giving  to    a 
third  person,  or  his    being    benefitted    by    another. 

Story  :  Once  a  king  gfive  an  order  for  a  Inrge  sum  of  money  to 
be  given  to  a  poor  mjin,  who  taking  the  order  went  to  the  treasurer 
to  ask  for  the  money.  The  treasurer  having  refus^ed  payment 
wrote  back  on  the  order  to  the  king  saying  that  the  sum  ordered 
to  be  paid  was  too  much,  a  king  ought  to  store  money  to  be  used 
in  time  of  distress.  The  man  took  the  paper  back  to  the  king,  who 
wrote  on  the  same  paper  that  a  fortunate  man  hns  no  distress  at  all, 
and  sent  it  again  to  the  treasurer,  who  returned  it  to  the  kine,  having 
written  on  it  thus  "If  ntr.ny  time  God  f  fortune)  should  forsake  you  ?" 
The  king  rend  the  remarks  of  his  treasurer,  and  wrote  on  the  paper 
again,  "If  God  is  against  me  at  any  time,  the  wealth  will  also 
vanish  "  As  soon  as  the  treasurer  read  the  final  order  he  was  quite 
convinced  of  the  truth  of  the  king's  remark,  and  paid  the  money. 
Hence  the  proverb. 

BRAVERY  &  COURAGE. 
1  ''?f^?rr  %^  ^JfT  Ml^r*     Bali3^a  deklii  bliutabbajau 

A  ghost  even  flies   before  a  strong  man.      No   one  can 
oppress  the  strotig. 

Once  a  man  having  become  bankrupt  left  his  village 
and  went  away  to  another  country  with  his  family  and 
goods  iu  search  of  a  livelihood.  One  night  he  happened 
to  stop  at  a  |il  ice  where  dead  bodies  were  burnt,  callfd 
'"Shamashana"  which  is  supposed  to  be  full  of  ghosts  and  evil 
spirits.  As  soon  as  the  night  came  on  a  murderous  ghosl  a[)peared 
before  him.  Tiie  mafi  at  once  told  his  daugnter-in-law  to  bind  the 
ghost.  She  lost  no  tiuic  in  running  after  him  with  a  cord  for  the 
purpose.  He  also  told  his  son  and  wife  to  cut  off  the  lieid  of  the 
ghost.  As  soon  as  thev  got  this  order  from  the  old  man  they  both 
ran  after  the  ghost  with  a  sword  and  an  axe,  and  having  caught 
him  were  ab  lut  to  behead  him.  The  ghost  implored  them,  and 
said  if  thev  Sfiared  him  he  would  shew  them  five  jars  of  gold 
coin  buried  in  a  certain  place.  On  this  the  old  man  was  shewn 
the  place  and  took  possession  of  the  money,  and  then  told  the 
members  of  his  family  to  let  the  ghost  go  uninjured.  Thus 
having  possessed  himseif  of  the  wealth  the  man  returned  to   his 


(  11  ) 

home,  where  be  began  to  live  comfortnbly.  This  procedure  of  his 
struck  his  neighbours  with  nmnzpinent  and  suspicion  as  to  how 
he  hiid  become  rich.  On  close  enquiry  the  story  leaked  out  to 
some  one  who  bad  become  very  envious  of  the  old  man.  The 
envious  m;in  having  come  to  know  bow  the  other  man  became 
rich,  sold  bis  house  and  land  to  others  and  went  away  with  his 
family  to  the  s[)Ot  haunted  by  the  ghost.  As  the  night  came  on 
the  devil  appeared  before  him  ;  he  told  bis  dangliter-in-law  to 
have  him  bound,  but  she  fled  away  and  bid  her  fice  ;  he  al«o  at 
the  same  time  told  his  wife  and  son  to  cut  off  the  ghost's  bead, 
but  they  also  ran  away  for  fear  of  the  ghost.  The  man  himself 
was  also  frightened  at  his  appearance,  and  thus  the  ghost,  seeing 
them  all  timid  and  cowardly,  killed  them  one  by  one.  This  illustra- 
tion is  also  applied  to  the  following  proverbs. 

1  He    who    is   not  afraid    of  dving    will   do  every   thing 
fvide  under  the  head  "Uonsolation  and  Encouragement''J. 

2  He  who  is  afraid  will  die,  (vide  under  the  head  •"Consola- 
tion and  Encouragement''). 

2  ?Tr"'ct  fl^^TT  51TT  JT^^TT.  ^laritalawaranamaguladara. 

Whoever  wields  a  sword  is  called  Guladdra   (  a  cliief). 

Thi-i  is  applied  to  a  soldier  (hero. J  and  also  to  one  who   does 
mischief  and  is  therefore  dreaded  and  cilled  a  champion. 

3  a*^f  %  ^T^  ^TlR  f^^l^fsT.     Junwan  ki  darale  "ha- 
gari  nikholini. 

One  should  not  take  off  her  shirt  for  fear  of  lice. 
Caution  against  unnecessary  alarm. 

4  gJT^^^T^W^^^  ^^T  ^1*      Tumale  cliucbo  pechha 
maile  ke  ghuno  pechliai. 

Did  you  alone  suck  the  breast  of  your  viofier  ?  and  did  I 
suck  the  Jcnee  of  my  mother  instead  of  her  breast  ? 
Used  to  intimidate.      Are  you  a  man  and  am  I  not  ? 

5  ^TTTf%  tiT^^T  i  ^15  ^T^TTX:  %rfH  liT^r.     Namardi 
Parmeshwara  le  decbha  mara  mara  taubhi  kauno. 

God  has  made  you  a  coward,  but  why  do  you  not  threaten 
to  beat  1 


(     12     ) 

I.  E.  Brave  words  sometimes  frighten  people.  They  should 
be  used  to  effect  one's  purpose. 

Story :  Once  a  he-goat  in  spite  of  the  remonstrance  of  his 
master,  an  agriculturist,  went  to  a  jungle  in  the  evening.  While 
in  the  jungle  he  was  seen  by  a  leopard,  who  followed  him,  and 
asked  him,  "Why  do  you  wander  in  the  jungle  at  night  ?"  To  this 
the  goat  said,  "I  have  killed  many  elephants,  but  I  am  now  in 
search  of  a  leopard,  that  1  may  kill  him  also."  At  this  the  leopard 
took  fright.  On  hearing  the  conversation  a  jackal  went  after  the 
leopard  and  said  ''Shame  to  j'ou,  leopard,  that  you  are  frightened 
by  a  goat.  Let  us  go  and  kill  the  goat."  To  this  the  leopard 
said,  "0  Jack^il,  you  are  a  very  sly  creature,  and  consequently  not 
worthy  of  confidence,  the  goat  is  such  a  hero  that  he  has  killed 
many  elephants."  To  this  jackal  rejoined  "If  you  do  not  trust 
me,  let  us  tie  our  tails  together  so  that  we  may  help  each  other  in 
time  of  need,  and  kill  the  goat,  which  is  a  tasty  morsel  for  both  of 
us."  After  this  they  both  set  off  to  kill  the  goat.  As  soon  as  the 
goat  saw  these  two  fierce  animals  approaching  him  he  said, 
"Well,  my  dear  friend  jackal^  you  have  done  well  in  bringing  the 
leopard  to  me,  for  I  have  just  come  here  in  search  of  him."  This 
speech  so  frightened  the  leopard  that  he  fled  towards  a  precipice, 
while  the  jackal  ran  towards  the  goat.  But,  owing  to  the  leopard 
being  a  stronger  animal,  he  dragged  the  jackal  with  him,  and 
falling  down  the  steep  precipice  both  were  killed.  This  story  also 
explains  the  proverb  "The  taste  of  eating  "AuidaT  fa  wild  fruit 
used  for  medicines)  and  the  reason  of  an  old  man's  warning  are 
experienced  afterwards."     Vide  under  head  "Old  People." 

BRIBERY  &  GIFTS. 

1  "^tf^  ^T  ^T^T  TT^^T.     Chandi  ko  joto  mdrana. 
To  beat  a  man  with  a  silver  shoe. 

Applied  generally  to  getting  a  purpose  accomplished  through 
bribery,  gifts,  or  by  offering  rewards. 

2  <qj^  ^j  ^^3  "nill^T  ^W.     Chandl  ko  mekha  tamasho 
dekha. 

Drive  in  a  silver  nail  and  see  wonders  wrought. 

The  power  of  money,  which  is  called  the  "Assistant  God." 

3  wi^  ^  ^^3  ^W  ^^  ^IVm  k\^tf.      Mirdagga  ka 
mukha  lepa  le  bhali  awaja  auncbhya. 


(    13    ) 

The  kettledrum  sounds  well  when  its  mouth  is  smeared 
with  flour. 

By  giving  alms  or  bribes  you  can  get  any  amount  of  praise. 

4  mjf^  ^T^  ^^^  f^'TTT*      Khali    hatha    mukha    me 
nijanu. 

An  empty  hand  {fingers  with  no  food  in  them)  does 
not  go  into  the  mouth. 

Natives  of  India  convey  their  food  to  their  mouths 
■with  their  fingers,  in  other  words,  they  do  not '  enter  the  mouth 
without  food,  i.e.  one  will  not  thrust  his  fingers  into  his  mouth  except 
when  taking  food. 

No  one  will  do  any  work  without  remuneration  ;  or  used  by 
one  who  is  unwilling  to  do  work  without  wages  as  an  excuse 
for  his  denial. 


CALAMITY. 

1  ^1T  ^  ^r^T*  H"^^^  tTI^^«    TJpara  me  chapara,  ukala 
me  takula. 

Sorrow  upon  sorrow,  perplexity  upon  perplexity. 

E.  g.  One  calamity  or  perplexity  treading  upon  the  beels  of 
another.     "Misfortunes  never  come  single." 

2  ^^  f%  TIT  ^'^X  •!  'BIT'  Daiba  ki  mara  khabarana  sara. 

A  judgment  from   God — one  cannot  provide  against  or 
remedy  it. 

Applied  to  sudden  loss  without  any  opportunity  of  remedying 
or  preventing  it. 

3  ^T"<^  "^^l  f^<'r  T''C'!I«    Thati  harana  pita  marana. 

Birthright  gone  and  father  dead. 

An  overwhelming  calamity.  This  is  also  used  to  represent 
that  the  death  of  one's  father  is  as  ruinous  as  the  confiscation 
of  his  hereditary  home. 


(    u  ) 

Kakha   ten   bodun   bipata  ki  bata  eka  eka   bipata  nau 

nau  hatha. 

How  shall   T  describe  my  misfortunes  ?    Each  of  them   is 
nine  cubits  long. 

Used  by  one  complaining  of  great  mi9fortunes. 

CASTE. 

1  «T»II^  '3^3  »i]^  1]^  f^l'J^^*      Ma  gala  sahewa  gotra 

gala  ni  sahewa. 

One  can   tolerate  the  slandering  of  his  mother,   but  not 
that  of  his  caste. 

Showing  the  high  estimate  in  which  caste  is  held. 

CHARACTER. 

1  'StzT  ^r  ^^amr  ^2T  ^T 'ir"^  ^I'ar.     Beta  kya  dekhano 

beta  ka  yara  dekhana. 

A  sons  character  is  to  be  judged  by  the  character   of  his 
companions. 

2  y^j^^j  ?lff  ^TT^  TT^ST.      Dhanun  ko  ganwa  parala 

ten  siijha. 

A  village  in  which  paddy  is  grown  can  be  recognized  by 
the  straw  it  has  produced. 

3  5IT^  %T^T  ^fiWfV  ^1^  5liwt  ^I^  ^mr  SIT?.     Nam£ 

eaukara  kamaya  khawa  nami  chora  pakarha  jawa. 

A  noted  merchant  earns  more  and  more,   but  a   reputed 
thief  will  be  arrested  again  and  again. 

C.  f.  "Give  a  dog  a  bad  name  and  hang  him." 


(    15    ) 

4  »jf  ^r  ^'3'n*&  ^I*f»    Gaun  ko  lakshyana  gyunda  ten. 

The  condition  of  a  village  is  known  by  the  path  which 
leads  to  it. 

A  man's  character  is  known  by  his  conduct. 

5  ^i^  ^T  ^fT  'll?nf^^«       Handi  ko  sita  pachhyanida. 
The  potful  ot  rice  is  judged  by  one  grain   taken  out  of  it 

(as  to  whether  the  whole  potful  is  well  cooked  or  not). 

A  man's  character  or  disposition  is  known  from  a  single  deed. 

6  ^^'jl^  "^TW  n/%3  ^T^.     Jaiki  chha  bata   taiki   chha 
Bakba. 

Otily  a  man  of  good  repute  is  trusted  by  all. 

So  one  ought  to  be  very  careful  that  his  character   should 
remain  stainless. 

7  ^nn  ^^7{  s!  VT^T  ^ITT.   Sauna  saputa  na  bhado  kaputa. 

Neither  is  Sawana  {July)  a  good  son,  nor  Bhddo  {August) 
a  bad  son. 

Used  in  comparing  two  characters  equally  noted  for  wickedness. 

8  ^T^  ^^T  •!  W^T  ^^T«     Sauna  sukho  na  bhado  haro. 
Neither  Sauna  (July)  is  dry,  nor  Bhddo  (August)  green. 

Used  in  comparing  two  characters  equally  noted  for  wickedness. 

9  fiit^^TiT  ^  fTT'JWr  ^^^'^  ^  ^^"^T*    Tapyun  gbama  • 

ke  tapano  dekhyun  mainsa  ke  dekhano. 

He  who  has  felt  the  heat  of  the  sun  knows  what  sunshine 
is,  and  he  who  has  once  had  dealings  with  a  man  knows 
what  his  character  is. 

10  ^l^RT  ^^lil  1^12  '^Z•  Gaun  ka  lacbhyana  (laksbyana) 
galyatba  bati. 

One  can  foretell  the  condition  of  a  village  from  the  path 
leading  to  it. 

A  man's  character  is  evident  from  his  dealings. 


(     16     ) 
CHARITY  &  ALMS. 

1  '^^tlfT  Tt3T^17T«     Rakba  pata  rakhawa  pata. 

Be  charitable  to  others,  and  you  will  he  treated  charitably. 

This  is  generally  used  in  exhorting  one  not  to  expose  the 
faults  of  others,  so  that  they  should  do  the  same  to  you. 
C.  f.  "Judge  not  that  ye  be  not  judged." 
"Blessed  are  the  merciful,  for  they  shall  obtain  mercy." 
The  story  related  below  illustrates  the  proverb. 
Story :  One   morning  in   the   month   of  May,  the   Emperor 
Akabara  the  great,  his  son,    and  Birabara  his  prime  minister  went 
out  for  a  walk  together.     They  walked  several  miles.     As  soon  as 
the  sun  had  risen  the  monarch  felt  his    cloak  heavy  and  relieved 
himself  of  it  by  putting  it  on  the   shoulder  of  Birabara.     As  soon 
as  he  had  done  this,    his  son   also    followed   his   father's   example. 
On  this  the  Emperor  looking  at  Birabara   said   ironically  that  the 
load  was  enough  for  one  ass.    To  this   remark  Birabara  said,    "No 
sire,  the  load  I  am  bearing  is  properly  speaking  the  load   of  two 
asses.     "Tit  for  tat." 

2  ^T^T  ^  "^["IT^^I^T  ^T^I^.      Adara  ka  cbana  be- 

adara  ka  dakba. 

Even  gram  given  with  courtesy   is   better  than  grapes 
bestowed  with  contempt. 

I.  e.  A  little  given  kindly  is  better  than  much  bestowed 
■with  harshness  or  disdain. 

"Every  man  according  as  he  purposeth  in  his  heart,  so  let 
him  give  :  not  grudgingly,  or  of  necessity  ;  for  God  loveth  a 
cheerful  giver"   (2  Corin.  9.  7). 

3  ^^  ^  vt^  f^%  ^5^^^  ^cT  f%$T*     Bbikba  me 

bbikba  dino  tiaa  loka  jita  lino. 

He  who  gives  alms  out  of  what  he  has  received  as  alms 
{begged)  wins  three  worlds. 

This  proverb  is  generally  quoted  to  encourage  a  poor  person 
to  give  alms,  or  support  others. 

4  >jfii  iflWT  ^TTTT;  ^^T'    Bbuji  bono  satai  dino. 

To  bestow  an  alms  after  many  repulses  is  like  sowing 
parched  gi-ain  {i.  e.  bears  no  good  fruit). 


(     17     ) 

This  is  applied  to  one  who  gives  help  to  another  after 
putting  him  to  great  trouble  and  inconvenience.  This  kind  of 
giving  will  meet  with  no  reward  (merit),  just  as  parched  grain 
will  not  grow.  -C.  /.  "He  doubles  his  gift,  who  gives  in  time." 
"He  gives  twice,  that  gives  in  a  trice."  "The  Lord  loveth  a 
cheerful  giver." 

5  ^^^t  S«li  f%  ^'T  ^t  W«li  (%•    Swarga  son  teka  ni  dharma 
son  chheka  ni. 

Heaven  {the  sky)  needs  no  props,  and  a  virtuous  act  needs 

no  special  time,  or  alms  need  no  future  promises,    {for  its 

performance). 

This  is  used  to  encourage   one   to   do   good   deeds  without 
procrastination. 

6  ^^T  ^"Si  ^T%T  ^r^T^«     Jaiko  chunna  ui  ko  punya. 

The  reward  is  his  who  gives  (  the  flour  )   not  of  the   one 

who  receives. 


Used  to  encourage  charity. 


7  fs!^  ejci  ^ef[f  ^^.     Dinyun  dana  thukyun  thuka. 

An  alms  once  given,   is   as   phlegm  which   has   been   ex- 
pectorated, not  worth  tahing  back. 

8  si^T  ilj^j  ?T^T'3^T^T«    Jaso  bolo  taso  lawalo. 
As  much  as  yoxh  sow  so  much  you  will  reap. 

Applied  only  to  giving  charities.  In  a  future  existence  one 
will  be  blessed  in  proportion  to  one's  gifts  in  this  life.  "Whatsoever 
a  man  soweth  that  shall  he  also  reap."     (Gal.  6,7.) 

Illustration.  Once  there  was  a  poor,  simple,  and  virtuous 
beggar  living  with  his  wife  in  a  town.  He  used  to  earn  only  three 
clihatdks  (six  ounces)  of  flour  a  day,  whether  he  begged  at  five 
houses  or  fifty,  but  never  more.  One  day,  when  they  bad 
cooked  1\  cakes  with  the  three  chhatdks  of  flour,  a  saint  arrived 
there  who  said  that  he  was  very  hungry.  They  gave  him  the  l^ 
ready-made  cakes,  which  the  saint  ate  and  departed.  The  hermit 
then  went  to  God  and  interceded  for  the  poor  man,  but  God  shewed 
him  the  account  Book  and  said  that,  since  he  had  given  only 
1|  Rupees  in  his  former  existence,  he  was  not  entitled  to  more 
than  what  he  received,  and,  if  he  got  that  1 J  Rupees  at  one   time, 

C 


(     18     ) 

after  thai  he  would  get  nothing  more.  The  kind-hearted  saint 
then  petitionod  God  to  let  him  have  the  H  Rupees  :it  once,  and 
God  ijave  it  to  him.  Then  tlie  saint  came  biick  to  earth  again 
and  advised  the  poor  mnn  th;it  the  1  ^Rupees  should  be  spent  on 
charity,  ;ind  whatever  he  got  rhereatter  should  also  be  devoted 
to  the  help  of  poor  jiorsons.  The  beggar  did  ns  he  was  told.  The 
very  next  day  having  s|ient  1^  Rupees  on  charity  he  earntd  Rs-  3. 
and,  this  sum  also  having  been  given  to  poor  ])eople,  the  next  day 
he  got  JRft-  (5.  in  this  way  as  his  income  increaserl  he  increased 
Lis  alms  also,  sjiending  all  that  he  received  on  charity.  Alter  thLs 
the  same  saint  went  to  p.nradise  again  and  saw  God  in  the  form  of 
an  old  man  sitting  in  a  bending  posture.  On  his  enquiring  the 
cause  of  tliis,  God  said  that  the  man  who  had  received  1-J  iinpees, 
some  days  ago,  had  becouie  very  charitable  and  that  whatever 
he  got  he  gave  it  awaj'  to  the  poor,  and  that  his  charity  had  thus 
put  a  heavy  burden  upon  himself  After  this  the  saint  came  to  the 
man  again,  and  s.id  that  he  was  a  very  pious  man  and  pave  him 
advice  a*  to  his  saving  something  for  times  of  netd.  The  man 
being  puffed  up  with  ])i-ide  began  to  withhold  his  hand  fi-om 
charity,  an(i  the  consequence  was  he  became  poor  again  very  soon. 
6'./.  '-Much  is  expected  when  much  is  given."  "As  you  sow, 
so  you  shuil  reap." 

9  >T^7  ^i7?T  ^"^^igsf^  SHi[^«      Bhala   kama  aibana  kani 
dhnkani. 

The  good  deeds  of  a  man  cover  his  imperfections. 
C-  /•   '"Charity  covereth  a  multitude  of  sins." 

10  ^^T  ^Tf^  ^1  ^^T  ^3  ^^T   ^Tf^   ^^   ^31  f^"^'     ^^"sa 

gliani  laL'ai  dula  paitha  kawa  gliani  lagai  desha  phira. 

Put  a  hell  on  a  crow  and  he  files  to  distant  limits  ;  put  a 
hell  on  a.  mouse  and  he  run-^  to  his  hole. 

Used  to  induce  people  to  extend  their  charities  to  strangers. 
If  vou  do  a  kindness  to  a  stranger  he  will  praise  you  for  it  far 
and  wide  ;  if  you  help  a  fellow  countryman  he  will  be  ashamed 
to  sj.eak  about  it  and  will  keep  silent. 

11  fe^"^  %  f^Wi^"^  '^^T-      Dinera  bai  diwonera  barho. 

The  person  who  induces  another  to  give  is  hetter  than  tlie 
giver  (  himself). 

Used  as  an  inducement  to  charity. 


(     19     ) 
CHASTITY  &  UNCHASTITY. 

1  ^r^r  ^^W  '^T^  i^  ^(%r  "^^^T  '^J^'  ^'-^^  t^^  apana  apa  ni 
rau  tau  apnna  bapa. 

A  woman   loill  remain   chaste  herself,    hut  not  by  her 
father's  command. 

I.  e.  only  her  own  sense  of  honour  can  be  depended  on. 

2  cf^T  ^TW  "^1^  WZT  •^^^  -^X  :?[??  "^rl;   ^zr-      Buba 
ghara  tau  cbarai  kliuta  buba  gbara  nata  charai  khuta. 

When  my  father  is  at  home  my  mother  is  a  quadruped  and 
when  he  is  away  still  she  is  the  same. 
An  unchaste  woman. 

3  TI^  ^t^  ^  oftfT  '^''C'^fT'    Eanda  sanda  ki  kya  paratita. 

A  icoman  and  a  bidlock  are  not  to  be  trusted. 

I.  e.  Neither  the  chastity  of  a  woman  nor  the  behaviour  of  a 
bull  can  always  be  depended  on. 

4  ^^^  ^T^t^fT  '^Wii'  ^  '^fT*      Syaini  le  kbola  danta 

baika  le  pai  anta. 

When  a   woman  shoivs  her    teeth   ( spealcs  )   man  finds 
her  motive. 

Used  to  show  the  impropriety  of  a  woraan  conversing  with 
men,  as  it  is  not  the  custom  among  nntive  women  to  converse  freely 
with  men  other  than  their  own  relatives. 

CHEATS. 

1  ^T^'t)-  ^sj^  ■^J\■^■[  ^j^    f?lJT^^r'     Lalcbi    desba    me 

basfarba  bbukha  ni  luarana. 

Cheats  never  staive  in  an  avaricious  country. 

This  is  applied  to  one  who  is  teinnted  to  lay  out  money  at 
intffrest  in  an  unsafe  speculation  by  offers  of  high  interest.  The 
story  noted  below  illustrates  the  proverb.  In  a  certain  citv  a 
cheat  once  borrowed  a  small  vessel  from  a  rich  merchant  for 
cooking  his  food,  and  after  making  use  of  it  returned  the  vessel 
in  the  evening  with  another  new  vessel  smaller  than  the  first  one 


(     20    ) 

The  merchant  took  back  his  own,  but  refused  the  other.  On  thi^ 
the  cheat  said  that  he  could  not  help  it,  as  his  (the  merchants')  own 
vessel  had  given  birth  to  it,  and  it  justly  belonged  to  him.  After 
this  argument  the  merchant  was  glad  to  take  the  other  vessel, 
alleged  to  be  the  offspring  of  his  own  vessel.  Such  a  bargain  was 
repeated  by  the  cheat  several  times,  entirely  to  the  profit  of  the 
merchant,  who  in  the  meantime  became  quite  convinced  of  the 
man's  honesty.  Latar  on  the  cheat  began  to  borrow  from  him 
many  things  of  higher  value  and  returu  them  (with  the  several 
offspring  of  each)  iu  the  same  way  as  he  used  to  do  with  the 
smaller  things.  Finally  one  day  the  cheat  pretended  that  there 
was  a  marriage  in  his  family,  for  which  he  wanted  to  borrow  much 
jewellery  and  many  silver  vessels-;  the  merchant  without  any 
hesitation  lent  him  all  he  had  ;  the  cheat  took  them  all  away  as- 
usual,  and  never  appeared  again. 

2  ^ef^i  %  STjeut'      Sabana  hai  thaga  nal. 
A  barber  is  the  greatest  cheat  of  all. 

Used  to  represent  the  craft  of  a  barber.     The  following  story 
illustrates  the  pioverb. 

Illustration.     Among  the  36  arts   and   crafts   a   certain  king: 
was  skilled  in  35.     He  went  to  an  ascetic  to  learn  the  36th   or   the 
art  of  metamorphosing.      Contrary  to  the  advice  of  his   ministers- 
he  took  with  him  a  barber  who   was   a   favourite   of  his.      Though 
the  king  learnt  the  art  in  secret,  the  barber  somehow   managed   ta 
become  acquainted  with  it,  but  feigned  ignorance.     Once  at  night 
he  entreated  the  king  to  shew  him  the  wonders  of  the    36th  art 
that  he  had  learnt.     The  king  accordingly  after  instructing  the 
barber  to  constantly  fan  his  body  when  he  left  it,  and   to  prevent 
its  being  touched  by  a  single  fly,  left  his  own  body  and  entered  into- 
that  of  a  parrot,  and  turned  the  jungle  into  a  large  city  full  of  men, 
women,   elephants,   horses,   camels    &c.      In    the    meantime    the 
barber  lost  no  time  fas  be  had  also-  learnt  the  art)   in  entering  the' 
kino-"s  body  and  returning  to  the  metropolis.      He  began  to   reign 
over  the  country,  but  the  Prime  Minister  of  the  empire  perceived 
that  some  other  soul  had   entered  into   the  king's  body.      As   hi3- 
own  body  was  already  taken  possession  of  by  the  barber,  the  king 
remained  a  parrot.      He  was  caught  by  a  fowler,  but  entreated  the- 
fowler  to  spare  him,  promising  him  nine  lacs  of  rupees  as  a  reward.- 
The  fowler  did  not  kill  him,  but  took  him  to  a  great  city    for  sale^ 
and,  while  there,  took  the  parrot   to   a    meeting    of  literary   men. 
All  of    them    were   very   much  surprised    at   the   parrot,  and  at 
the  knowledge  of  science  and  literature  which  he   displaj'ed.     One- 
of    the    richest    of    the    savans    paid    nine    lacs  of  Rupees  few 


(     21     ) 

ihe  parrot  and  bought  him.  The  parrot's  fame  for  learning 
soon  spread  far  and  wide,  and  eventaally  reached  the  Prime 
Minister  of  the  said  kingdom,  who  came  to  the  city  and  saw  the 
parrot  and  found  him  no  less  wonderful  than  fame  had  reported. 
The  Vizier  then  gave  many  jewels  and  immense  wealth  to  the 
rich  man,  who  in  return  presented  him  with  the  parrot.  Thereupon 
the  Yizier,  returning  to  his  own  country,  took  occasion  to  say 
to  the  false  king,  "Sire,  you  were  wont  formerly  to  assume  the 
disguise  of  various  animals,  but  I  do  not  understand  why  you  da 
not  now  do  so."  On  this  the  new  king  to  prevent  suspicion 
ordered  a  ram-fight,  and  having  caused  one  animal  to  be  suffocated, 
entered  its  body,  and  began  to  fight  with  the  real  ram,  thereupon 
the  real  king  left  the  body  of  the  parrot  and  entered  into  his 
former  body.  Hence  the  proverb  that  a  barber  is  an  emblenj 
of  a  cheat. 

CLEAR.  CONSCIENCE. 

1  'R'^nT'T  ^Zrf^  ^  'i^T*      Mana  changa  ta  kathauti  me 

Gano;a. 

To  a  pure  mind  the  water  in  a  shoe-mahers  washbowl  is  as 
pure  as  the  Ganges'  water.  (This  water  is  considered  so 
unclean  that  if  a  drop  of  it  touches  a  Brahman  he  will  fast 
for  three  days  before  he  is  considered  a  clean  person). 

This  proverb  is  generally  made  use  of  to  show  strong  faith. 
It  has  its  origin  in  the  story  related  below. 

A  shoe-maker  named  Eai  Das  is  said  to  have  been  a 
very  pious  man.  Whenever  he  knew  of  any  one  going  on  a 
pilgrimage  to  Hardwar  he  was  in  the  habit  of  sending  through 
him  two  pice  as  a  present  to  the  Ganges,  on  the  condition  that 
she  (the  Ganges^  would  put  forth  her  hand  to  receive  it.  Once 
the  present  was  sent  through  a  poor  Brahman.  After  having  re- 
ceived the  shoe-maker's  present,  the  Ganges,  pitying  the  Brahman's 
poverty,  presented  him  with  a  single  gold  bracelet  which  was 
richly  embroidered  and  beautifully  made.  The  Brahman  being 
nnable  to  sell  that  bracelet  was  at  last  obliged  to  take  it  to  a 
king  for  sale.  The  king  bought  it  at  the  price  demanded  by  the 
Brahman  and  sent  it  to  his  queen  consort,  who  was  so  highly 
pleased  with  it  that  she  insisted  on  having  another  one  of  the 
same  make.  The  Brahman  was  consequently  commanded  t» 
produce  another  at  the  risk  of  bis  life.  The  Brahman  went  to  the 
Ganges  and  prayed  to  her,  but  in  vain.  After  that  he  went  to- 
Eai  Das,  and  representing  the  case  to  him,  begged  him  to  save  his 
life.     Rai  Das  prayed  to  the  Ganges  and  plunged  his  hand  in  his 


(     22     ) 

water  pot  (in  which  he  used  to  soak  his  leather),  and  brought  up 
another  bracelet  of  the  same  kind,  and  gave  it  ta  the  Brahman 
to  present  to  the  king. 

Kathauti  means  a  wooden  cup.  C.  f.  "To  the  pure  all 
things  are  pure." 

COMFORTS  &  DISCOMFORTS. 

1  ^JIT  f^'^  '^'T  «fvr«     Huna  ta  gyun  runa  kyun. 

If  there  had  been  a  good  crop   of  wheat^    why  should  1 
complain  ? 

E.  g.  No  one  cries  or  complains  without  some  cause  of 
suffering. 

2  ^f^  TT^  ^f^  ^I^.     Eundi  randa  chundi  panda. 
A  weeping  woman  and  a  leaking  upper  story. 

Applied  to  persons  or  things  that  become  very  troublesome-. 
C  /.  "It  is  better  to  dwell  in  the  wilderness  than  with  a  conten- 
tious and  an  angry  woman."  "Continual  dropping  in  a  very  rainy 
day,  and  a  contentious  woman  are  alike." 

3  ^^  ^5j  ri^i"  ^*l.     Jaiki  jwe  nai  taiko  kwe  nai. 
He  who  has  no  wife  has  no  one, 

I.  E.  A  man  without  a  wife  has  no  comfort. 

4  ^f  •IT  ^f^  r^f^^T  ^I^WT  "?^I«     Chadhana  buni  ligayo 
bokano  parho. 

One  has  to  carry  the  horse,  which  he  had  procured  for  the 
purpose  of  riding,  on  his  own  shoulders. 

Applied  to  bad  trade  or  business,  or  to  work  which  instead 
of  being  profitable  proves  tc  be  ruinous. 

5  ^TTrf  ^I"';  ^^T'     -A.ga  ten  angara  mitho. 
Eed  coals  are  better  than  a  blazing  jire. 

This  means  that  moderate  and  lasting  comforts  are  better 
than  those  of  a  more  imposing  kind  and  of  a  transient  nature. 


(     23     ) 

6  <3ZTT  ^  'T^'T.     Khatai  mc  parhanu. 

To  be  immersed  into  acid. 

A  hobble.  A  nasty  business.  One  entangled  in  an  un- 
necessary trouble,  and  being  unable  to  rid  himself  of  it  ironically 
■uses  this  phrase.  Acid  is  representative  of  inconvenience  and 
trouble. 

7  Wi^  ^^3  rT  €t  ^^  'sf^T  ^^3  fT  ^T  ^^t*     KLandi  bakhata 
kl  kala  sinda  bakhata  ko  dliunwan. 

Quarrelling  at  dinner  and  srnoke  at  bed-time. 
Sources  of  discomfort. 

COMMON  PROPERTY. 

1  JITT  ^T  5I^T  y^%  RJ^T*      Garba   ko  cbbalo   dbura 

ko  palo. 

The  banks  of  a  river  and  the   vegetation    of  a   mountain 
peak. 

Applied  to  denote  that  these  things  are  nobody's  property, 
every  one  having  a  common  right  to  them. 

CONSOLATION  &  ENCOURAGEMENT. 

1  ^iST  f%  "^9  ^JWl  f^  'at^*    Hnna  ki  risa  jana  ki  kbfsa. 

One  on  the  increase  is  envied,  and  one  on  the   decline  is 
laughed  at. 

Used  to  console  people  concerned  on  appropriate  occasions. 

2  ^Tfrr   ^^  "zir^T  ^TfS'  ^fji^JiT:!'      Auta   dbana  pyaro 
kodhi  jyu.  pyaro. 

Wealth  is  dear  to  a  childless  man,  life  is  dear  to  a  leper. 

This  is  spoken  ironically  of  the  above  defects.  A  person 
having  no  descendants  consoles  himself  with  his  wealth,  and  in 
the  same  way  a  leper  having  no  enjoyment  in  life,  wishes  to  live 
long  to  see  the  world.     The  perversity  of  human  nature. 

3  %1'^r  %T  'IvT*    Jo  darau  so  marau. 
He  who  is  afraid  will  die. 


(     24     ) 

Once  jn  a  jungle  a  man  seeing  a  tiger  coming  climbed  up  a 
large  tree  to  save  himsf^lf,  A  monkey  followed  his  example.  The 
tiger  came  near  the  shadow  of  the  man,  and  attempted  to  grasp  it, 
but  as  the  man  knew  that  his  shadow  was  not  himself,  he  did  not 
fear  the  tiger's  approach.  After  this  the  tiger  attacked  the 
shadow  of  the  monkey,  and  as  soon  as  ho  had  stretched  forth  his 
claws  to  catch  the  shadow  of  the  monkey,  the  monkey  thought 
that  he  was  being  caught,  and  falling  down  in  terror  was  eaten  up 
by  the  tiger. 

4  ^%  f^x  %'^  ^X  ^K^Ti  ^^J.      Jaile  shira  deehha  ui 
serp,  laga  delo. 

Be  who  has  given  the  head,  will  give  also  a  seer  (_of  grain 
to  support  the  man) . 

God  supports  every  creature  he  has  created.  Encouragement 
to  the  poor  and  distressed.  He  who  provides  the  mother's  milk  for 
him  at  his  birth  will  still  supply  his  wants. 

5  ^^  "^g  5i»l^3t  rT^  ^I M^«     J^i  ^^'Q-  dewa  jagadisha 
taiki  kya  risba. 

One  favored  by  God  {the  ruler  of  the  world)  should  not 
he  envied. 

Good  people  console  themselves  by  this  proverb  even  in  view 
of  the  prosperity  of  their  enemies. 

6  ^Ti'I^?!^  ^T^l  f'C'^f*     Wo  nl  rai  ta  yo  laga  ni  rawa. 
As  my  former  condition  or  circumstances  have  not  lasted 

up  to  this  time  so  the  present  state  also  will  not  last. 

E.  g.  A  man  poor  before,  has  become  a  rich  man  now,  and 
vice  versa,  and  so  speaks  as  in  the  proverb.  Used  to  console 
one  in  adversity  and  make  him  careful  and  conscientious  ia 
prosperity. 

7  a^a'g^  far?;  ^^r  ^^^  ^f%%^^^T'      Wokhala  me  sliira 
<3eno  mashala  dekhi  ke  darano. 

If  you  put  your  head  in  a  mortar,  why  should  you  fear 
the  pestle  ? 

Used  to  encourage  one  to  cope  with  the  difficulties  and 
dangers  of  a  business  already  started  by  him. 


(     25     ) 

Used  to  encourage  one  to  cope  with  the  difficulties  and 
dangers  of  a  business  already  started  by  him. 

8  Tf'S  ^T  f|3T3ir^  il"':!  2RT  f^  ^J^'     Randa  ka  dina 
jawana  chhora  ka  dina  awana. 

The  day  of  the  widow  has  gone,  but  the  day  of  the  orphan 
boy  is  to  come. 

Often  used  to  encourage  an  orphan  son  and  his  mother  to  try 
their  best  to  help  themselves. 

9  3^g  f%  "^f^  ^'C  ^T  WTT"!.       Shyala  ki  buddhi   Bhera 
ko  tarana. 

Slyness  of  a  jackal  and  courage  of  a  tiger. 
Encouragement  to  try  one's  best. 

10  ^^Tirt  %Tf^  %%^.     Suwa  mari  kauni  kaile  bwe. 
No   one  sowed  kauni  (  a  hind  of  millet  )  after  hilling 

parrots. 

Applied  to  one  who  needlessly  anticipates  the  difficulties  and 
obstacles  to  be  met  with  in  a  work  not  already  commencedj  as  kauni 
is  generally  eaten  when  growing  by  parrots. 

11  f%^^  ^riT  'rft^  !lf%fr.      Sikhika  syana   padhika 

Pandita. 

Observation  makes  one  cunning,  and  study  makes   one 
learned. 

Used  to    pursuade    children,   ignorant   and    inexperienced 
people  to  become  clever  and  learned  men. 

12  31^^'C^T'';  %tsi«Ji^ H^T*  Shakarakhora  son  shakara  paida. 
God  gives  sugar  to  him  who  cannot  eat  without  it.     '^God 
tempers  the  wind  to  the  shorn  lamb." 

Story : — A  great  monarch  once  obtained  God's  permission  to 
feed  for  one  day  all  the  animals  within  his  kingdom.  Accordingly 
he  collected  different  kinds  of  food  necessary  for  each  animal  on  a 

D 


(     26     ) 

stnpendoua  scale,  so  that  at  last  great  mountains  of  food  were 
collected.  Just  at  this  time  a  certain  creature  came  out  of  the 
ocean  bordering  upon  the  monarch's  empire  and  complained  of 
great  hunger.  By  permission  of  the  monarch  the  animal  was 
allowed  to  eat  as  much  as  he  desired  from  the  provision  made 
ready.  The  animal  within  a  few  hours'  time  consumed  the  whole 
amount.  This  fact  made  the  Ruler  mortified  and  penitent.  He 
asked  God  for  forgiveness  and  said  "0  Lord,  thou  alone  canst 
supply  all  thy  creatures  with  food  adapted  to  the  nature  of  each, 
and  secure  to  each  the  quantity  daily  required.  No  man  in  the 
world  can  support  so  great  a  charge  even  for  a  second." 

13  ^w{f^  '^JX^  %JX  ^^^  ^H%  ^?T.     Mana  ki  hara  le 

hara  mana  ki  jita  le  jita. 

One  has  won  if  in  his  heart  he  feels  so,  and  is  defeated 
if  he  thinks  so. 

14  %lt%  ^(351  ^^f5|  ^T^  1^'?:      Sauni  kathina  dekhani 
bala  bazura. 

It  is  very  difjicult  for  one  to  endure  injustice,  but  the 
rvrong  doer  will  certainly  be  requited. 

"It  is  better  to  suffer  wrong  than  to  do  it." 

15  q^^*5T  fli  ^'l^'^T^.     Parmeshwar  ki   Iambi   banba. 
God's  a7-m  U  long — (to  help  or  to  punish). 

16  ^T^^T  TI^  5JTH  ^VT^  ^55iT«|  sn^.       Bbagi   ko 
mala  jawa  abbagi  ki  jyana  jawa. 

One  who  is  fortunate  loses  his  property,  but  the  unfortunate 
loses  life  {either  his  own  life,  or  the  lives  of  other  persons 
in  his  household). 

Consolation  derived  from  Fatalism. 

17  ^I^ '^T«f  ^T^  ^T^*     Dadba  baje,  kala  bbaje. 

Death  flies  away  when  the  jaws  work  (  literally  sound). 

Sick  persons,  who  have  lost  their  appetite,  are  thus  induced 
to  eat  as  much  as  they  can  so  that  they  may  get  well  soon. 


(    27     ) 

18  9T^  ^f^  e|ij«r  f%^r*     Kama  kaui  kama  sikbau. 
Work  teaches  work. 

I.  E.  One  who  is  initialed  in  or  is  made  to  do  work  will 
naturally  find  out  how  to  do  it. 

Used  to  encourage  one  to  undertake  work  and  not  to  be 
afraid  of  it  ou  account  of  ignorance  or  inexperience. 

"Experientia  docet." 

19  ^T^  ?i^T  Vf%?n  f^^I'ir  "^flr^ir*     Lagi  gaya  bhutiya 
ni  lago  cbutiya. 

If  I  hit  the  mark  it  is  like  a  lance ;  if  I  miss  I  mil  only 
he  laughed  at. 

Encouragement  to  venture  boldly. 

20  %T  H^siT  %  ^'^I  ^T^^  ^  ^^*    Jo  marana  bai  ni 
darau  so  saba  kucbba  karau. 

Be  who  is  not  afraid  of  dying  mil  do  every  thing. 
Used  to  encourage  people  to  chivalry. 

21  ^T^T  "^T^  %^^  ^t:51Tf^.    Dara  ka  pasa  jaibera  dara 
jancbbi. 

Fear  or  danger  vanishes  only   when   it  is   faced  or 

coped  vnth. 

Used  to  encourage  people  not  to  fear  or  flee  dangers.  C.  f. 
"Better  face  a  danger  once  than  be  always  in  fear." 

CONTENTMENT. 

1  Iri^T  "^Xt  %I^T  OJI^T-    Auto  cbai  sauto  pyaro-] 

Better  to  have  a  stepson  than  to  be  childless. 

This  is  used  by  a  woman  who  has  no  son  of  her  own  but 
finds  comfort  in  the  fact  that  her  rival  wife  has  one,  so  that  hsz 
husband  will  not  be  childless. 


(     28     ) 

2  ^rf?  'IT^I  ^ITK^  ^  ^T'^r*      Thorbi  khano   Benares 
men  rauno. 

It  is  better  to  live  in  Benares  with  a  little  food  than  with 
much  food  elsewhere. 

E.  g.  Benares  being  a  sacred  city,  living  there  is  considered 
a  meritorious  act. 

3  eji>f  TSEi  ^^1  ^♦f^fi3  Vf':  "^W*      Kabhain  gbyu  ghana 

kabhain  muthi  bbari  cbana. 

Plenty   of  ghi    at    one   time  and  a  handful  of  gram 

at  another. 

Denotes  that  no  one,  in  any  circumstances,  can  expect  to 
have  all  days  alike  with  regard  to  food,  comfort,  &c. 

4  i§rf%  'aiW  ^^  vT^sir     Thorbi  kbano  sukbi  rauna. 

To  eat  a  little  and  he  contented  and  happy. 

C.  f.  "A  little  with  quiet  is  th«  best  of  all  diet."  This  is 
used  in  deterring  one  from  aspiring  after  a  higher  thing  which 
will  entail  hardship  and  trouble,  or  in  advising  one  to  remain 
contented  with  his  own  circumstances,  and  not  to  envy  others 
in  better  condition. 

5  ^T  f%  'SITf^  ^f^'     Gbara  ki  adbi  bbali. 

Half  a  loaf  at  home  is  letter  than  a  whole  one  abroad. 

Used  to  make  one  contented  with  his  own  lot  at  home  in 
comparison  with  that  of  others  abroad,  though  they  may  be  in 
better  circumstances. 

6  ^ife  W  ^Ul  ^Tfe  ^  ^JH  ^  ^1^'    I^oti  ka  santa  roti 
ke  marbi  ke  moti. 

Bread  is  bread,  ^ho  cares  whether  it  be  thick  or  thin  ? 

E.  g.  If  one  has  to  eat  bread  what  does  it  matter  whether  it 
be  made  thick  or  thin. 

Used  of  one  who  is  contented  with  his  circumstances  whether 
good  or  adverse. 


(    29    ) 

7  ^f?r  5!T^^  ^fn-     NIti  jaika  thiti. 

One  wishes  to  stop  after  getting  to  Niti  (  a  village  in  Bhot 

in  the  snows  in  Garhwal  on  the  borders  of  Thibet  ). 

Applied   to   one   who   has    accomplished   his   purpose   and 
is  satisfied. 

8  ^i^-^  SSI  '^vai  %  ^I^T.  ^T  ^T'af*     Adara  ka  chana 
beadara  ka  dakha. 

Even  gram  given  with  courtesy  is  better  than  grapes 

bestowed  with  contempt. 

I.  E.  A  little  given  kindly   is   better  than   much    bestowed 
■with  harshness  or  disdain. 

COURAGE  UNDER  DESPAIR. 

1  WX:?T7  ^T  ^  ^T*?T«     Marta  kya  na  karata. 

One  about  to  be  hilled,  what  will  he  not  do  f 

Applied  to  one  who  is  in  a  desperate  plight.  C.f.  "The  drowning 
man  catches  at  a  straw." 

COWARD. 

1  ITinf  IT  ^T  '»TT^T  ^I»l^TT  Wl  ^7T«IT.    Hanadara  ka 
paithara  bhagadara  ka  aithara. 

Behind  one  who  is  attaching,  and  in  front  of  one  who  is 
running  away. 

Applied  to  a  coward. 

2  ^fvs  8BT  ^^1  ^'5  ^T  ^'sT'     Syaini  ka  lekha  na   maisa 
ka  lekha. 

Neither  lihe  a  man  nor  woman. 
An  effeminate,  home-staying  person. 


(     30     ) 
CRITICAL  PERIODS. 

1  qf^  ^f^fT  ^%T  ^^T'    Gharhi  bachi  ta  gharho   bacha. 

If  a  small  pot  escapes,  the  large  jar  may  escape. 

I.  E.  If  the  critical  or   dangerous   moment   is   passed  then' 
there  is  no  danger  thereafter  for  years. 

2  ^5|f!^T^?i|^^7«i^iTl{3a(Tl^.    Ye  jatakala  bacbun  tau 
khasama  thain  baba  kun. 

If  I  survive  this  confinement  I  will  treat  my  husband  as  I 
do  my  father. 

The  anguish  of  child-hirth  : 

Applied  to  any  trouble  which  a  man  has  brought  on  himself 
and  of  which  he  repents. 


DEBTS,  LOANS  &  SURETY. 

1  ^^l"  'i^  ^^H  «3T^     Ochhi  punji  kbasama  kbani. 

Small  capital  is  {a  fruitful  source  of  )  swearing. 

I.  E.  To  borrow  money  from  a  man  of  small  capital  is 
dangerous,  because  he  will  give  much  trouble  in  connection  with 
the  debt.     C.  f.    "A  poor  man's  debt  makes  a  great  noise.'' 

2  ^igf  xm  51  ^nrj  ^^.    Leno  eka  na  deno  dui. 

Neither  take  one,  nor  pay  bach  two. 

One  who  borrows  has  to  pay  back  with  interest.  There  was 
once  a  washer-man  in  the  service  of  a  king.  He  was  well  off 
before  he  borrowed.  As  the  king  used  to  give  money  on  interest 
to  his  other  servants  the  washer-man  was  pursuaded  by  his  wife 
(though  not  in  need)  to  ask  for  a  loan.  He  did,  and  received  one 
gold  Mohara  which  he  brought  to  his  wife.  Though  he  did  this, 
he  was  always  fretting  himself  to  make  up  the  second  Mohara 
required  for  interest.  He  spent  only  half  his  pay,  refused 
delicacies,  and  overworked  himself  until  he  had  earned  the  second 
Mohur.  "When  the  day  for  payment  came  the  king  noticed  how 
thin  be  had  grown,  and  asked  the  reason,  to  which  he  replied  that, 
"To  borrow  one  and  to  pay  hack  two"  made  him  lean.  A  caution 
against  incurring  debt  :  also  used  by  one  who  repudiates  a  loaa 
or  denies  having  borrowed. 


(    31    ) 

3  ^T*l  ^T  'i\^  'T^T  ^T  MfT^«    Hatha  ko  dinyik  jpatha 
ko  bharyun. 

Given  by  one's  hand,  and  measured  in  a  measure. 

Bona  fide   loans  which  cannot  be  absolved  either  in  this 
or  the  next  world. 

4  frm  "^^^  •!«BT5ft-    Rina  muchyate  na  Kaslii. 

Debt  is  not  absolved  even  at  Kashi  (  by  visiting  and 
bathing  at  Benares  ). 

The  story  given  below  is  used  to  illustrate  the  proverb : — 

Once  a  man  in  very  poor  circumstanceg  brought  home 
•Rs-  2,000/  which  he  had  borrowed  from  a  man  who  did  not  know 
how  poor  he  was.  At  night  while  he  slept  among  the  cattle,  as  is 
nsual  among  the  poor,  he  overheard  one  of  the  bollocks  saying 
to  the  others  that  as  the  man  was  quite  unable  in  his  life  time  to 
discharge  the  debt  he  had  incurred,  he  would  have  to  come  and 
serve  as  a  bullock  to  the  lender  of  the  money  for  years  in  his  next 
existence.  At  this  the  man  got  frightened,  and  asked  advice 
from  the  bullock  about  the  matter,  who  told  him  to  return  the 
money  and  advised  him  to  go  to  the  king  and  wager  Ss-  2,000 
with  him  on  a  fight  between  his  bullock  and  the  elephant  of  the 
king.  The  king  thinking  his  elephant  far  superior  in  strength 
to  the  lean  bullock  accepted  the  wager  of  Ss-  2,000/-  Both  the 
animals  were  brought  before  the  king  to  fight,  but  no  sooner 
did  the  elephant  see  the  bullock  than  he  turned  tail  and  ran  away 
from  him.  Attempt  to  get  up  a  fight  was  repeated  thrice,  but 
the  elephant  could  not  stand  the  snorting  and  pawing  of  the 
bullock.  The  king  at  last,  finding  his  elephant  thus  vanquished 
by  the  bullock,  paid  the  sum  of  Ss-  2,000  according  to  agreement  ; 
on  inquiring  the  cause  of  the  elephant's  fright  both  of  the  animals 
admitted  that  the  elephant  had  owed  and  had  not  repaid  Bs-  300 
to  the  bullock  in  his  former  life  and  so  he  could  not  face  the 
"bullock.  C  /.•  "Out  of  debt  out  of  danger."  "Better  go  to  bed 
supperless,  than  rise  in  debt." 

5  ^j^  W«B^  ^?3  ^jfj".    Mola  lenl  sukha  sepi. 
Buy  for  cash  and  sleep  well. 

Never  borrow. 


(     32     ) 

6  %T  'JT  MT  ^T  ^f  ^T.     Jo  parha  bhara  so  dewa  ghara. 
He  who  stands  surety  will  have  to  give  up  his  own  house. 

7  U^  Jif%  Wl^  »Tf%  ^  -^^T  ^T?:  fiJT  '^t:  ^     Eka  gnli 
ka  dui  guli  dyun  alai  balai  shira  para  lyun. 

Why  should  one  pay  two  bullets  {two  Rupees)  for  one 
borrowed,  and  take  the  extra  dangers  and  trouble  on 
his  head. 

E.  g.  Generally  in  former  times,  and  even  now  to  a  certain 
extent,  one  "who  borrows  money  from  another  becomes  in  a  manner 
his  vassal.  C.  f.  "The  borrower  is  a  servant  of  the  lender." 
The  usage  is  still  prevailing  in  the  country  for  borrowers  to  work 
in  the  fields  of  their  creditors  for  a  certain  number  of  days 
without  wages  in  each  season.  This  is  over  and  above  the  high 
interest  stipulated  for  the  loans. 

8  *3Tf%  ^'i'T  'iT^  ^T^  f^f^  ^IW  ^I^  ^T^«      Khani 

bakhata  khaba  lala  dini  bakhata  ankba  lala. 

The  mouth. gets  red  when  the  betel  nut  is  eaten,  but  the  eye 
becomes  red  when  it  has  to  be  paid  for. 

E.  g.  The  people  of  India  are  very  fond  of  chewing 
betel  nuts  ;  these  they  generally  get  from  the  dealers  on  credit,  so 
that  when  betel  nuts  are  eaten  (chewed)  the  chewers'  mouths 
get  red,  but  when  a  bill  for  the  price-  of  the  same  is  received 
by  them  their  eyes  get  red  (they  become  angry).  Hence  the 
proverb  is  used  to  condemn  the  practice  of  contracting  debts. 
The  borrower  is  glad  when  he  gets  the  money  but  is  angry  when 
he  is  requested  to  repay  it, 

9  ^^  %T  5«B  ^IJI  ^T  ^^'     Bairi  ko  eka  rina  ko  sbekha. 

Of  enemies  not  one,  of  debt  not  even  a  little  (  or  enemies 
and  debts  should  be  totally  destroyed  ). 

E.  g.  A  single  enemy  not  destroyed,  and  a  little  debt  left ' 
unpaid  will  increase  in  time  and  prove  troublesome. 

10  »T?^;)g^  ^^«3.     Marun  bhuka  run  sukha. 

3Iay  I  starve  but  remain  comfortable  {loithout  anxieties). 

Used  as  a  caution  against  incurring  debts  or  against 
extravagance. 


(    33    ) 

11  sqTST  TT7T  W\  ^^^r*    Byaja  rata  laga  chaladau. 

Interest  runs  even  at  night,  i.  e.  some  animals  move 
about  in  the  day  and  others  at  night,  but  interest  never  ceases 
to  accumidate. 

Used  as  a  caution  against  getting  into  debt, 

12  ^^^%  %T^«T5  H'^^T  ^r«B"?^*.     Kukura  le  daurhanu 
chha  marano  kankarha  le  cliba. 

The  dog  has  only  to  hunt,  it  is  the  wild  sheep  that  is  killed. 

Used  by  one  to  induce  another  to  stand  security  for  him  as 
the  former  fthe  principal)  is  incurring  the  primary  liability  but 
the  latter  (the  security)  has  only  the  secondary  responsibility. 

13  «IT^I  ''R3^  ^WT^T  f^^^^T*      Patho   phutada  udharo 
ni  bagado. 

The  measure  breaks,  but  the  loan  remains. 

Means  that  a  debt  must  be  repaid  even  if  the  men  dealt  with 
or  the  witnesses  to  the  transactions  are  dead. 

14  Z^J  f%^r  ifil'Rrf^*     Taka  diyo  gaji  pbarhi. 

Pay  cash  and  tear  the  cloth  {so  much  as  you  want)  from 
the  piece  {belonging  to  merchant),  i.  e.  pay  and  purchase. 
Caution  against  getting  anything  on  credit. 

DECEIT. 

1  Tr^^  ^T^^r  ^T^  m^T  wi^  tr^.  ^f  t  ^t  ^^Ir. 

Marada  bakbaro  pakanda  kukurbo  kbandi  danwa  lingurba 

ko  tbupurbo. 

One  kills  a  goat,  cooks  a  cocJc,  but  for  dinner  gives  only  a 

heap  of  Lingurhd  (a  wild  vegetable). 

Applied  to  deceitful  persona  who  make  great  profession  but 
do  little  or  nothing. 

E 


(     34     ) 

2  ^"T  ^T*!!  ^^"l '^^I'T.    Apun  khanu  aurana  chuthona. 

ne  himself  eats,  hut  makes  another  wash  out  his  mouth, 
as  if  the  latter  had  eaten. 

Clearing  himself  from  his  own  guilt  by  implicating  another. 
[  Chuthana=to  wash  one's  hands  and  mouth  after  a  meal  eaten 
■with  the  fingers.  ] 

3  ^r»l  g^  ^T  llf^  ^t  %T?^.    Aga  lagai  bera  pani  son 
daurhanu. 

One  sets  fire,  and  then  runs  for  water  to  quench  it. 
Applied  to  deceitful  persons  and  mischief-makers. 

4  *rs  ^T^^^  ^  ^^IT*    Munda  katika  renda  ki  barliai. 
After  having  cut  off  the  head,  to  praise  the  corpse. 

To  eulogise  a  man  after  ruining  him. 

5  %t"^  ^fx:  ^^T  %T^T^  W  5rr»I  ff  ^r«    Chora  then  chori 
karau  Saukara  then  jaga  dilau. 

Telling  the  thief  to  steal,  and  the  rich  man   to  guard 
his  house. 

Applied  to  tricky  and  deceiptful  people  who  collude  with 
both  parties. 

6  ^j-!\  SSI  ^naT  ^fTT  '^T^g  %J  »!%•    Dhana   ka   dana 
bhitara  chawala  ko  gudo. 

There  is  a  grain  of  rice  inside  the  hush  {of  paddy). 

It  is  said,  that  once  the  son  of  a  king  had  conceived  a  strong 
friendship  for  the  son  of  a  minister.  The  king,  for  some  reason 
of  his  own,  wished  that  his  son  should  give  up  this  friendship, 
but  failed  to  make  him  do  so.  At  last  he  offered  a  great  reward 
to  any  one  who  would  accomplish  this  object  for  him.  Many 
■wise  and  clever  people  accordingly  tried  various  devices  to  effect 
this,  but  in  vain.  Whatever  either  of  the  friends  was  told  by  any 
one  he  informed  the  other  of  it,  and  thus  strengthened  the 
friendship  day  by  day.  After  this  a  cunning  woman  contracted 
close  intimacy  with  both  of  them,  and  one  day  while  the  two  were 
sitting  together,  she  went  in  and  said  she  wished  to  tell  a  secret 
to  the  son  of  the  minister,  and  then  took  him  away  for  a  minute 


(    S5    ) 

io  a  private  place  when  she  whispered  ia  Lis  ear.  "There  is  a 
grain  of  rice  inside  the  husk  of  the  paddy."  As  soon  as  this  was 
done  she  left  the  kingdom  for  good.  The  minister's  son  immediately 
repaired  to  his  friend,  and  as  usual,  informed  him  of  what  the 
woman  had  really  said  to  him.  But  the  king's  son  did  not  believe 
it,  and  suspected  his  friend  of  having  concealed  the  real  matter 
told'  him  by  the  woman  ;  and  from  that  time  the  king's  son  became 
alienated  from  his  friend.     Hence  the  proverb. 

Used  to  warn  against  deception,  and  applied  to  one  who 
makes  too  much  of  a  very  little  thing. 

7  ^^T  W  T^T  I^T  8RT  '^?T»    Charha  ka  marha  marha 
ka  charha. 

Representing  living  birds  as  dead  bodies,  and  dead  bodies 
as  living  birds. 

Calling  black,  white  ;  and  white,  black. 

8  il^^I'/t  ^^T*    Nau  tero  gaun  inero. 

In  your  name,  but  my  village. 

The  village  is  in  your  name  but  is  really  mine.  Giving  one 
Hominal  authority  in  order  to  impose  upon  him. 

9  ^x  m'K  W^\  %jzt^  if  ^T^  f^  'StUT-      Ghara  bara  tero 
kotharhi  men.  hatha  ni  laga. 

The  house  is  yours  but  do  not  use  the  room. 
Applied  to  nominal  trusts. 

10  ^?3  ?f  TT^T  ^3  ^f  %T^  eBFT*    Mukha  men  rama  peta 

men.  aura  kama. 

God's  name  in  the  mouth,    but  another  motive  in    the 
heart. 

"A  wolf  in  sheep's  clothing." 

E.  g.  A  magnanimous  man  has  the  same  thing  in  his  heart, 
mouth,  and  actions,  but  a  wicked  man  has  one  thing  in  his 
heart,  another  in  his  words,  and  a  quite  different  one  in  hia^ 
deeds. 


(     36     ) 
DEFERRED   HOPES. 

1  '^t'll  *lfT*l«lI  ^^  (%  ^T^-      Haiya  marigaya  buna 

ki  Asa. 

My  sons  already  born  are  dead :  I  can  there/ore  hope   to 
have  more  born  to  me. 

One  bases  Ms  hopes  on  past  experience.  Also  used 
ironically  to  denote  the  precarious  state  of  a  thing  which  has 
already  failed. 

2  W  ^T  ^^r  ^^^T  ^T^T  ^«T^  ^^I^  =» 'K^T^I.    Paind 

ko  paino  chukayo  Baro  bhitara  bathaun  na  phukayo. 

1  was  repaid  for  my  present,   but  the  wind  blew  through 
my  house  all  night. 

Paina=any  thing  good  that  is  distributed  among  the  neigh- 
bours and  kinsmen. 

I.  E.  One  in  hope  of  such  a  return  from  his  neighbour 
kept  bis  doors  open  at  night,  so  that  the  wind  blew  through  the 
house  io  the  inconvenience  of  the  occupants. 

This  is  applied  to  one  who  instead  of  being  benefitted  by 
any  transaction  is  put  to  extra  troubles  or  loss  ;  also  spoken  of 
hopes  which  are  deferred. 

3  ^TrIT%  ^T  H^T  «tT  ^^  ^^  ^^}^.    Data  hai  Suma 

bhalo  jo  paili  dide  jababa. 

A  miser  wJio  rejects  one  at  once  is  a  better  man  than  a 
liberal  man  who  Jceeps  one  long  in  suspense. 

This  is  used  in  regard  to  inconveniences  that  trouble  one 
■whose  hopes  are  not  realized  for  a  considerable  time.  C.  f  "Hope 
deferred  maketh  the  heart  sick." 

4  ^"^  ^rf^  sm^  'B'^  ^Tfr  ^T^-    Kaba  tbori  byali  kaba 
kbori  kbali. 

When  will  the  yearling  buffalo  calve  and  when  will  my 
shull  eat  1 

An  expression  of  impatience  used  when  some  desired  good 
seems  to  be  long  deferred.  For  instance,  a  widow  anxiously  and 
impatiently  waits  for  her  infant  sons  to  grow  up  when  they  will 
contribute  to  her  support. 


(     37    ) 
DEPENDENCE. 

1  ^T^T^  ^^  «|a?  ^  ^>1^  »r^'      Dada  le  bahu  bahu  le 
sagali  mau. 

The  Bahu   ( elder  brother's  wife  )   depends  on  my   elder 
brother,  and  the  whole  family  depends  on  her. 

The  chief  person  or  moving  spirit  in  a  concern. 

2  7%r  ')r'5  ^"0  "51^?  s^I^r  ^n^r  "^R*     Thulo  gom  luna 
bukawa  nano  thobarho  chata. 

Full   grown   cows  eat  salt,   but  the  calves    lick  their 
(  mother's  )  lips. 

Applicable  to  one  who  maintains  an  establishment. 

3  qj^  ^T  ^T^  ^fl%  "^1^'    Paai  ka  sasa  ghutarho  basa. 
The  frog  croahs  by  the  aid  of  the  water. 

A  poor  and  weak  person  can  only  achieve  anything  by  the 
patronage  of  a  greater  man,  or  a  poor  man  lives  his  life  by 
support  or  in  hope  of  support  from  some  great  man.  C  /. 
"Qaench  not  hope,  for  when  hope  dies,  all  dies." 

4  ^r**  %T  ^^r  'i^'^I  if*     Syapa  ko  jiyo  mundala  men. 
The  soul  or  life  of  a  snake  is  in  its  head. 

This  is  applied  to  the  head  of  a  family  on  whom  all  the 
members  of  the  family  are  dependant. 

5  ^qq$T  ^T^T  ^''^T  "^T^^  '^^'^^T*  Apano  khoro  apana 
hatha  le  ni  mudino. 

No  one  can  shave  his  head  with  his  own  hand. 
Applied  to  mutual  need  of  help. 

6  ^^j  e»if%  %J  ^T'lT.     Syurba  dagarhi  ko  dhago. 

The  thread  follows  the  needle. 

Used  by  a  member  of  one's  family  or  by  a  dependant,  or  to 
one  who  is  the  head  of  a  family  or  to  a  patron  on  whose  movements 
all  depend.  Usually  spoken  by  women  in  regard  to  their 
respective  husbands. 


(    38     ) 
DILATORY  HABITS. 

1  ^T'»T^  ^  ^r'»  fill  ^t^r^  %I  ^I5l»    Topala  ki  topa  tapa 
chaundala  ko  raja. 

While  the  Topdl  was  getting  ready  his  cannons,  the  Chaun- 
dala came  and  seized  his  kingdom. 

These  two  petty  kings  reigned  over  Pargannah  Chandpur 
(Gardhwal;  in  the  seventh  century  A.  D.  Used  in  advising  one 
to  be  always  ready  for  any  thing  that  may  happen,  and  not  to  let 
matters  slide.     (A  pure  Garhwali  proverb}. 

2  5if  «T^  >TT2^  ''T1  "^tf^  frt  ri^  ^  ^fe«     Jan  taka  Bhata  le 
paga  bandhi  tan  taka  pethai  uthi. 

While  the  bard  was  dressing  his  turban  the  market 
broke  up. 

JE.  g.  Bards  or  bafifoons  dress  themselves  up  before  they 
go  to  a  public  place,  and  if  they  are  delayed  in  dressing  they  lose 
the  opportunity  of  displaying  their  arts  and  making  money. 

Applied  to  failure  in  any  business  due  to  diiatoriness. 

DILEMMA. 

Ata  ko  diyo  bhitara    randata    musa   khandana    bhaira 

kawa  lijanda  na. 

A  lamp  made  of  flour  {paste)  if  placed  inside  the  house 
is  eaten  by  mice,  and  if  kept  outside  is  taken  away 
by  the  crows. 

( A  dilemma ). 

2  ^rTT^  I:t  ^HTf  ft'T'^^  H^  ^^I^.     Ye  tarapha  ran 
rabharha  wl  tarapha  bhela  kaphdrha. 

On  one  side  a  deep  stream  and  a  raging  torrent,  on  the 
other  a  sheer  precipice. 

C.  f.  "The  sea  in  front   of  them,  and  the  Egyptians  behind 
them,"     or  "between  Scylla  and  Charybdis," 


(     ^9     ) 

3  rfnTT  f}i  ^^  l^f.  Tato  dudha  thukewa  na  ghutewa. 

Hot  milk  one  cannot  either  spit  out  or  drink. 

I.  e.  If  you  spit  it  out  it  is  wasted,  if  you  swallow  it,  it 
burns  you. 

4  X:T3"51  ^%  f?l5JfTIir.    Rowai  na  hansai  gija  tanai. 

Could  neither  weep  nor  laugh. 

This  is  applied  to  one  who  is  astounded  at  some  sudden 
unexpected  incident. 

5  ^fT^'^  %^   ^'ri'Km    ^TT«      Ye    tarapha    kuwa    wl 
tarapLa  khai. 

Either  a  well,  and  thither  a  ditch. 
A  dilemma. 

6  *TT^I  5^  '^J'H  ^  TT^?  ^  ^  5T%^'      Tato  dudha  hatha 
men  rakhewa  na  bhin  chharhewa. 

Hot  milk  neither  worth  retaining  in  one's  hand,  nor  wot*th 
dropping  on  the  ground. 

E.  g.  signifies  a  dilemma  which  in  either  way  suggests  loss. 

7  %i5<T^  »TTfK5jt?Ei  fJllrisgor  m^  f  fir  ^W.    Kaunchhu 

ta  mai  marl  janchhya  ni  kaunyu  ta  bapa  kutta  khhanchha. 

If  I  speak  out  my  mother  will  be  beaten,  if  I  keep  silence 
my  father  will  feed  on  dog's  flesh. 

"Oa  the  horns  of  a  dilemma." 

Story : — A  certain  man  had  a  son  (a  boy  of  12  years  of  age) 
by  a  former  wife,  and  a  young  wife  whom  he  had  married  after 
the  death  of  the  lad's  mother.  This  woman  had  a  paramour  who 
instigated  her  to  feed  her  husband  with  the  flesh  of  a  dog  so  that 
he  might  become  mad.  (For  they  suppose  that  when  a  man  eats 
the  flesh  either  of  a  dog  or  of  an  owl  he  becomes  insane}.  So, 
following  his  advice,  she  one  day  killed  a  dog  and  prepared  the 
food  and  placed  it  before  her  husband.  The  boy,  who  had  observed 
all  this,  was  in  great  doubt  whether  he  should  tell  his  father  or 
not.  He  said,  "If  I  tell  my  father  he  will  surely  kill  my  mother  ; 
but  if  I  remain  silent  he  will  eat  dog's  flesh." 


(     40    ) 

8  ^  IJT^  ^T"  ^^  ^r^  ^T^  ^rft"  %T'   Main  aura  bapu  eka 

cliora  aura  lathi  do. 

1  and  my  father  are  one,   but  the  thief  and  his  stick 
are  two. 

E.  g.  In  a  certain  house  at  night  there  were  only  father  and 
son  ;  a  thief  came  there  with  a  stick  in  his  hand  ;  the  son  says  to 
himself.  "If  my  father  is  killed  it  is  a  loss,  and  if  I  am  killed 
it  is  also  a  loss."  The  stick  is  quite  a  separate  thing  from  the 
thief,  and  so  they  are  two.  For  if  the  stick  is  broken  it  is  no 
loss  to  the  thief,  and  if  the  thief  be  beaten  it  is  also  no  real  loss 
to  the  stick. 

9  ^1T  %  ^1  ^fJHSIT  %'^*      Kujaga   ko  dukha  jathano 

baida. 

Abcess  in  the  private  part  to  be  treated  by  her  husband's 
elder  brother,  who  is  the  doctor  or  physician. 

A  younger  brother's  wife  is  looked  upon  as  a  daughter,  and 
she  in  turn  looks  upon  her  husband's  elder  brother  as  a  father,  i.  e. 
one  is  not  allowed  even  to  touch  the  other.  So  she  feels 
ashamed  or  finds  it  difficult  to  expose  herself  to  her  husbands' 
elder  brother. 

Used  to  represent  a  difficult  position,  a  dilemma. 

ka  larhu  khala  ta  pachhatala  ne  khala  ta  pachhatala. 

The  sweet  balls  of  sawdust  you   will  repent  of  whether 
you  eat  them  or  not. 

I.  e.  If  you  taste  them  you  will  regret  your  buying  and 
tasting  them,  on  the  other  hand  you  will  also  repent  for  not 
purchasing  and  tasting  them,  because  they  are  elegantly  made 
and  tempting  in  appearance.  Such  balls  used  to  be  made 
to  deeieve  the  hill  people  who  weut  to  Hardawar  in  former 
times. 

A  dilemma. 


(    41    ) 
DISAPPOINTMENT. 

1  ^T^T  f^'Jr  ^T^  'STW.    Haro  miyan  dadhi  hatha. 
One  who  is  vanquished  seizes,  his  beard, 

I.  e.  In  disappointment  or  chagrin. 

2  ^I^  1  m^T  ^T^TT  1  ^jit  ^^  ^*    Jogi  ^^  chharo 
kumahara  ku  mati  kakha  ni. 

Is  there  any  place  where  a  Jogi  (  ascetic )  cannot  get 
itshes  f  and  a  potter  earth  f 

It  is  a  very  easy  matter  to  become  a  Jogi,  if  a  man  fails  ia. 
all  other  efforts  to  get  a  living. 

3  g»i%  Sifz  ^r^x:  fqi  fi|^.       Tamarhi  pbuti  laskara 
ki  bida. 

As  the  gourd  is  broken  the  people  depart. 

I.  e.  The  people  who  were  in  hopes  of  getting  some  of  the 
seeds  of  the  gourd  went  away  on  its  being  broken,  either  with 
their  hopes  realized  or  disappointed,  for  it  was  in  existence  no 
longer.     When  the  matter  is  decided  all  the  candidates   go  away. 

4  iK%  ^fK  ^f%  ^N  ft%  f^^T  *5»ITT  ^  JII^.  Jaikikari 
barhi  asa  wile  diyo  Jhungara  ko  gasa. 

He  in  whom  I  had  a  great  hope  gave  me  only  a  morsel 
cj  millet  (  inferior  grain  ), 

Applied  to  disappointment  from  a  person  in  whom  trust 
was  placed. 

5  ^T{j  ^xkj  %Tf%  szr^T  ^5ir(^  ^T  2m  ^i't  ^^t^t- 

Mama  alo  tauli  chhutalo  nijani  nau  taka  aura  dandyalo. 

/  thought  that  when  my  maternal  uncle  came,  he  would 
redeem  my  {pledged)  vessel,  but  did  not  think  that  he 
would  cause  me  to  be  robbed  of  nine  Takds  {^four  and 
half  annas  )  more. 

Used  of  bad  treatment  when  help  was  expected. 

F 


(     42     ) 

6  ^TcRTSI '^T'BT*     Akasha  chano. 

Looking  to  heaven  ( the  sky  )  ;   ^.  e.  one  having  no  hopes 
looks  to  the  sky. 

Used  of  utter  disappointment. 

7  ?3T^j  •!  «rr^T  ITI!  ^T  ^T^r*     Kbayo  na  payo  marana 
80  ayo. 

Neither  ate  nor  received  any  thing  but  came  to  die. 
Used  by  one  mourning  over  great  disappointment. 

DISHONESTY. 

1  ^  ^T  ''^^T  f^TT^'    Dai  ka  pabara  biralu. 
A  <iat  set  to  watch  the  curds. 

Applied  to  dishonest  persons  who  are  entrusted  with  property. 

2  ^Hf%  (^  %(%  ^T  ^r  TTTI-    DamarM  ki  handi  kutta 
ko  imana. 

The  trustworthiness  of  a  dog  is  tried  even  hy  a   small  pot 
(  of  food  )  worth  \  of  a  pice. 

Used  in  reference  to  petty  dishonesty. 


3  ^g*!  3^^  ^Tl  '^^^  ^^T*    Duma  gwera  baga  bakharwalo. 

To  make  a  Dum  cowherd,  and  a  leopard  a  shepherd. 

Dums  will  eat  beef,   and   so   cannot   be   trusted   with   the 
care  of  cows. 

Applied  to  dishonest  persons  in  charge  of  property. 


4  ^»H!!"gr  f^^T  f^lf%  »l^T'      Sungana  son  diyo  nigali 


gayo. 

The  "thing  given  to  one  for  smelling  has  been  devoured 
hy  him. 

Applied  to  one  who  misappropriates  a  thing    lent  him  for 
temporary  use,  or  in  his  capacity  of  an  agent  or  guardian  &c. 


(    43    ) 

5  ^rit  SRT  ^51  ^sit^  ^ifg  ^sff^T  %tf •      Sonthon  ka 
feija  ku  janda  pholi  khandai  aunda. 

One  who  goes  to  collect  pulse  comes  home  eating  the  hearts. 
Applied  to  dishonest  persons  or  servants. 

DISINTERESTEDNESS; 

1  ^1  ^I 5SIT  ^^Si^T-     Duma  ko  bya  ankhana  da. 
The  marriage  of  a  Dum  (  simply  )  pains  the  eyes. 

The  Hindu  Bitha  ( patrician )  castes  do  not  participate  in 
any  ceremony  or  feasts  held  by  a  Dum. 

Applied  to  things  in  -which  one  has  no  concern  at  all  and 
which  instead  of  being  beneficial  turn  out  to  be  troublesome 
to-  him. 

2  ?tTT  ^T  %  5|%»ilt  ^TT  i^T  ^^T  ^  ^^T  %  ^T5T«  Mera 
gtara  hai-  nahaigechhl  mera-  lekha  tera  chelai  chela 
hal  jana. 

If  you  leave  my  house  you  may  be  blessed  with  so  many 
sons  {I do  not  care). 

The  thing  left  or  got  rid  of  should  be  forgotten.  Loss  of 
interest  in  any  thing  with  which  we  are  no  longer  connected. 

3  %T  ^  ^K  ^T^T  ^t»    Sau  ko  sai  bau  ko  bhai. 

Neither  related  to  my  father-in-law  nor  tojny  mother. 

Applied  to  one  who  is  no  relation  at  all,  or  with  whom  one 
has  no  concern  whatever. 

4  g  ^^  ^%T  ITT  ^^T  ^^T'?TT.  Tu  koll  mai  lohara 
tero  mero  ke  byohara. 

You  are  a  weaver,  1  am  a  blacksmith,  what  dealings  are 
there  between  us  ? 

This  is  said,  by  one  who  thints  himself  quite  separate 
Irom  the  person  addressed. 


(    44    > 

5  ^^i  ^€r»ir  ^TT  ^^"T*    Tero  pallago  mera  kathapa. 

Your  salutation  is  nothing  to  me. 

Expresses  extreme  hatred,  contempt,   or  indiffepence.     Iron- 
ically applied  to  one  by  whom  the  speaker  is  not  properly  treated. 

6  "^51  ^T^  %  'T^'^^T^f^.    Tina  loka  hai  ]\f  athura  Eyari. 

Mathurd  is  quite  separate  from  the  three  worMs. 

Mathura  is  considered  highly  blessed  because   Krishna  was 
born  there. 

7  ^TJ  'if':  l^lrf  ^gi^T^i  I'fS  517^.     Apun  marigayo  ta 

kawa  raja  baithi  jawa. 

One  who  is  ahotit  to    die    does    not  mind   if  a  crow 
heeomes  king. 

Spoken  in  reference  to  any  thing  in  ■which  o»e  is  no  longer 
eoneerned. 

8  'V[Jri  f^TT^5|%  g^  (sf'TT'TT.     Bhauta  biralunale  Musa 
m  mjerana. 

Too  many  eats  do  not  kill  rats. 

C.  f.  "Too  many  cooks  spoil  the  broth," 

9  aTf%^T^t  ^I  "T^T  ^.     Chhorhiyo  gaun  ko  nato   ke. 

What  relation  with  a  village  one  has  deserted  ? 

Used  to  indicate   one'a  disinterestedness  in   a   matter   witb 
which  be  has  bo  concern. 

DISTRESS. 

1  'Sfll^T  ^f^  fri^^T  ^T  ^IT^T.     Dubanera   kani  tinaka 

ko  saharo. 

A  drowning  man  clings  to  a  straw.     [  Also  an  English 
proverb.      Which  was  the  borroicer  ?  } 

1.  e.  One  in  distress  is  neglected  and  forsaken  by  all,  and  so 
if  one  gives  him  any  small  help  in  that  state  it  is  greatly 
appreciated. 


(   45   ; 

2  fSlTITf^  ^T  'TI5T.     Nirapani  ko  machho. 
A  fish  out  of  water. 

Out  of  one's  element. 

3  fi(4l3Tig7  ^T  ^TiTTf%  SfC.   Nikhana  gbara  cbaumasi  jara. 

No  food  in  my  house,  and  besides  am  down  with  fever 
(  of  the  rainy  season  ). 

Accumulated  woes.    C.  /.  "Misfortunes  never  come  singly." 

4  >lt3  5i^«i  •Jj^if  •!  ^7»r^      Gantha  na  dama  mukha   na 
chatna. 

No  money  in  hand,  and  no  shin  on  the  face. 
An  old  and  poor  man's  plea. 

5  TJcI  <^^  •!  f^  ^51  ST.  Rata  ninda  nai  dina  bhukha  nai. 
No  sleep  at  night,  and  no  hunger  in  the  day. 

A  distressful  state. 

6  %r  ^^  %T  ^^  'T^  ^^  %T  l^iT'    Sau  gbarbi  ko  sukba 
eka  gbarbi  ko  dukba. 

An  hour  of  misery  is  equal  to  a  hundred  hours  of  pleasure. 

7  51JR  if  f^^spi,     Jagana  men  bigbana, 

A  calamity  during  a  sacrifice  (  merry  festival ). 

E.  g.  During  the  marriage,  tonsure,  and  other  like  ceremonies, 
when  all  the  kinsmen  and  guests  are  being  feasted,  if  any  one 
falls  sick  or  dies,  or  some  other  adverse  circumstance  occurs,  the 
people  concerned  are  much  troubled  and  use  this  phrase  expressive 
of  great  sorrow  and  regret. 

8  ^^f^  ti%  %T  "^"^  '^''^17.     Aluni  marcba  ko  barabarata. 

Red  pepper  taken  without  salt  causes  greater  irritation. 

I.  e.  Any  inconvenience  or  distress  shared  with  others  is 
less  painful  (or  more  endurable)  than  when  suffered  alone. 


(     46     ) 

Used  by  one  thus  affected,  and  also  by  one  imposed  on 
or  tasked  for  nothing  (without  any  compensation  for  his  work) 
or  by  one  who  receives  punishment  or  reproof  without  any  fault 
or  offence  committed  by  him. 


DISUNION. 

1  ^j3  ^ifj^ljg  %J^^T,    Atha  patyala  nau  chula. 

Eight  Brahmins  of  the  village  of  Patiyd,  but  nine  ovens. 

1.  e.  Eight  Brahmin  kinsmen  of  the  village  of  Patiya,  Kumaun, 
and  one  man,  their  coolie  (a  shudra  or  khassid  by  caste)  went  on  a 
journey.  At  the  first  stopping  place,  each  of  the  Brahmins 
began  to  build  a  separate  cooking  place  for  himself,  no  one  being 
willing  to  eat  the  food  cooked  by  another.  The  khassid  coolie, 
who  could  not  possibly  object  to  eat  the  food  cooked  by  a  Brahmin, 
became  suspicious  and  disgusted  at  their  unexpected  disunion, 
thinking  they  must  all  be  of  a  low  caste.  So  he  determined  to 
cook  his  own  food  separately  by  having  a  separate,  or  ninth,  chuld 
for  himself.  Hence  this  proverb.  Whenever  there  is  want  of 
unity  among  one  set  of  people  others  suspect  them.  This  proverb 
is  also  often  quoted  by  the  people  of  Garhwal  against  the 
Kumaunis,  who  are  much  more  fastidious  in  such  matters  thaa 
the  Garhwalis. 

2  ^BJI^T  ^t  ^^  "^t.     Jhagula  dui  mukha  dui. 

Where  there  are  two  Jhagulds  ( long  robes  )  there  are 
two  mouth-openings,  (  i.  e.  the  part  found  the  nech  through 
which  the  head  goes  ). 

/.  e.  Each  person,  in  a  family,  or  community,  has  his   own 
bent  or  motive. 

3  ^T^T^t  %fT^T^  ^T^I^t  ^^I^.  Adha  gaun  ctaitwala 
adha  ga-un  bagwala. 

One  half  the  village  keeps  the  festival  in  one  month,  the 
other  half  eight  months  after. 

Illustrates  the  evil  of  disunion. 


(    i^   ) 

DOG  IN  THE  MANGER. 

1  s^j  %^  ^T1   ^1  ^  ^IK^   ^t^  ^iim\      Budho  balla 
apa  laga  na  aurana  kani  laganade. 

An  old  buUoci  will  not  himself  woo,  nor  will  he  allow  any 
other  bullock  to  do  -to ;  i.  e.  -putting  hindrance  in  the  way  of 
others  without  gaining  any  benefit  yourself. 
C.  f.  "Dog  in  the  manger." 

DUPLICITY. 

1  *ii3T  Sir  ^T^T  ^.     Jhuta  bya  sancha  nya. 

Marriages  will  be  effected  by  false  representations,  but 

justice  will  be  obtained  by  speaking  the  truth. 

It  is  difficult  to  get  a  poor  man  married  unless  lie  is  falsely 
represented  to  be  of  a  high  caste  and  a  man  of  property 
and  wealth. 


ECONOMY  OR  FRUGALITY. 

1  lit  cT  ir^  f^«T5^TT.     BMta  dholi  bbitanai. 

The  wall  was  thrown  down,  but  it  fell  inwards  {and  so 

all  the  stones  were  available  for  use  again). 

If  it  had  fallen  outwards  into  the  neighbour's  field  he  might 
bave  taken  away  the  stones  for  his  own  use.  E.  g.  One  who  is 
bound  to  give  alms  bestows  them  on  his  own  relatives. 

2  5it  ^1^9  fit  ^^rfr^^.     J^S  cbalisa  tan  gbabatalisa. 
If  there  are  40,   one  or  more  can  be  included  without 

making  any  material  difference  ;    ( so  small  a  difference  is 
of  no  importance. ) 

"Six  of  one  and  half  a  dozen  of  the  other." 


(     48     ) 

3  TIfT  wi^T  >TTfT  3m^T.     Pata  mugato  bhata  jugato. 

A  broad  leaf,  but  the  rice  in  7noderate  quantity. 

This  suggests  that  full  provision  should  be  made  for  any 
thing  before-hand,  but  the  expenditure  should  be  carefully  limited, 
and  also  that  if  one  bring  a  broad  leaf  (  for  begging  rice  )  we 
should  give  him  rice  or  any  food  in  limited  quantity  or  according 
to  our  circumstances. 

4  5ig^  ^r  %T^  <Tg%  ^^  iT^T'';iT*    Jatuka  lambo  saurha 
tatukai  paira  pasarna. 

One  should  stretch  out  his  feet  only  so  far  as  his  quilt 
may  cover  them. 

C.f.  "Cut  your  coat  according  to  your  cloth." 

5  ^^  QTef^'UT  ^ror  ■^T^Iiiir.      Tela    turkyona    luna 
burkyona. 

Oil  to  be  used  in  drops,  and  salt  to  be  used  in  pinches. 

The  smallest  items  of  expenditure  in  a  family  amount  to  a 
great  deal  in  the  end,  and  so  one  should  be  cautioned  against 
extravagance. 

6  qJl^  Tf^cR  "Sf  ^T^T.     Pagarhi  rakhi  ka  gbyu  khano. 

©\ 

One  should  eat  ghi  without  dishonoring  his   turban.  An 

economical  maxim. 

One  should  not  endulge  in  pleasure  to  the  injury  of  hi3 
wealth  or  reputation.  C.  f.  "Hast  thou  found  honey  ?  eat  so 
much  as  is  sufficient  for  thee,  lest  thou  be  filled  therewith  and 
vomit  it."  The  turban  or  Pagarhi  is  an  indispensable  article  of  a 
respectable  man's  dress  and  honour,  and  is  often  the  most  costly 
part  of  it. 

7  ^T^T  ^I^r  ^  ltT'5  f^\  f^^  li  TT^.     Topo  topo  kai 
chliansa  biyop.  biyon  kai  rasa. 

Drop  by  drop  the  vessel  (of  curds)  Jills,   and  grain  by 
grain  the  corn-heap  grows. 

C.  f.  "Many  a  mickle  makes  a  muckle."    (  Scotch  proverb  ). 


C    49    ) 

S  *lf^JBT^'5T  ^  ^n:  %r  ^rW.     Dhaniyaa  ka  daua 

me  rai  ko  dano. 

Adding  a  grain  of  mustard  to  that  of  coriander. 

This  is  applied  either  to  one  who  is  thrifty  and  thus  adds 
to  his  possessions  or  to  one  who  earns  much  with  a  small  capital 
prudently  invested  in  wise  speculations. 

9  ^^  f^l  "^I  ^IIT^  •T'lT.    Aura  din  a  changd  tyohara 

nanga. 

Well  fed  and  clothed  on  ordinary  days,  naked  and  hungry 
on  festival  days. 

Bad  economy,  not  saving  for  needy  days.  (On  festive  occasions 
the  best  of  clothes  and  food  obtainable  should  be  used  J. 

10  51^  T<TTr  •T'i  '<TTTJir.     Jakha  itaga  takha  tataga. 
When  so  much,  then  thai  much  will  do. 

E.  g.  The  difference  of  one  or  two  in  a  large  quantity  is  no 
difference  i.«.  is  of  no  moment. 

This  is  used  to  induce  a  man  to  spend  a  little  more  than 
what  has  already  been  estimated  or  spent  with  a  view  to  have  an 
auspicious  completion  of  the  business. 

11  9rg^^^gf%^T   ^^.      Tela   dekha  tela  ki   dhdra 

dekha. 

Looh  at  the  oil  (i.  e.  see  how  much  there  is)  and  then 
regulate  the  jiow  (^^  e.  how  much  you  will  pour  out). 

I.  e.  Restrict  your  expenses  within  your  income,  C.  f.  "Cut 
your  coat  according  to  your  cloth." 

ENVY. 

1  ^VS\  miv:[  fk^  «^T  ^  T^lt  ^r.     Apana  jay  an  ki 

HI  kaka  ki  rayan  ki  chhau. 

I  do  not  complain  of  my  own  ruin,  but  why  in  the  world 
has  my  uncle  escaped  f 

The  regret  of  one  fallen  into  misfortune  that  others  do  not 
share  with  him. 

G 


(    50    ) 

2  ^7  R%Tf%''I  ^  ^t^.     Ho  parhosina  mai  jast. 

O,  neighbour  be  like  me. 

Story.  Oace  a  man  who  had  hia  nose  cut  off  for  some 
offence  happened  to  come  to  a  certain  city,  where  he  was  teased 
by  being  given  the  nickname  "Nakatd"  (  noseless ).  For  some 
time  he  patiently  endured  the  disgrace,  but  at  last  invented  a  plan 
for  revenging  himself  upon  the  residents  of  the  town.  So  he  sat 
down  like  a  saint  in  -a  conspicuous  place  in  the  city,  and  acted  as 
if  he  was  absorbed  in  the  contemplation  of  God.  Now  and  then 
he  would  address  the  Gods  thus  "0  Vishnu  you  are  welcome," 
"0  Mahadeo  you  are  welcome,"  "0  Brahma  you  are  welcome," 
"0  Lachhmi,  0  Parbati,  0  Brahmani,  you  are  welcome," 
"Come  and  sit  down  here  (  pointing  out  in  a  respectful  manner 
with  his  two  hands  a  place  for  each ),  and  thanking  them  for  their 
trouble  and  condescension  in  manifesting  themselves  to  him.  He 
did  this  every  day  for  some  time  attracting  the  attention  of  the 
passers-by,  and  gradually  the  news  spread  throughout  the  city 
and  the  country.  At  first  the  people  did  not  believe  him,  but 
seeing  him  so  firm  in  his  faith,  piety,  and  adoration,  some  began 
to  pay  more  attention  and  feel  curious  about  the  matter,  and  so 
they  enquired  from  the  feigned  saint  what  it  meant,  as  they  could 
not  see  the  deities  with  whom  he  had  converse.  To  this  he  replied 
that  no  one  could  see  the  gods  ( with  the  bodily  eye )  until  he 
got  heavenly  eyes  by  becoming  a  devotee.  This  naturally  induced 
some  to  become  devotees  in  order  to  have  a  constant  vision  of 
God  like  the  saint,  and  consequently  many  of  them  wished  and 
asked  him  to  have  mercy  on  them.  The  man  said  that  they  must 
become  his  disciples  by  learning  the  religious  enchantments 
(  power  to  fascinate  the  deities  )  from  him.  Whereupon  many  of 
them  volunteered  to  be  his  disciples,  but  the  noseless  man  said  to 
them,  "0,  my  dear  brothers,  it  is  very  difficult  for  one  to  become 
truly  religious  amidst  the  luxuries  and  endearments  of  worldly 
things.  No  one  can  ever  see  the  deities  until  he  divests  himself 
of  all  worldly  honors  and  subdues  his  senses  for  the  sake  of  his 
God.  The  chief  sense  or  pride  of  these  worldly  honors  is  the 
nose  C  the  root  of  haughtiness  and  vanities )  which  ought  to  be 
got  rid  of  first  of  all  in  order  to  render  man  a  humble  and 
worthy  being  in  the  sight  of  the  deities.  This  is  the  first  and 
most  important  ordeal  one  has  to  go  through  in  order  to  merit 
personal  conversation  with  the  deities.  For  as  soon  as  one's 
nose  is  cut  off  he  becomes  absolved  of  all  sins  and  sinful 
sensations.  One  man  at  first  fell  a  victim  to  this  plot,  and 
submitted  to  the  loss  of  his  nose,  and  to  his  utter  grief  found 
his  hopes  of  seeing  the  deities  to  be  utterly  false.  On  enquiry 
from    his     Guru    { spiritual    guide )    the    new    disciple    was    told. 


(    51     ) 

'*My  dear  son,  do  you  not  know  that  a- leper  wishes  to  have  the 
whole  world  become  like  himself,  and  so  also  a  sinner  ;  since 
you  have  been  unfortunately  imposed  upon  now  you  must  also 
make  the  same  professions,  so  that  more  may  become  like  ourselves, 
and  then  no  one  will  be  able  to  cast  a  slur  on  any  of  us."  After 
this  both  the  iVaiafas  united  in  persuading  others  to  follow  their 
example,  and  succeeding  in  tricking  many  of  their  neighbours, 
until  the  news  reached  the  king  and  his  wise  statesmen,  who  at 
once  put  a  stop  to  this  scandal  of  the  noseless  sect  by  driving 
them,  out  of  their  city  and  country. 


EVIL  PROPENSITIES  &  HABITS- 

1  1?T^  ^  ^rq  ^^r  ^T2T  ^"«IT3T  ^^[.     Chhati  me  sanpa 
ehalyo  bata  ku  bata  lagyo. 

If  a  snake  has  crept  into   one's  bosom  it  Kas  taken  a 

wrong  road. 

Applied  to  one  who  attempts  iinproper  acts  wh'ich  ought 
to  be  stopped  at  once  before  any  injury  is  done.  C.  f.  "Ill 
examples  are  like-  contagious  diseases."  Evil  habita  should  be 
nipped  in  the  bud. 

2  ■^Tl  'iT3  %  ^T^R^T  f^l^T  f^^^  ^  1^  ^T1  ^\Z  1^%r  ^F 

^^T  Wi    Baga  gotha  bai  bakaro  ligayo  phikara  nai.  para 

baga  gotha  palako  yo- phikara  chha. 

Tlie  leopard  has  carried  away  a  goat  out  of  a  cowshed;  Ida 

not  care  for  that,  hut  I  do  care  that  the  leopard  has  found  a 

relish  in  {or  way  to)  the  cowshed. 

Applied  to  future  apprehensions  or  dangers  from  the  lure  or 
clae  someone  has  found  to  injure  us. 

EXTRAVAGANCE. 

1  ^T  CB^  WIIBIT  %^.     Ghara  phuki  tamasho  dekha.. 

For  the  sake  of  a  show  he  burns  his  own  house.. 
Applied  to  extravagant  persons. 


(    52    > 
2  ^J<^  ^jjq  XEt  Tnj  igSr  fSE^  ^'^It'IT.    Pan-cha  angula  ghyu 
ma  chhato  sbira  kadhai  ma. 

Five  fingers  in  Ghi  but  the  sixth  head  on  the  pan. 

This  is  an  ironical  phrase  applied  to  imprudent,  extravagant, 
and  voluptuous  people.  C.  f.  "S-hort  pleasure  long  lament." 
"He  burns  the  candle  at  both  ends." 

A  pan  is  a  kind  of  oven  in  which  cakes  are  cooked  and 
grain  parched.  Food  is  eaten  with  five  fingers  and  it  is  also  taken 
•with  Ghi  mixed  with  it  by  rich  and  well-to-do  persons,  and  so  the 
fingers  are  besmeared  with  ferA*  at  dianer  time,  but  the  head  of  the 
eater  ©f  the  Ghi  is  responsible  for  its  price,  for  whjeh  (if  not  paid), 
the  head  will  be  troubled  (arrested). 

3  "q^  'STw  TT^  l>T^  ^5?^f5r  %r^  f^iTT^  ^^-^  ^f^  %r 

^^T  '^•^  ^t5l  %r  ^^T  ^'Bl  ^^.     Chakha  dalau  mala  aura 

dhana  kani  kaurM  ni  rakhau  kafana  suni,  jo  delo  tanaf 

feuni  so  delo  kafana  auni. 

Enjoy  all  your  property  and  mealth,  having  nothing  for 
your  eofiin,  for  God  who  gives  for  the  nourishment  of  the 
body  is  sure  to  provide  for  the  coffin  also. 

Carpe  diemr 

4  ^T»l  %lf5l  'SRilWHTfT     Kaja  kauni  akaja  bhata, 

Kauni  (  an  inferior  millet )  on  a  festival  day  (for  meaSy 
and  rice  on  ordinary  days. 

Used   of  extravagant  or  iarproper  conduct   ra  regard  tc 
expenses. 

Poor  people  eat  ^awni' as  a  general  rtjle,  but  keep  a  small 
quantity  of  rice  for  festive  occasions.  An  extravagant  person' 
will  use  up  his  stock  of  rice  for  ordinary  consumption,  and'  thus- 
when  the  feast  comes  round  he  will  have  to  eat  the  meagre  kauni. 


(    53    ) 

5  ^^T  "IT^  ^T^r  ^^  Sl^  ^I^r.    Bhainso  mari  torho 
kurho  dhali  worbo. 

Ke  kills  his  buffalo  for  the  sake  of  "Torhd»" 
(tnd  pulls  down  his  house  for  the  sake  of  stones  for  a 
boundary  mark. 

"Torho"  is  a  musical  horn  made  of  the  horns  of  a  buffalo  and 
Bsed  as  a  trumpet.  "Worho"  is  a  boundary  mark  made  of  a  atone 
or  stones  which  separate  one's  field  from  that  of  another. 

Applied  to  one  foolishly  extravagant. 

6  ^T«l^  "^I^  ^SJi^  ^12.      Nau  pala  bachharu    dasa 
pala  ghantai. 

A   calf  weighing  nine    chhatdkas  wears  a  bell  of  ten 

ehutdks'  weight. 

Applies  to  one  who  wears  sumptuous  clothes  and  valuable 
jewelry  beyond  his  position  or  means. 

7  t!^  ^T  ir^T  ^m  ^it  ^rt  ^r  3»II  ^  vrl     Kanda  ka 
cbbora  lagyo  loi  boi  mau  dhunga  me  dboi. 

The  pampered  son  of  a  widow  in  his  arrogance  and  excess 
brought  the  wealthy  family  to  ruin. 

This  is  applicable  to  one  who  has  no  one  to  look  after  him 
or  control  his  bad  conduct. 

8  »?Tf^TT  %!?  ^r  ^'TT  *iH  %^  ^q^lf .   Madiro  kauacbba 
yo  dbama  dbama  kaika  upara  cbba. 

The  millet  (  while  being  threshed  or  husked  out )  says 
where  does  the  sound  come  from,  or  on  whom  is  the  threshing 
being  done  (  i.  c.  on  me). 

Used  by  the  head  of  a  family  when  he  finds  the  members 
of  his  family  extravagant. 


(     54     ) 
FALSEHOOD. 

1  ^J*\l  ^'^.     Kanakhuri. 

One  hits  the  ear  and  foot  at  one  shot. 

E.  g.  A  sportsman  said  that  he  hit  a  deer  on  its  ear  and  foot 
with  one  bullet  while  the  animal  was  scratching  its  ear  with  its  foot. 

Applied  to  liars  who  try  to  make  their  stories  as  plausible 
as  they  can.     The  story  below  will  illustrate  the  proverb  : 

St(yrii : — A  man  addicted  to  telling  lies  once  went  to 
Hardwara  to  bathe  in  the  Ganges,  with  an  express  vow  that  after 
the  bathing  he  would  no  longer  tell  lies.  When  he  came  back 
from  the  shrine  his  friends  and'  kinsmen  came  round  him,  and 
asked  him  how  he  performed  his  pilgrimage.  The  man  said  he 
had  no  trouble  at  all  on  his  journey  to  and  from  that  place  except 
once  when  in  the  jungle  he  saw  seven  tigers,  who,  on  seeing  him-, 
came  towards  him.  But  being  frightened  at  the  sight  of  the 
tigers,  he  climbed  up  a  tall  tree  by  the  side  of  the  road.  All  the 
tigers  came  up  to  the  trunk  of  the  tree  and  seeing  him  seated  at  a 
safe  distance  beyond  their  reach  became  very  furious,  and  began 
to  roar  and  jump  upwards,  hut  in  vain.  After  this,  with  a  view 
to  catch  him,  one  tiger  in  an  erect  posture  stood  on  the  head 
of  the  other,  in  this  way  the  seventh  animal  attained  a  certain 
height,  but  still  could  not  reach  the  bough  on  which  he  was. 
This  frightful  scene  terrified  him  so  much  that  the  perspiration 
ran  from  his  face  in  a  stream.  On  this  the  tigers  began  to  climb 
up  the  stream  he  was  making,  whereupon  with  great  presence 
of  mind,  he  whipped  out  a  khukari  (  a  kind  of  short  sword  )  from 
his  belt,  and  cut  off  the  stream.  This  caused  them  all  to  fall 
on  the  ground  and  die.  After  that  he  descended  the  tree  and. 
calmly  resumed  his  journey  homewards. 

2 .  %T  '^''li  ^T51T  ^T  ^T'^  f^  't^^  ^T  f^iW.    Sau  rupayan. 

raja  kd  bhandara  ki  khankala  ka  gicha. 

One  hundred  Rupees  is  either  in  the  treasury  of  the  king,. 
or  in  the  mouih  of  a  liar. 

This  is  an  old  saying  belonging  to  the  times  when  money 
was  very  scarce.  That  so  much  money  could  only  be  found  in 
the  treasury  of  a  king  or  in  the  mouth  of  a  liar  refers  to  the  way 
in  which  liars  exaggerate.  C.  f.  "Liars  begin  by  imposing  upon 
others,  but  they  end  in    deceiving    themselves." 


{    55    ) 

3  »fi2  f^  511  \     JLuti  ki  jarha  nai. 

Ji  falsehood  has  no  roots. 

G.  f.  "Falsehood  has  no  legs." 

4  %rT  VfiZJ  ^T  ztr.     Jo  jbuto  so  tuto. 

•One  who  resorts  to  lies  is  sure  to  be  in  poverty. 
I.  e.  Evil  deeds  must  result  in  evil  consequences. 

FALSE  ALARM, 
i  si^'l  ^  vi'^.    Junwan  ki  bhainsa. 

-.4  louse  exaggerated  into  a  buffalo. 

In  a  certain  village  lived  a  man  and  his  wife.  The  man 
was  a  simple,  cowardly,  and  lazy  person,  while  his  wife  was  a  wise 
and  energetic  woman.  Whenever  the  husband  was  told  to  work 
he  used  to  become  angry  with  his  wife  and  frighten  her  by  sayincr 
that  he  would  leave  his  house  for  good  and  go  to  some  foreio^n 
country.  For  some  years  the  woman  lived  in  great  terror  of 
being  desertei,  at  length  becoming  callous  of  his  threats  she 
allowed  him  to  go.  On  the  day  he  was  to  set  out  to  the  Plains 
she  equipped  herself  like  a  policeman  with  a  sword  and  gun  and 
waylaid  her  husband,  whom  she  threatened  with  instant  death  if  he 
did  not  return  home  and  pledge  his  word  never  to  come  again  that 
way.  (It  being  the  only  pathway  from  the  village  to  the  Plains  j. 
The  poor  coward  returned  home  at  once.  She  managed  to  reach 
home  unobserved  before  the  arrival  of  her  husband.  When  the 
man  returned  she  enquired  of  him  the  cause  of  bis  return. 
"0  dear  wife,"  said  he,  "how  could  I  go  to  the  Plains,  for  a 
hundred  policemen  came  to  kill  me  ?"  To  this  she  said,  "Alas  ! 
a  hundred  is  too  great  a  number,  perhaps  you  mean  fifty." 
"Yes  you  are  right,  fifty."  On  this  the  wife  said  again,  "I  think 
twenty-five  even  would  have  been  more  than  sufficient  to 
deter  you,"  to  which  he  said  that  there  were  indeed  twenty-five. 
Thus  the  wife  mentioned  ten,  then  five,  then  two,  and  finally  one, 
the  husband  admitting  each  number,  and  finally  confessing  that 
it  was  only  one  constable  who  had  prevented  his  going  away, 
the  story  is  also  applicable  to  other  Proverbs  viz. 

1  A  falsehood  has  no  roots   funder  heading  Falsehood  j. 

2  Theremedy  of  poison  is  poison  (     Do.  Remedy). 

3  WormiJ   cannot   be   extracted  without  charming  (under 
heading  Remedy  J. 


(    56    ) 

2  "^Tl  'sa.    Baga  dutha. 

Leopards  and  ghosts. 

This  phrase  is  used  to  frighten  children  from  going  out  in 
the  evening  when  leopards  and  ghosts  are  said  to  be  moving  about. 

3  m^^  %T  *TT^«     Kamala  ko  bhalu. 
A  bear  made  of  blanket. 

Monkeys  and  deer  are  kept  from  the  fields  by  a  scare-crow 
in  the  shape  of  a  bear  made  with  a  black  blanket. 
Applied  to  any  false  alarm  ;  a  canard. 

4  ^i^^U  '^TT^  ^?I5^»     Kande   klesha  Bamsu   uklesha. 

Sickness  in  Kande  but  anxieties  and  fears  in  Bdmsu. 

Used  in  teaching  that  no  one   unnecessarily   entertain   fears 
for  a  danger  which  is  not  at  hand. 

FALSE  MODESTY. 

1   #R5  Sijtii  f33^7    ^^T'HT'      Chhansa  ku   iano  titaro 

lukono. 

Why  should  one,  who  goes  to  ask  for  butter-milk,  conceal 
the  pot  in  which  he  has  to  bring  it  ? 

Applies  to  one  who  goes  to  another  to  ask  for  a  thing,  but 
is  ashamed  to  make  his  request. 

FALSE  PROMISES. 

1  5?^  (%ig  ^kV  »I^T  "^^  ^^'i  ^r  ^75?  ^^  II^T  T?T  K^r 

^sfT  M^T  ^^7^-     Suwa  Simala  dharigayo  barhe  phalana 

kf  asa,  phala  pako  ruwa  bhayo  suwa  bhayo  nirasa. 

A  parrot  {which  is  very  fond  of  eating  fruit)  seeing  the 
big  buds  and  flowers  of  a  Simala  tree  in  the  month  of 
February,  left  the  place  {where  the  Simala  tree  grew)  hoping 
to  come  back  when  the  fruit  was  ripe.  But  when  the  parrot 
returned  in  April  to  eat  the  fruit  he  found  to  his  utter  despair 
that  there  was  nothing  but  cotton  in  the  pods. 

Used  of  false  promises. 


(    57     ) 

2  ^I3T  SJJT^r  'll  f^^T  M^I.     Banja  byayo  gobirho   bhayo. 
An  oak  tree  gave  birth   to    Gobirha   fa  worm  often 

found  in  the  crachs  of  an  oak  tree  J. 

Applied  to  oue  whose  many  promises  end   in  nothing,  or  in 
something  which  is  of  very  little  use. 

"Parturiunt  montes,  nasoetur  ridiculus  mus." 

3  m^T    f;i%    5%«IT    'If'Sl^r.      Bina    dudi    chba.  maina 
paladau. 

Fostering  a  child  for  six  months,  without  milk. 

Applied  to  one   who   puts  off  another   with   promises   and 
never  fulfils  them. 

4  ^^i  5EIT  'SR^^I  %T  ^^^  if.      Tero   bya  karunlo  sau 
barasa  men. 

I  will  get  you  married  a  hundred  years  hence. 

Applied  to  promises  to  do  a  thing  after  an  unnecessary  delay 
or  at  a  time  when  it  will  not  be  needed. 

FALSE  HOPES. 

1  T«l  ^T  '31^  ^TT.     Mana  ka  larhu  khana. 

JEJating  the  sweetmeats  of  fancy.  Equivalent  to  "build- 
ing castles  in  the  airP 

The  story  below  illustrates  the  proverb; 

Story : — Once  a  poor  man  had  a  jar  of  oil  to  convey  from 
one  place  to  another  at  a  wage  of  four  annas.  The  man  as  usual 
took  the  jar  on  his  head,  and  began  to  walk  with  it,  amusing 
himself  with  his  imaginings,  as  follows : — "For  the  conveyance 
of  this  load  I  will  get  four  annas,  with  which  I  will  buy  a  hen, 
which  will  in  due  time  produce  eggs  and  chickens.  The  sale  of 
these  will  procure  me  a  few  rupees,  which  will  enable  me  to 
purchase  a  herd  of  goats.  After  this  the  sale  of  the  goats  and 
their  kids  will  supply  me  with  money  sufficient  to  purchase  and 
keep  cows,  the  sale  of  which,  with  their  offspring,  will  make  me 
possessed  of  money  to  buy  buffaloes  and  herd  them.  The  last 
occupation  will  give  mc  money  enough  to   marry.     When   1   get 

H 


'(    58    ), 

married  1  will  have  children  who  will  call  me,  "Father  dear,  coni'e 
and  take  your  meal:;"  then  I  shall  reply.  "No,  no."  Suiting  his 
-action  to  his  word sie  shook  his  head,  fby  this  time  he  had  arrived 
at  the  shop  where  he  had  to  deliver  the  loadj  and  threw  the  jar 
'on  the  ground  and  spilt  the  oil.  The  owner  of  the  oil  began  to 
*blame  the  coolie  for  the  loss  of  his  oil.  But  the  coolie  said  to  tha 
man  to  whom  the  oil  belonged.  "0  my  dear  friend,  alas  !.  you 
should  not  m<>urn  over  the  oil,  which  is  of  very  little  value  ;  for  I 
have  IoSj  my  family  through  the  destruction  of  your  oil."  On 
being  asked  what  he  meant,  the  coolie  narrated  the  imaginary 
prospects  which  he  had  based  on  the  four  annas  that  he  had  to 
receive  for  carriage  of  the  oil  jar.  0.  /.  "He  that  lives  upon 
hopes  will  die  fasting,"  and  the  story  of  Alnaschar  in  the 
"Arabian  Nights." 

2  g^iHT  ^It'ST  »f!2T  ^ff  5IS  ^^,     Uina  dhubina  jhuta 
muta  dhandha  sachi. 

ITie  dream  was  false,  but  the  pool  of  urine  is  a  reality. 

Said  by  one  who  has  had  a  terrifying   dream,    on   awaking. 

This  proverb  is  made  use  of  to  distinguish  between  the 
realities  of  life  and  the  false  fears  and  anticipations  which  are 
like  dreams. 


3  Xjmj  i^r^T  HT^I  Wl  ^f^r   ^'':  ^^  ^rff  ^T   '^^T.     Raja 
Bhoja  bharama  ka  bhula  ghara  ghara  mattl  ka  chula. 

JRdjd  Bhoja  is  under  an  illusion.     Every  house  has 
earthen  hearths, 

1.  e.  all  human  beings  doomed  to  death,  pleasure,  pains, 
prosperity  and  adversity. 

Rajah  Bhoj  was  a  famous  King  of  Malwa,  supposed  to  have 
flourished  about  the  end  of  the  tenth  and  beginning  of  the  eleventh 
century.  He  is  said  to  have  been  a  great  patron  of  learning,  and 
is  the  hero  of  many  stories  and  anecdotes,  the  best  known  of 
which  is  the  beautiful  story  called  "Raja  Bhoj  ka  Swapna"  or 
"King  Bhoj's  dream." 

4  HT1  f^  7ff .     Bharama  ki  tatti. 
xllusion's  veil. 


(    59    ) 

Applied' to  worldly  honour  and  wealth  which  intrinsically 
are  fallacious.  E.  g.,  it  is  used  of  a  seemingly  wealthy  or  great 
man' who  on  examination  turns  out  to  be  a  man  of  straw.  A  mani 
who  possesses  one  lakh  of  rupees  is  often  reckoned  to  have- 
ten  lakhs. 

5  »TT?ITW  ^^  1T»T  ^RTf^  ^T^T  «B^^^IT.     Maya  ka 
tina  nama  Pharasi,  Pharasa,  Pharaaarama. 

Wealth  has  three  names-.   fMaya=illttsion,  that  which 
tempts  all  menj^  viz  Fharsu^  I'harsd,  Tharasram: 

One  who  has  a  competence  is  called  Pharsu,  a  wealthier 
man  is  called  Pbarsa  fa  better  name),  if  he  is  very  rich  people 
^ill  call  him  Pharasram  (a  very  respectable  name). 

Degrees  of  wealth  and  corresponding  honour. 

FAMILY  OR  HOUSEHOLD.. 

I  'W^  ^^r  ^^  ^^r  It  ■^T'^  ^r^r  ^  ^.     Ghara  karau: 
ghara  karau  sau  balaya  khora  me  dharau. 

^et  up  house,  get  married,  and  bring  one  hundred 
troubles  on  your  head. 

Used  to  dissuade  one  from  marrying,  or  used  by  one  who- 
becomes  disgusted  with  the  troubles  and- discomforts  he  is  having 
on.  account  of  his  family. 

FATE  OR  DESTINY. 

1  ^TI'OT  ^I^T  ^f^T'ST.     Apano  boiyo  lawono; 

One  is  sure  to  get  the  fruit  of  what  he  has  sown: 

"Whatsoever  a  man  soweth  that  shall  he  also  reap." 

A  reference  to- the  doctrine  of  transmigration.     A  man  will 

receive  the  fruit  of  the  deeds  done  by   him   in   former   existences. 

This  is  so  certain  that  a   man.  should  be  perfectly  patient   under 

alii  circumstances. 

2  r^fk  W^f%  %^  ^^  ^T  ^^T  f^^'TW  ^T  ^g.     Padhl 
pharasi  becha  tela  yo  dekhau  kismata  ko  khela. 

A  Persian  scholar,  yet  obliged  to  sell  oil ;   such  the- 
tyranny  of  fate. 


(     60    ) 

The  story  below  is  used  to  illustrate  the  proverb. 

Once  when  India  was  under  the  sceptre  of  the  Mohamed'aH 
Rulers  every  one  who  knew  Persian  could  get  a  post  of  some 
importance  in  the  administration.  But  an  unlucky  man  thoroughly 
educated  in  that  language  not  having  been  able  to  get  such  a 
post  was  obliged  to  take  up  service  with  a  Baniyd  { merchant)  who 
assigned  to  him  the  work  of  selling  oil. 

An  accomplished  but  unlucky  man. 

3  ^^  Wn  ^  ^nr^  fSl^rr  mR  TTTT  9[i^T     Huni  chba 
ta  ekai  sapaka  ni  huni  ta  sari  rata  ghepalo. 

The  khira  f  rice  pudding  J  is  prepared  hy  stirring  it 
with  one  stick  ^  and  an  event  which  is  fated  not  to  occur 
cannot  be  brought  round  even  if  a  whole  crowd  of  men 
work  all  night  to  accomplish  it. 

Fate  will  accomplish  itself  in  its  own  way. 

4  SIT5I  'iT^T  'ITI  '^T'^^TW  HTT.     Naja  khano  saga  raja 

khano  bhaga. 

One  eats  his  meal  fgravtij  with  vegetables  aitd  enjoys 
his  kingdom  by  his  luck. 

Fortune- decides  all. 

Used  as  a  caution  against  envying  others  who  are  in 
better  positions. 

5  ^f  f%  ^  ^^(^  ^«Tf%  ^^fw.     Eunall  ke  dekhani  muna- 

li  dekhani. 

Why  should  one  consult  one's  horroscope  rather  than 
(be  contented  with)  his  skull  or  fate. 

At  the  time  of  birth  an  astrologer  is  employed  to  draw  out 
a  chart  or  horoscope  predicting  the  course  of  the  child's  lifa. 
The  sutures  of  the  skull  are  also  supposed  to  indicate  a  man's 
lot.  This  proverb  is  a  warning  against  constant  and  useless 
reference  to  one's  horoscope  (which  is  always  carefully  preserved, 
bmt  which  often  turn-  out  felse)  in&tead  of  being  content  with  the 
course  of  one's  life. 

The  predictions  of  horoscopes  are  so  unquestionably  believed 
by  illiterate  people  of  these  hills  that  they  regard  the  things  there- 
in predicted  to  take  place  as  already  in  their  posaessiou.. 


(     61     ) 

The  under-noted  fact  is  used  to  illustrate  the  matter.  Once 
a  man  enquired  of  a  youth  (bachelor)  of  his  acquaintance  whether 
he  was  married.  The  latter  replied  to  the  query  in  the  affirmative. 
But  the  other  persons  of  his  household  present  then  and  there 
contradicted  his  statement,  saying  that  be  was  yet  a  bachelor. 
On  this  the  youth  said  "Friends  how  do  you  say  this  ?  you  know 
that  our  Pandit  (astrologer)  has  put  down  2  wives  for  me  in  my 
horoscope." 

6  ^^iT  ^T^»I  ^^I  KT1   f'l^.      Khasama   sohaga  lelo 
bhaga  nile. 

My  husband,  if  angry,  can  deprive  me  of  sohaga  {of  his 
society)  but  not  of  my  luck. 

Applied  to  one  who  cares  nothing  for  his   superior's  wrath, 
since  every  thing  depends  on  one's  fate. 
The  extreme  of  fatalism. 

7  SIT^I  *f^T^  '3T'n  ^''I'5('    Jano  Nepal  klianu  kapala. 
Though  one  may  go  to  Nepal  yet  be  cannot  escape  the 

decrees  of  fate. 

8  ^T^fx:  ^T'lWT  ^^T  ^  ^^  ^^  fl^  I^T.     Bakari  apana 
bachcha  ki  khaira  kaba  taka  man  a. 

Sow  long  shall  a  she-goat  pray  for  the  life  of  her  hid? 
{i.  e.  no  one  can  escape  his  fate  J. 

A  bad  man  will  certainly  at  last  meet  with  punishment. 
There  is  a  strange  story  current  about  kids  which  illustrates 
the  proverb. 

Story : — There  are  nine  festival  days  called  "Nabratri"  or 
"Durga  Puja"  generally  occurring  either  in  September  or  October 
every  year.  During  these  festivities  he-goats  or  kids  are  killed 
or  sacrificed  by  almost  every  family.  Twenty-two  days  after  this 
there  is  another  festival  called  "Go  Piija"  or  "Gobardhan"  on 
which  day  all  the  cows,  bullocks,  and  calves  are  fed  with  human 
food  (viz  rice,  dal,  cakes  &c).  One  day  some  kids  saw  calves 
playing  and  jumping  merrily  on  account  of  the  feast  they  were 
looking  forward  to  on  the  day  of  the  ensuing  "Go  puja."  The 
calves  informed  the  kids  of  the  approaching  feast  and  the  latter 


C    62    ) 

also  began  fco  dance  for  joy,  in  expectation  of  that  day.  On  seeing^ 
them  so  ignorant  of  their  impending  fate,  the  old  goats  said  to- 
them.  "0  kids,  you  are  very  foolish,  for  you  are  unaware  of  the- 
fact  that  the  Gopiija  festival  will  come  a  long  time  after  you- 
will  have  been  killed  during  the  Durga  puja,  which  is  drawing 
near  now.  On  hearing  this  all  the  kids  playing  so  joyfully 
became  very  sad. 

Also  used  in  the   sense  that  the  things   of  this   world   are- 
uncertain  and  fleeting. 

9  Slefi  efiT  •if^«j  iTj  ff .    Dhaka  ka  tina  pata. 

The  JDhaka  tree  has  three  leaves  only. 

The  Dhaka  tree  is  considered  a  very  sacred  tree.  It 
has  only  three  leaves.  These  are  supposed  to  represent  the' 
three  universal  stages  of  birth,  life,  and  death.  The  proverb 
applies  to  any  or  every  thing  which  is  written  in  one's 
fate  as  inevitable.  It  is  also  used  to  represent  insufficient  or 
fallacious  arrangement.  It  is  also  used  to  represent  that  no  king: 
howsoever  pleased  with  one  can  give  him  more  than  what  is 
destined  in  his  fate,  as  any  amount  of  rain  will  not  produce  more- 
than  3  leaves  in  the  Dhdka  tree. 

10  3i?i<a  ^  if?]^  '^(^  ^  ^f  T^T.   Jangala  me  mangala  basti 

me  karhaka. 

Feasting  in  the  jungle  and  starving  in  a  town. 

Good  fortune  spreads  a  table  before  us  even  in  the  wilderness^ 
while  evil  fortune  reduces  us  to  misery  even  in  the  most  favourable- 
circumstances. 

11  VK^^  51TW  q^fl   ^TT  ^T  ^t    ^^ISI.      Puraba  jaw* 
pacbhama  karama  ka  ui  lakshyana. 

Whether  I  go  east  or  west  the  same  fate  follows  me^ 

Change  of  place  will  not  change  one's  fate.  C.f.  Horace's 
"Patriae  quis  exsul  se  quoque  fugit." 

12  ""^^  HT1  ^T1«     Chala  bhaga   aga. 

"O  Fate,  move  on." 

E.  g.  One  wishes  to  try  his  fortune  elsewhere  by  leaving: 
the  place  where  his  fate  has  failed  to  do  anything  for  him, 
"Better  luck  another  time." 


(    63    ) 

13    ^^  fifi  f^  vf^f?T.     AgrQ  kin  kin  bhabishyati. 
What  becomes  hereafter. 

Once  the  skull  of  a  man  was  found  by  a  Pandit  on  which  the 
under-noted  inscriptions  (sutures)  were  written.  "This  man  will 
remain  in  poverty  daring  the  whole  of  his  life,  and  undergo 
10  years  imprisonment  ;  after  this  he  will  die  on  the  banks  of  the 
ocean  ;  what  will  become  of  him  hereafter  no  one  knows."  The 
Pandit,  who  understood  the  divine  writing,  felt  curious  about  the 
fate  of  the  skull,  since  all  other  things  which  were  written  thereon 
had  passed  away,  and  he  was  quite  unable  to  test  its  accuracy 
by  comparing  it  with  the  real  events  of  the  man's  life.  So  the 
Pandit  wrapped  the  skull  in  a  clean  cloth  and  locked  it  in  his  box. 
After  travelling  for  some  time  in  foreign  countries  he  at  last 
returned  home.  There  also  he  took  proper  care  of  the  skull  and 
kept  it  locked  in  his  own  safe.  Some  time  afterwards  being  laid 
up  with  illness,  his  wife  got  possession  of  the  key  of  her  husband's 
safe.  Intending  to  take  out  some  money  or  valuables  she  opened 
it  and  found  the  skull.  Suspecting  it  was  the  skull  of  her  rival 
wife  who  had  died  many  years  before,  and  becoming  jealous  on 
account  of  her  husband's  attachment  to  the  dead  woman  as  evinced 
by  the  fact  of  his  keeping  her  skull  so  safely,  secretly  she  threw 
it  into  a  latrine.  She  did  this  because  it  is  supposed  that  when 
the  bones  of  a  deceased  person  are  thus  defiled  that  person's  spirit 
will  remain  for  ever  in  hell.  The  outcome  of  the  skull's  fate, 
when  made  known  to  the  Pandit,  convinced  him  that  the  writing 
on  the  skull  was  correct. 

14    vfvi  ^Jf^.    Dhuni  pani. 

Fire  and  water,  i.  e.  ministering  to  a  Faldr. 

E.  g.  The  fire  used  by  a  Fakir  (ascetic)  for  warming  himself 
is  known  as  a  "Dhuni.^'  A  Fakir  needs  only  a  fire  to  warm  him, 
and  water  kept  in  a  gourd,  for  he  gets  cooked  food  from  other 
people  by  begging.  Those  who  help  him  by  supplying  fuel  and 
water  are  considered  to  have  earned  his  favor.  Ascetics  who 
perform  penances,  and  abstain  from  worldly  affairs  in  this  life 
are  supposed  to  become  kings,  ministers,  and  wealthy  people  in  the 
next  life,  and  so  in  that  existence  they  will  repay  the  service 
rendered  them  in  this  world  by  giving  good  posts  &c  in  their 
Government  to  those  who  gave  them  food,  water  and  fuel.  In  the 
same  way  the  people  who  now  find  favor  with  great  men  are 
believed  to  have  served  them  in  the  former  life  when  the  great 
ofBcers  and  kings  were  ascetics. 


(    64    ) 

15  gr'fi^  ^Hf^  ^J^  SRT»T  fk  ^^  ^l^-     Uphali  uphali 

dyun  phale  karamaki  dui  nale. 

No  matter  Jiow  hard  I  dig  I  can  only  get  two   nalis 
(four  seers  J. 

Used  to  dissuade  people  from  excessive  toil,  and  also  used  by 
one  who  is  discouraged  by  the  failure  of  his  own  efforts. 

16  «f7f^  ^T^  7f%  f%S^.     Nani  khori  thuli  ni  huni. 

Whose  fate  fQismatJ  is  small  can  never  become  great. 

Applied  to  a  poor  man  who  after  once  having  become 
prosperous  relapses  into  his  former  wretched  condition. 

Illustration  1.  Once  there  lived  a  sage  hermit  in  a  certain 
forest  far  away  from  human  habitations,  where  he  had  no  other 
creature  but  a  small  mouse  now  and  then  playing  around  him. 
One  day  the  mouse  having  been  pursued  by  a  cat  entered  the 
blanket  worn  by  the  hermit  for  covering.  The  hermit  having 
pity  on  the  helpless  little  creature  wished  him  to  be  a  cat.  The 
mouse  instantly  became  a  cat.  After  a  little  time  the  transformed 
animal  was  pursued  by  a  dog,  when  the  sage  was  kind  enough 
to  turn  him  into  a  dog.  On  the  dog  being  hunted  by  a  leopard 
the  sage  made  him  also  a  leopard.  The  leopard  used  to  move 
about  fearlessly  during  the  day-time  and  returned  to  the  jungle 
in  the  evening.  In  course  of  time  the  leopard  came  to  be  known 
by  the  people  of  the  neighbourhood  as  "the  hermit's  leopard." 
This  epithet  the  leopard  considered  as  a  disgrace  to  himself,  and 
thought  that  it  would  be  uttered  no  more  if  he  killed  the  hermit. 
So  he  went  to  kill  the  sage,  who,  knowing  his  evil  intention,  turned 
him  again  into  a  mouse. 

Illustration  2.  Once  a  king  while  journeying  in  a  forei^u 
country  saw  a  most  beautiful  girl  whom  ha  took  to  his  harem 
though  ignorant  of  her  parentage.  Soon  after  this  it  was  observed 
that  the  girl  was  waning  and  losing  her  beauty  day  by  day.  On 
enquiry  it  was  found  that  she  did  not  take  her  food  properly. 
Many  learned  and  experienced  phj'sicians  were  employed  to  benefit 
her,  but  in  vain.  She  could  not  give  any  clue  to  her  disorder. 
At  last  a  wise  man,  having  somehow  found  out  the  parentage 
of  the  damsel,  volunteered  to  bring  her  round  if  he  were  allowed 
to  feed  her.  The  offer  was  accepted.  After  this  the  man  havinf 
put  a  little  food  on  a  leaf  began  to  feed  her  at  short  intervals, 
and  she  began  to  eat,  as  she  was  accustomed  to.  (For  she  was 
the  daughter  of  a  sweeper,  a  class  who  do  not  cook  their  own  food. 


f    65    ) 

but  live  on  wLai  ttey  get  from  the  people  they  serve.  Thus  they 
take  a  little  food  as  they  receive  it  many  times  a  day.  (The  girl 
also  was  accustomed  to  the  habit).  Under  this  regimen  the  girl 
began  to  grow  fat  and  plump.  Bat  when  the  facts  were  made 
known  to  the  king  he  was  obliged  to  drive  her  out  of  his  seraglio. 

17  ^q^T  f^^^  ^'^r^T   ^T^T«     Apano  dinera  anyara 

kwarha. 

One  who  wishes  to  bestow  a  gift  will  give  it  even  if  the 
recipient  is  shut  up  (  hidden  )  in  a  dark  corner. 

Fate  must  fulfil  itself  whatever  the  outward  circumstances 
may  te.  In  other  words,  any  one  who  wishes  to  give  help  to 
another  will  do  so  without  regard  to  the  other's  position. 

18  ^    ^i   f%fq  %    ?j  9t1T.      K^i   S0&  ^pi   J^ai  son 
gboga. 

One  gets  shells,  another  pearls.  (Fn  diving  for  pearls). 
One  man  is  fortunate,  another  uofortuiaate. 

19  ^TWT  MUl  ^T  ^VHT.    Apana  bhaga  ko  khano. 

One  will  eat  ( suffer )  what  there  is  in  store  in  his 
destiny,  or  what  fate  has  decreed. 

This  means  thai  no  relatives  are  of  any  help  to  one  in  either 
prosperity  or  adversity. 

The  story  narrated  below  is  quoted  to  explain  the  proverb. 
It  is  said  that  there  was  once  a  king  who  had  seven  daughters, 
all  of  whom  were  very  dear  to  him.  One  day  while  sitting  among 
them  he  enquired  of  each  of  them  through  whose  luck  she  got 
her  maintenance.  All  of  them  except  the  youngest  said  "0  Father, 
we  as  well  as  the  world  under  your  sceptre  depend  on  your  good 
luck  for  maintenance  and  protection."  The  seventh  and  youngest 
differed  from  the  others  and  said,  "0  Sire,  though  you  have  givea 
me  birth,  still  I  shall  have  to  undergo  whatever  there  may  be  in 
my  luck.  I  do  not  at  all  depend  on  your  luck."  This  statement 
made  the  king  indignant  against  this  daughter,  and  he  ordered 
her  to  be  expelled  from  his  palace  and  placed  where  four  roads 
meet,  to  be  taken  away  by  any  body  who  might  wish  to  have  her. 
But  he  gave  the  other  daughters  to  powerful  and  wealthy  princes 
in  marriage  with  an  excessive  amount  of  dowry,  so  that  it  might 
last  for  generations.     The  banished  girl,  as  soon  as  she  was  thrown 

I 


(  ^  } 

on  the  road  far  oflf  from  thie  town  of  her  father  made  a  vow  in  her 
mind  to  make  the  first  man  she  met  her  husband.  The  man  who 
first  came  turned  out  to  be  a  woodman,  who  used  to  earn  his  bread 
by  selling  firewood  daily.  According  to  her  vow  the  girl  took 
him  for  her  husband  and  went  to  his  home,  where  she  began  to 
live  as  his  wife,  doing  the  necessary  domestic  work  for  him. 
One  day  while  he  was  about  to  take  his  load  of  firewood  to  the 
town  she  saw  that  the  load  consisted  of  sandal  wood.  On  enquiry 
she  found  that  her  husband  had  supplied  that  kind  of  wood  to  the 
ting  of  the  city  ( her  own  father )  for  many  years  past  on 
credit,  and  received  only  two  annas  (about  1^  pence)  a  day.  She 
prepared  a  bill  for  him,  which,  after  deduction  of  what  he  had 
already  received,  amounted  to  a  lac  of  Rupees  as  the  price  of  the 
sandal,  and  instructed  her  husband  to  demand  this  sum  from  the 
king.  The  wood-man  did  as  he  was  told,  and  received  a  lac  of 
rupees,  with  which  he  came  home.  "With  such  a  large  sum  in 
her  possession  she  did  not  like  to  remain  in  the  wretched  hovel 
she  and  her  husband  were  living  in.  So  she  selected  a  nice  site 
for  her  palace  and  ordered  it  to  be  dug  out,  squared  and  levelled. 
While  this  was  being  done  she  found  in  the  place  four  invaluable 
large  rubies,  besides  immense  wealth  in  gold,  buried  under-ground. 
The  rubies  on  sale  fetched  her  four  lacs  of  rupees.  This  wealth 
she  invested  in  prudent  speculation  as  well  as  in  buying  innumerable 
villages  in  the  neighbourhood  and  in  various  kinds  of  trade.  All 
these  transactions  in  time  greatly  added  to  their  wealth,  and  her 
husband  began  to  be  called  a  king.  Once  after  this  the  hereditary 
king  was  assailed  and  would  have  been  defeated  and  driven  out 
of  his  kingdom  had  it  not  been  for  the  help  the  new  king  gave  in 
defeating  the  assailants.  This  event  put  the  original  king  under 
obligation  to  and  made  him  acquainted  with  the  new  king.  He 
was  yet  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  his  own  daughter  was  the  wife 
of  the  new  king,  and  that  the  latter  was  his  old  woodman.  After 
this  one  day  the  king  with  his  royal  family  and  train  was  invited 
by  the  woodman  to  a  feast.  The  wife  having  put  a  drop  of  curd 
on  her  right  foot  (among  the  Hindus  food  is  distributed  with 
naked  foot)  served  each  course  herself,  disguising  herself  each 
time  by  putting  on  a  diflferent  costume.  The  guests  were  astonish- 
ed that  instead  of  one  the  host  had  so  many  waiters.  As  soon  as 
-the  feast  was-over  the  king  and  the  royal  family  were  seated  in 
another  apartment.  The  king  was  astonished  to  find  here  a  woman 
saluting  and  addressing  him  as  her  father.  He  recognized  his 
daughter  and  acknowledged  that  every  one  ought  to  depend  on 
his  or  her  own  kismat  (fate)  and  shewed  her  her  other  sisters,  who, 
having  lost  all  they  had,  had  become  dependant  on  him,  and  was 
convinced  that  no  relation  howsoever  wealthy  and  powerful  or 
poor  he  may  be  can  make  a  man  «itber  prosperous  or  otherwise. 


(  67  ; 

20  Ji^Ti^T'^^1  %mr^r  ^^T.     Gaino  bapu  dela  laino- 
ko  delo. 

My  father  will  give  me  jewelry  ((gol'd  and'  silver 

ornaments)  but  who  will  give  me   the   luch  in  store 

for  m£  ? 

Used  to  teach  people  that  they  should  depend  on  their  lot, 
and  not  on  getting  from  others. 

21  ^TgTT  ^  51^  ^H  JfiT  1i^.     Karatuta  ka  nala  karma 
ka  pbala. 

The  stalks  ( of  crops  )  come  by  indiistry,  but  the  yield 

depends  on  luck. 

E.  g.  A  cultivator  can,  only  make  the  crops  grow,  but  if  he- 
has  ill  luck  the  crops  will  be  damaged,  or  destroyed  in  some 
way  or  otheri. 

'^'^  ?5j  qii'?T^  ^  51^^.     Eba  kapali  saha-.  sharira, 

JSat  O  skull,  and  endure  O-  body; 

Used  by  one  who  is  angry  with  his  ill  luck.  Bjr  skull  he 
means  his  evil  destiny.  The  sutures  of  the  skull  are  supposed^ 
to  be  written  words  in  which  a  man's  destiny  is  recorded  J, 

FAULT-FINDING. 

Apana  ganda  ko  lekho  na  jokho  paraya  ganda  ko.  janthi 
to  teko. 

Unmindful  of  his  own  large  goitre  he  tells  another  to 
support  his  on  a  stick. 

Wa  see  the  faults  of  others,  but  not  our  own.  C.  /.  "The 
faults  of  our  neighbours  with  freedom  we  blame,  but  tax  not 
ourselves  though  we  practise  the  same." 


(     fi8    ) 

IMustrated  Bt/  the  following  story  :^ — 

While  sittimg  in  Court  before  the  Emperor  Akabar  the- 
Great,  his  chief  minister  Birbal  was  guilty  of  an  act  of  indecency. 
At  which  the  other  ministers  present  being  envious  of  his  position 
cried  out  that  Birbal  had  committed  a  very  disrespectful  act 
in  the  august  presence  of  the  Emperor,  and  that  he  deserved 
capital  punishment.  The  kiag  a>greeing  with  them  ordered 
Birbal  to  be  impaled.  Birbal  being  thus  convicted  of  hia 
unavoidable  fault  did  not  refute  the  charge  at  that  time.  But  a 
few  days  before  the  date  fixed  for  the  execution  d"  the  sentence 
he  presented  himself  to  the  king  and  said  to  bim  that  he  had 
already  instructed  him  in  all  the  aits  and  sciences  of  which  bo 
was  possessed,  but  the  art  of  sowing  pearls  he  had  had  no 
opportunity  of  imparting  to  him,  and  that  after  his  death  there- 
was  no  one  who  would  be  able  to  instruct  bim  in  this  mystery. 
The  Emperor  being  interested  in  this  speech  ordered  that  he- 
should  be  executed  after  he  had  shewn  him  this  art.  So  Birbal 
was  allowed  to  sow  the  pearls.  In  order  to  revenge  himself  npoit 
his  enemies  (the  other  ministers)  he  selected  the  sites  on  which' 
their  houses  were  built  for  the  sowing  of  the  pearls.  The  house* 
-were  ordered  to  be  razed  to  the  ground  and  made  into  fields.  He 
then  asked  for  lacs  of  rupees  in  order  to  provide  the  seed  pearls 
Having  so  far  accomplished  his  purpose,  he  sowed  barley  on  the- 
fields  prepared  for  the  purpose.  After  some  time  the  barley  sprung 
up  and  grewy  when  Birbal  himself  went  to  the  Emperor  and 
t»ld  bim  that  the  pearls  were  now  ready  for  reaping  early  in  the 
morning.  (For  in  the  early  morning  each  dew-drop  on  the  barley- 
appeared  like  a  beautiful  pearl).  He  also  recommended  that  the- 
Emperor  should  reap  them  with  his  own  bands,  as  the  pearls  would 
turn  into  water  if  touched  by  any  one  who  was  not  in  the  habit 
of  committing  the  act  of  indecency  of  which  be  had  been  guilty. 
Whereupon  the  king  was  sorely  troubled  and  confessed  that  he  was- 
unable  to  reap  them,  and  the  ministers  and  the  other  servant* 
of  the  Darbdra  all  confessed  their  inability  to  undertake  the 
delicate  work  of  reaping  the  pearls,  not  being  free  from  the  fault 
of  which  Birbal  bad  been  found  guilty.  Birbal  then  said,^ 
"0  Lord  of  my  soul  and  property,  if  no  one  is  free  from  the 
fault  of  which  I  have  been  guilty,  why  should  I  lose  my  life  for  a 
habit  common  to  all  ?"  The  king  was  then  obliged  to  grant  him 
pardon.  Compare  the  Sanskrit  proverb.  "The  wicked  blame 
others  for  small  faults,  though  they  be  small  as  mustard  seeds,. 
but  will  not  see  their  own  faults,  though  they  be  large  as 
the  bel  fruit." 

Also  the  mote  in  another's  eye  and  the  beam  in   one's   owa 
eye  of  the  Gospel  story. 


(    69    ) 

2  ^T^^lft  »I5W5I'»Ar  ^T^si  ir  ^T-  Apun  korhi  garw. 
gana  pakau  aurana  nau  dharau. 

A  leper  rotting  and  full  of  sores,  blames  another  on 
the  same  score. 

I.  e.  Exposing  the  faults  of  others  with  a  view  to  conceal 
one's  own. 

FEAR  OR  SERVILITY. 

1  ^rf^  ^%.    Dara  ki  swasti. 

Giving  salutation  of  ^^ Swasti"  through  fear. 

E.  g.  The  salatation  "SwasfC  is  only  uttered  by  a  Brahmana 
to  a  king,  or  to  those  who  are  of  royal  family  after  they  have 
bowed  down  before  or  saluted  him.  But  generally  through  fear 
the  same  word  is  used  by  a  Brahmana  before  a  king  salutes  him 
(in  order  to  please  him)  or  to  any  one  in  power  though  not 
entitled  to  it. 

Hence  the  proverb  is  applied  to  one  who  from  fear  acts 
contrary  to  his  conscience  and  custom. 

2  •^JJ  M%j  ^gjg  ^T  fi[*|  ^  -set  (51317^,     Basa  parbo 

kalala  ka  bina  mada  rai  nijanu. 

One  in  the  power  of  a  distiller  cannot  abstain  from 
wine  (  through  fear  or  in  order  to  please  him  ). 

FOLLY  &  IMPRUDENCE, 

1  ^^  ^^  ^T  ^^T  11  "^^I  ^^  ^T  ^^  If.     Un  pana  ka 
cbula  pana  cbula  pana  ka  unpana. 

To  bring  in  outsiders  and  place  them  near  the  hearth ^ 
and  to  drive  away  those  of  the  household. 

The  custom  among  Hindus  prohibits  persons,  other  than 
kinsmen  and  relations,  to  approach  their  kitchen,  otherwise  their 
food  is  rendered  unholy  and  useless  ;  and  thus  by  "hearth-people" 
is  meant  the  members  of  the  same  house  and  near  relations. 
So  foreigners  if  taken  into  one's  house,  are  sure  to  rain  the  house, 
having  no  sympathy  with  the  family.  For  instance  when  a 
concubine  is  taken  into  the  house  and  the  married  wife  expelled 
from  it. 


f     70     ) 

2  ^qf5i  »TT^  fk^J^J  ^XJ  sjlt^  ^1^.    Apani  mani 
birana  dera  jaika  khani. 

To  eat  one's  own  grain  in  another's  home. 

Refers  to  one  who  is  independent  and  not  tinder  obligation 
to  others.  In  another  sense  this  is  also  quoted  of  one  who  foolishly 
maintains  independence,  E.  g.  a  man  who  is  visiting  another,  is 
expected  to  live  at  the  expense  of  his  host. 

3  ^^g  %T  Z\  f^WTf%  5T^  ^^rf%  "Vf.    Akala  ko  tappu. 
pichharhi  dhhala  agharhi  appu. 

One  who  loses  his  presence  of  mind  holds  his  shield' 
behind  him  and  puts  himself  in  front. 

4  ^fcIT'Q  f^  %  ^T^^^T^  ^  ^.    Babajyu  ki  jai  ashirbada 
men  gai. 

The  "Jai"    ( blessing )  of  a  Jbgi  (  ascetic )  goes  in 
blessings. 

This  is  applicable  to  one  who  neglects  his  own  affairs  for  the 
sake  of  others.  , 

This  proverb  is  a  slur  on  an  ascetic,  who  instead  of  devoting 
his  time  and  attention  to  the  contemplation  of  the  Almighty  with 
the  object  of  attaining  the  chief  end  of  man,  wastes  his  life  in 
profusely  throwing  away  his  blessings  saymg  "Jai"  (victory)  to 
every  one  he  comes  across.  An  ascetic  when  saluted  is  bound  to 
express  his  good  wish  (Jai)  to  the  person  making  an  obeisance 
to  him.  He  wishes  triumph  to  others  but  does  not  triumph  over 
his  own  desires  (lower  nature). 

5  ^^?r  ^^I^T.     Bhekuwa  kulyarho. 
A  dull  head  is  a  blunted  axe. 

Applied  to  a  very  stupid  person. 

6  sirft  ^^  "^r^llT  S^'HT  ^1?T  ^TIT.    'Jatri  Haridwar* 
gaya  Humana  dagarha  laga. 

The  pilgrims  go  to  Saridicdra,  but  the  ghosts  also  ga> 
loith  them. 


{    71     ) 

"Humanas"  are  spirits  that  take  human  forms,  tut  cannot 
perform  human  acts,  and  so  cannot  perform  any  religious  rites  at 
Haridwara  (a  famous  place  of  pilgrimage).  Applied  to  one  who 
tries  to  do  what  is  beyond  his  power  ;  imitating  greater  persons. 
Superstitious  people  stippoSe  'that  evil  spirits  accompany  human 
beings  invisibly  in  order  to  take  possession  of  them  and  also  to 
imitate  them,  merely  because  they  were  human  beings  themselves 
before  they  died. 

7  5q-^  ^  ^f  71  ^^T  3T%-     Gobara  lya   kayo  gu 
libera  tbarho^ 

One  deputed  to  bring  cow  dung  has  brought  human 
excreta. 

Applied  to  a  very  stupid  man. 

8  HH^T^  ^^f^  '^r«I  «IT^T.      Gandu  hatbi  gbara  ki 

pbauja  marau. 
A  wicked  elephant  destroys  its  oion  army. 
Fouling  one's  own  nest. 

9  V,^  ^^  JTS^T  ^^    ^^  1{3%T-     Gurba  dika    gudalo 

cbuka  dika  rutbalo. 

One  gets  angry  with  a  man  who  gives  him  treacle,  and 
pleased  with  him  who  gives  a  sour  liquid. 

Applied  to  a  foolish  man  who  is  annoyed  with  another's  good 
advice,  but  pleased  with  him  who  gives  him  bad  advice.  This 
corresponds  with  what  is  elsewhere  said,  that  good  advice  to  a 
foolish  man  makes  him  angry  rather  than  wise,  just  as  milk  given 
to  a  snake  will  only  increase  the  quantity  of  its  poison. 

10  «»|^    ^^«T  J^I^    S«H!FT-      Hagani    bakbata   mwala 
dhununu. 

One  begins  to  look  for  the  door  when  lie  is  under  the 
necessity  of  easing  himself. 

Applied  to  imprudent  persons  who  do  not  provide  for  future 
Qeceasities. 


(     72     ) 

11  ir7^  ^lf\  ^WJ  ^TrJ  ITKII'irr  ^T  ^"^^-     Jora  thorhi 
gussa  bhauta  marakhana  ka  lakshyana. 

One  who  has  Utile  strength  but  much  anger  carries  the 
marks  of  one  who  will  be  beaten  ( *.  e.  will  surely 
get  a  licking  ). 

Used  as  a  caution  to  poor  persons  against  shewing  anger. 
C.  f.  "if  you  cannot  bite,  never  shew  your  teeth." 

12  ^.'njJiT  ^j^  f%  ^pc  -^jfz   ;jT%3  q'^f%   ^j^   xi^7  ^j^. 

Baniya  bola  ki  meri  hati  na  baitha  paharhi  bola  puro  tola. 

The  Baniya  ( shop-keeper )  says  "Do  not  sit  in  my 
shop."  Tlie  Faharhi  (  hill  man  )  answers,  "please  weigh 
me  tlie  full  weight."  {for  the  grain  he  has  brought 
to  sell ). 

This  is  applied  to  one  who  in  spite  of  his  being  very  much 
disliked  by  another  asks  him  to  do  some  thing  for  him  which  the 
other  will  not  do. 

13  HTfT '^ri^^  5^r<T  TIE^.     Bhata  khaika  jata  puchbada._ 

After  having  eaten  rice  from  a  man^s  hand  to  enquire 
about  his  caste. 

A  man  generally  enquires  about  another's  caste  before  he 
intermarries  in  his  family  or  eats  rice  from  his  hand.  If  he  has 
already  entered  into  such  an  alliance  without  previous  enquiry  he 
should  make  no  enquiries  afterwards.  If  he  does  so,  he  exposes 
himself  to  ignominy  and  disgrace  ;  for  after  eating  rice  (not  other 
kinds  of  food)  from  a  man's  hand  you  can  refuse  him  nothing. 

14  f%^f  ^^s^  ^^I'^  ^^'  Sikhain  akala  cbadhayun  pani. 

Borrowed  wisdom  and  water  thrown  upward  (  cannot 
be  depended  on ). 

Applied  to  one  who  being  devoid  of  wits  is  instructed  for  a 
certain  occasion,  but  fails  to  use  properly  the  words  taught  him. 
Illustrated  by  this  story. 

A  villager  had  a  younger  brother  who  was  a  simpleton. 
One  day,  wishing  to  hear  news  of  his  father-in-law's  family  he 
sent  him  thither,  instructing  him  to  talk  cheerfully  and  politely, 
and  not  sit  like  an  owl,  as  was  his  usual  custom.  On  arriving 
at  the  house,   the   members   of  the   family   gathered   round  him 


C    73    ) 

and  began  relating  several  misfortunes  which  had  happened  to 
them  lately,  such  as  the  death  of  their  father,  the  loss  of  their 
irrigated  land  by  a  flood  etc.  The  simpleton,  remembering  his 
brother's  instructions,  replied  to  each  recital,  "Really  now, 
that's  very  nice.  I  am  glad  to  hear  this,"  ■whereupon  the  family 
"were  enraged,  thinking  he  was  making  fun  of  them.  Returning 
home,  he  told  his  brother  what  he  had  done.  His  brother 
called  him  all  the  fools  and  idiots  under  the  sun,  and  told  him 
that  he  ought  to  have  expressed  his  sorrow  and  sympathy  for 
their  misfortunes.  After  some  months  the  simpleton  was  again 
sent  to  the  same  house.  This  time  they  began  telling  him  good 
news,  about  four  sons  born  in  the  family,  large  profit  made  by 
dealing  in  bullocks  etc,  to  which  the  fellow  kept  replying, 
"Good  God  1  I'm  very  sorry  to  hear  this;"  whereat  the  people 
of  the  house  were  so  angry  that  they  kicked  him  out,  and  ordered 
him  never  to  show  his  face  there  again. 


15  (li^Tf^  f3[^TT   ^^    'BHrar  ^^   f^T(^      Shikari 

Bhikara  khelani  chutiya  gaila  phirani. 

Sportsmen  hunt  for  game,  but  the  foolish  aimlessly 
follow  them. 

Applied  to  people  who  idle  away  their  time  in  the  hope  of  profit- 
ing by  the  labors  of  others. 

16  ^5IT^  'ilT^    ^51T^  ^  5T^  ^'J^'^EIT^V    Kanali 
khaika  kafiali  ki  jarha  ni  pahachyanado. 

One  who  eats  the  nettle  but  does  not  know  its  roots. 

Applied  to  one  who  is  utterly  ignorant  and   never   asks   the 
reason  or  origin  of  the  most  ordinary  things. 

17  %fqi^^  f^m  %VH  ^fz  ^^  fVS-      Lekhi  bera  dirtu 
hatha  kati  bera  dinu. 

Giving  writings  is  the  same  as  cutting  off  the  hand  ? 

I.  e.    He   who   gives   written   obligations  is   in  the  power 
of  another. 

Compare  Proverbs,   22,26.     Be  not  one  of  them   that  are 
sureties  for  debts. 

"If  thou  art  surety  for  thy  neighbour,  thou  art  snared."  Pro.  6. 1. 

J 


(     74    .) 

18  ^^  ^Tt^f^  ^rt*    SIkha  pai  bechi  khai. 

Se  happened  to  learn  something  biCt  sold  his  wisdom. 

Applied  to  one  who  makes  poor  or  improper  use  of  his 
resources.  C.  f.  "Bay  the  truth,  and  sell  it  not ;  also  wisdom, 
and  instruction  and  understanding." 

19  ^^Efl^ljjfx:  c|i7  ^gj,      Lachhuwa   kothari  ka  chela, 

LacKhuwa  hotharVs  sons. 

Lachhuwa  was,  many  years  ago,  living  in  a  village  known 
as  "Kothyara"  (Patti  Bherang,  Pargana  Gangoli,  District  Kumaun). 
He  had  nine  strong,  stout,  and  good  looking  sons,  but  all  dull- 
headed,  foolish  and  stupid.  They  have  become  proverbial,  and 
their  names  are  used  by  people  to  bring  home  to  their  own  youno- 
sons  and  relations  their  follies  and  imprudences,  when  they  have 
not  the  common  sense  to  do  a  thing  properly,  to  encourage  them 
to  sharpen  their  wits. 

"A  recital  of  a  few  of  their  acts  will  illustrate  the  proverb. 

Once  their  father  proposed  to  build  a  house,  and  desired  them 
to  cut  beams,  sleepers  and  planks  in  the  jungle  for  the  purpose, 
and  convey  them  home  by  a  hand,  or  a  span,  (as  the  phrase  goes  in 
the  hills  when  a  thing  is  to  be  done  at  one's  convenience)  to  the 
spot  where  the  house  was  being  built.  Accordingly  they  went 
to  the  jungle,  and  cut  trees,  but  instead  of  bringing  them  home 
they  cut  them  into  pieces  of  a  cubit  or  span  in  length.  The  father 
(who  was  expecting  the  timber  daily)  on  enquiry  after  many  days 
found  to  his  regret  and  astonishment  that  the  timber  had  been 
completely  spoiled. 

Again  one  day  while  cutting  trees  in  the  jungle  they  were 
panic-struck  by  seeing  a  tiger  at  a  distance.  Unnecessarily 
apprehending  that  perhaps  one  ot  them  had  been  taken  away  by 
the  tiger,  one  of  them  began  to  count  their  number  to  ascertain 
whether  they  were  nine  or  not.  He  counted  and  found  eight  only, 
because  he  did  not  count  himself.  The  others  tried  and  found  the 
same  result.  They  then  began  to  lament  and  cry  out  that  one  of 
them  had  been  taken  away  by  the  tiger.  As  soon  as  their  father 
heard  their  cries  and  lamentations  he  was  paralysed,  and  became 
as  one  thunder-struck.  But  on  coming  out  and  seeing  all  the  nine 
present  he  began  to  mourn  over  the  stupidity  of  his  sons. 

A  third  time  their  father  gave  them  cloth  and  desired  them 
to  make  skirts  for  the  women  of  his  household.  Instead  of 
meas,nring  the  cloth  on  the  person    of  each   of  the   women   before 


(  75  y 

the  skirts  were  sewn,  they  measured  cloth  round  the  trunks  of 
Chir  trees,  and  sewed  the  skirts  arouud  them,  and  reported  to  their 
father  that  the  skirts  were  ready,  but  could  not  be  taken  off.  The 
father  went  to  see  what  was  really  the  matter,  and  was  disgusted 
to  find  how  stupid  his  sons  were. 

Again,  on  another  occasion,  their  father,  in  order  to  make 
them  of  some  use,  gave  them  a  large  sum  of  money  to  deal  in  cloth. 
They  brought  cloth  from  Kashipur  fa  market  in  the  Tarai  district 
adjoining  Kumaun)  and  began  to  sell  it.  After  some  months  the 
father  asked  them  whether  they  were  getting  any  profit  by  the 
trafiic.  They  replied  "0  father,  we  are  getting  immense  profit 
from  the  sale  of  the  cloth  ;  what  we  purchased  at  only  eight  yards 
for  the  rupee  at  Kashipur,  we  are  selling  here  at  the  enhanced 
rate  of  twelve  yards  for  the  rupee." 

On  the  fifth  occasion  the  father  requested  them  to  dig  some 
wells  for  the  sake  of  merit  as  he  himself  had  become  very  old 
and  was  about  to  die.  The  sons  went  out  and  had  a  talk  among 
themselves.  They  arrived  at  the  sage  conclusion  that  there  was  ' 
scarcely  any  need  of  digging  wells  in  the  vi'lage,  where  there  were 
already  many  water  springs,  so  they  had  better  furnish  water  on 
the  tops  of  high  mountains  where  it  was  most  needed.  Therefore 
they  dug  many  ditches  on  the  peaks  of  mountains  to  get  water, 
but  to  no  purpose.  These  ditches  or  dry  holes  or  wells  are  still 
in  existence  in  Pargannah  Gangoli  and  are  called  after  them. 
"Lachhuwa  Kothari's  sons'  wells." 

Lastly,  when  their  father  died,  all  of  them  proposed  to 
amuse  themselves  by  flying  about  as  birds.  Knowing  that  they 
could  not  fly  without  wings,  they  tied  large  "Sups"  with  which 
corn  is  sifted,  to  their  bodies  and  arms,  and  leaping  down  a  high 
precipice  perished  like  Icarus  of  old. 

20  ^^i^  ^7  ^.ft  ^9  S»rT  %J  Vjt  ^KT.  Wokhala  ko  bhai 
Mushala  Huma  ko  bhai  Thuma. 

The   brother  of  a  mortar  is  a  pestle  and  Swm&'s 
brother  is  Thvmd. 

Two  persons  wlio  ar€  alike  foolish  and  illiterate. 

21  ^^,^  5f  ti^f%  *^'^^  TT^i^t*  Sakani  na  pakani  banduka 

takani. 

One  unable   to  shoot  straight  aims  at  another  with 
a  gun. 


(    76    J 

Applied  to  one  who  vainly  attempts  any  thing  beyood  his 
capacity  ar  power.  C  f.  "If  you  cannot  bite,  ntrer  shew 
your  teeth." 

22  q|]^j  4t^  ^{^  f^^«B^T^^T'    Kala  shlkha  dfnl  silaka- 
do  rayo. 

A  foolish  man  broods  over  all  he  hear». 

Illustration,  A  fo&lish  man  once  heard  some  one  say  that 
people  about  to  die  become  cold  in  the  hands  and  feet.  This  saying 
took  hold  of  him  so  that  he  mever  forgot  it.  One  day  he  went  out 
to  dig  Tairku,  am  edible  root  highly  prized  by  the  villagers,  and 
■which  is  often  dug  from  a  depth  of  3  or  4 "  feet  in  the  ground. 
"When  the  fool  had  finished  digging  and  collecting  the  roots,  his 
hands  and  feet  became  very  cold,  as  it  was  the  winter  season. 
Remembering  the  saying  that  cold  hands  and  feet  are  signs  of 
approaching  death,  he  left  the  basket  of  roots  in  the  jungle  and 
■went  home,  telling  his  friends  that  he  was  about  to  die.  He  thea 
laid  himself  down  and  soon  assumed  all  the  appearance  of  a  dead 
man.  His  friends  thinking  he  was  really  dead  carried  him  to 
the  junction  of  two  streams,  where  they  slightly  scorched  the- 
body  and  left  it..  That  evening  two  travellers  passing  that 
■way,  and  not  knowing  the  road,,  began  to  speak  about  the  way  they 
should  take  to  reach  a  certain  village.  The  fool  hearing  them  said,. 
"When  I  was  alive  I  used  to  goby  such  a  path,,  but  1  am  dead 
now."  The  travellers  -were  frightened,  and  supposing  that  tho^ 
man  was  a  ghost,  stoned  him  to  death. 

23  tj^  »TT  ^T  %1^J  "e?  ^tft  ^1T  ^^T^  ^T  ^W.     Bauli 

ma  ka  baula  puta  aundi  ganga  parala  ka  suta. 

The  foolish  son  of  a  foolish  mother  wishes  to  cross  the 
swollen  torrent  on  a  bridge  of  straw. 

Foolish  people  do  or  attempt  foolish  things. 

Illustration.  Once  the  Emperor  Akbar  the  Great  desired 
iis  vizier  Birbal  to  produce  three  fools  before  him  within  a  week. 
IBirbal  accordingly  went  about  in  search  of  them.  While  thus 
engaged  he  saw  a  man  riding  a  pregnant  mare  with  a  heavy  load 
of  fuel  on  his  head,  and  enquired  of  him  why  he  -was  doing  so. 
The  man  replied  that  he  did  so  only  to  spare  the  mare  as  it  was 
pregnant.  Amused  at  his  reasoning,  Birbal  noted  him  down  as 
one  of  the  three  fools  he  was  in  search  of.     So-  he  took  him  to  the- 


(    77    ) 

Emperor,  who,  after  hearing  from  the  man  the  reason  he  had  to 
give  for  his  conduct,  declared  that  the  man  was  right.  After  this 
he  asked  Birbal  why  he  had  brought  only  one  fool  instead  of  three. 
Birbal  said  "0  Sire,  this  is  the  first  (natural^  fool  ;  your  majesty 
is  the  second,  who  has  declared  his  conduct  to  he  right  ;  ^nd 
1  am  the  third,  who  have  brought  him  before  your  majesty  to 
be  judged. 

24  %x  H^T  ^t^  ^T-     Chora  bhalo  bekupha  buro. 

A  thief  is  better  than  a  stupid  man. 

I.  e.  A  stupid  man  is  worse  than  a  thief  to  deal  with. 

25  ^'^T't  nxm  ^l^T  •f'l^^*     Jabana  tarasha  khando 
Uajadlka. 

A  cutting  tongue  and  the  term  ( within  which  a  debt  is 

to  be  repaid )  will  be  short. 

No  one  can  get  his  work  done  or  purpose  accomplished  by 
using  harsh  words,  or  taking  severe  and  improper  measures.  For 
instance,  if  one  were  to  accost  a  woman  as  "mother"  she  would  feel 
highly  pleased,  but  would  be  greatly  incensed  if  one  in  saluting  or 
addressing  her  were  to  say  to  her  "0  my  father's  wife"  though 
both  terms  have  the  same  signification. 

26  ^umi  «srei  ^  ^^f^'  ^T'':!^-      i-pana  khuta  me 
kulyarhi  marani. 

One  strikes  an  axe  against  his  own  foot. 
To  do  a  thing  which  ruins  one's  own  interest. 


""O 


27  "^f^'SIT  if^^lT  ^T^^  irf^llT*    Chutiya  marigaya 
aulada  chhorhigaya. 

The  foolish  man  is  dead,  but  has  left  offspring. 

By  this  proverb  the  father  is  still  accused  of  foolishness 
through  his  foolish  son.     His  follies  live  after  him. 


(     78     ) 

28  yfia  %j  <i^T  ^^'g  ^T  ^^f.    Gantha  ko  puro  akala^ 
ko  hino. 

Full  of  knots  but  witless. 

The  villagers  keep  their  money  tied  up  in  knots  in  their 
clothes  ;  so  full  of  knots  means  very  rich. 

Applied  to  one  who  is  rich,  but  destitute  of  wit,  and  so 
deceived  and  cheated  by  every  one.  One  who  has  more  money 
than  wit  to  use  it  properly. 

29  UTsfi  ^TT«!  ^t  ^W  ^T^'^^t  ^t^T-     Shukra  aurana  sort' 

sano  apun  son  kano. 

The  planet  Venus  [in  JSindu  astronomy,  of  the  male  sex) 

is  two-eyed  to  other  people,  but  blind  (one-eyed)  to  himself. 

E.  g.  This  planet  is  said  to  have  only  one  eye,  the  other 
has  been  put  out.  In  spite  of  this  defect,  according  to  astrologers 
he  bestows  good  fortune  while  in  the  ascendant,  but  is  unable 
to  repair  his  own  loss.  This  proverb  is  thus  quoted  in  reference 
to  a  man  who  is  engaged  in  doing  good  to  others  but  neglects  his- 
own  affairs.  The  lesson  usually  drawn  from  this  is  that  a  man- 
ought  first  to  look  to  his  own  welfare  and  then  try  to  do  good  to 
other  people.     C.f.  "Physician,  heal  thyself." 

30  5ir(!j    *i  q'^^r"!   iT«fi^P^T^.      Jana    na    pahachyana 

bhaka  angwala. 

To  embrace  at  once  one  who  is  a  perfect  stranger. 

Applies  to  one's  revealing  his  secrets  or  making  requests  to> 
another  with  whose  conduct  and  character  he  is  unacquainted. 

31  ^Tilir  ^f^  I^T^T-     Pauna  puchhi  pakorha. 

He  asks  the  guest  what  food  he  prefers. 

E.  g.  To  enquire  from  the  guest  as  to  the  kind  of  food  he- 
likes  to  eat.  It  is  improper  and  against  etiquette  for  the  guest- 
to  say  what  he  will  eat.  He  who  is  to  receive  a  gift  should  not  be 
asked  what  is  his  choice. 


C    79    ) 

32  g  qqisj  ?i^  ^jn  m  %j  ^i^Y^  ^q^T  ^j%     Tu  kyana 
gaye  haika  ko  kamaye  apano  khaye. 

Whi/  have  you  been  ruined  ?  because  you  earned  jor 
x)thers,  but  fed  yourself  at  your  own  expense  ( you  did  the 
work  of  others  without  food  and  wages ). 

E.  g.    The  custom  is  for  the   employer  to  feed  the   labourer 
-and  also  pay  his  wages. 

Applied  to  foolish  squanderers  who  do  not  care  for  wages. 

33  ^?5  "57^  ^^j:  -ggr^  ^T  ^"fT^  "Sltt,      Dekha  hale 

sahura  buwari  ko  mutanai  bati. 

I  have  seen  the  conduct  of  my  daughter-in-law  frojn 
the  manner  she  performed  the  offices  of  nature. 

An  unchaste  woman  reveals  her  character  by  trifling  actions  ; 
or,  more  generally,  we  can  judge  of  a  person's  nature  by  small 
indications,  e.  g.  untidiness  or  carelessness. 

34  ^t%«i  f  T^    qf^5l    %^'      Aghina  daurha  pachhina 
chaurha. 

Se  runs  forward  but  neglects  behind. 

Applies  to  one  who  makes  advancement  or  progress  in  hia 
Jesson  or  work,  but  neglects  what  he  has  already  attained. 

35  gj^  "sqiRl^  m^  ^rfff   ^1T-      Lato  apani  jasi  dhoti 
Liga'. 

The  dumb  (in  spite  of  other's  admonitions)  will  cover  his 
loins  (  or  dress  himself)  in  his  own  ^clumsy)  loay. 

That  is  an  idiot  will  not  follow  or  act  upon  the  good  advice 

fiven  him  by  others  superior  to  him  in  every  respect.   C.  f.  "Fools 
espise  wisdom." 


(     80    ) 

36  ^  ^i^?;  mf^  Raif?El'     Gai  kasai  kanl  patyanchhya. 

A  cow  trusts  in  a  butcher. 

Used  of  persons  void  of  intellect  who  trust  in  cheats  and 
thus  suffer  in  consequence. 

37  ^r^^  %^'^IK  W?T  TT  ^n  ^  "^f  ^T-    Bolika  kuma- 
hara  ghorha  ma  laga  ni  charbado. 

A  potter  will  not  ride  a  horse  even  if  told  to  do  so. 

A  potter  always  rides  an  ass,  hence  the  proverb. 
/.  e.    Foolish  people  do  not  listen  to  any  advice,  even  if  for 
their  own  comfort  or  benefit. 

FOOLISH  AMBITION. 

1  ^IT^^t^'ilfz  ^  W^  ^f  T*!.      Gana  son  langoti  nai 

tambd  son  mana. 

One  who  has  no  cloth  for  his  loins  (to  hide  his  nakedness) 
longs  for  a  tent. 

Preposterous  desires. 

2  -^^  t»T  ^\Z  ^  ^I^  ^  'aT^^'    Badana  para  langota 
ni  motyun  ki  kharida. 

One  who  has  no  cloth  to  cover  his   loins  wishes   to 
purchase  pearls. 

Preposterous  desires. 

3  Jm  %I^  H^»ig%t  #|t  ^15  'S^f^TJ't.      Mana  boda 

margala  khaun  syundi  ma  ku  dadela  ni  paun. 

I  have  not  even  the  dadela  (oil)  for  my  head  hut  I  have 
n  longing  for  sweetments  {cooked  in  oil). 

( I)adel=the  oil  left  after  cooking  piiris  ( cakes )  in  the 
cooking  vessel  i.  e.  burnt  oil ). 

Applied  to  one  who  longs  for  things  beyond  his  means. 
Women  apply  oil  to  their  head  in  order  to  decorate  and  tie 
their  hair. 


(    81     ) 

4  W5!^5||"%^*r5|^I^^liT'tT^-     Tanakonf  dhotf 
mana  boda  lao  moti. 

Nothing  to  wear,  yet  wishes  for  pearls, 

5  ITi!  %T  ^  ^^llt  *r^  ^  ^R^'RT'J^'     Tana  ko  nf  langoti 
tambu  ki  farmayasba. 

Nothing  to  wear,  yet  asks  for  a  tent., 

6  ■fR  ^T  5^  ^RTT  ^T1  ^Mi6  ^I^ItIT-     Tana  ko  ni  latta 
p4na  cbabauncbba  alapatta. 

No  cloth  to  fiover  his  person,  yet  he  wants  to  chew, 
betel  nid, 

7  zm  %j  ^HTT  9'^<T  lTl%9r-  Mana  hausiya  karama  gandiya. 
Seart  ambitious,  but  fate  imlv/cky. 

Used  when  poor  people  indulge  in  impossible  wishes, 

8  ^^  ^T^t  ^f*!  ^^t^.     Sabbi  sbyalpn  singa  ni  bondi. 

All  jackals  have  not  horns. 

Applied  ironically  to  those  who  aspire  to  some  dignity  and  pretend 
to  importance.     C.  f.  "All  that  glitters  is  not  gold." 

The  jackal  who  is  supposed  to  possess  a  horn  in  his  head  is 
made  king  of  the  jackals.  The  horn  comes  out  and  becomes  visible 
only  at  the  time  when  it  cries,  at  other  times  it  shrinks  and  is  there- 
fore not  seen.  Whenever  the  king  of  the  jackals  cries,  all  the 
jackals  are  obliged  to  acknowledge  him  as  their  lord  by  their 
howling  response.  If  any  pne  does  not  do  this  his  head  breaks  and 
he  dies.  The  king  of  jackals  is  said  to  yell  out  to  the  other  japkals. 
"Main  Dilli  ka  Badshah  hiin,  Main  Dilli  ka  Sadshah  bun,  Main 
Dilli  ka  Badshah  bun."  (1  am  emperor  of  Delhi.)  To  thi§  jll  the 
jackals  say  Ho,  ho,  ho.  (Yes  you  are,  yes  yon  are,  yes  you  are). 
People  attribute  many  strange  properties  to  the  horn  of  the  jackal 
(Shyala  singi).  Whoever  is  in  possession  of  the  horn  will  get 
the  king  in  his  own  power,  will  defeat  his  enemy,  will  drawmen  to 
his  side,  make)  women  love  him,  will  be  prosperous,  will  not  die  even 
if  struck  with  a  deadly  weapon  &c.  &c. 

The  Shyala  Singi  (horn  of  the  king  of  jackals)  is  reekoned 
as  one  of  the  Nid'his  (talismans  or  charms)  by  virtue  of  which  one 
can  get  everything  he  desires. 

ix. 


(     82    ) 

'9  ?|^  siigr  ^  SSJTf^^^T-  Gredi  na  palla  dui  byawatarula. 
Nothing  in  his  pocket  and  purse,  yet  wishes  to  marry 
two  brides. 

In  Gnrhwal  no  one  can  get  a  bride  unless  he  pays  smartly  for 
ier.     Applied  to  one  ambitious  beyond  his  position  and  power. 

10  Tf%  Jj^iTT  ^T1  '^T^^t  '?T^  '»'5T'^«T.   Rasi  gala  laga  harha 

son  liatiia  pasaranu. 

Soup  sticks  in  the  throat,   bid  he  stretches  forth  his 
'^handfor  a  bone. 

Applied  to  one  who  cannot  do  what  work  is  already  in  his 
hands  5'et  asks  for  more,  or  being  unable  even  io  do  an  ordinary 
thing  attempts  matters  beyond  his  power. 

11  TT^rr  ^T  5T^T  ^'S   ^■'^T  '51'liT.      Raja  ka  jasa  graba 
mera  laga  kai'a. 

Make  my  stars  the  samie  as  those  of  a  king. 

By  stars  literally  is  meant  circumstances  or  luck.  This  is 
applicable  to  a  very  irisignificant  person  who  aspires  after  high 
things  totally  beyond  his  reach,  or  competes  with  his  superiors. 

Stars= fortune.     High  ambition. 

FOPS,  BOASTERS  &  FASTIDIOUS  PEOPLE. 

1  »l^  ^T^I  iT^JI^T«1  ^T  1^%3!.     Grurha  khano  gulgulana 
ko  paraheja. 

One  who  eats  gurha   (  treacle )   but   abstains  from 
sweet  loaves  (  made  with  gurha  ). 
Foolish  scruples. 

2  'gif^  t5!Tif%  5T(^  fi^T.  JI^T  ^Tl^r-     Hathi  nigali  jano 
naacbhara  gala  lagano. 

To    strain    at    a   gnat    and    sicallow    ah   elephant 
or  camel. 

E.  g.  To  make  much  ado  about  the  performance  of  un- 
important" duties,  but  to  make  no  difficulties  about  neglecting  much 
more  important  affairs. 


(    83    )) 

3  %f  ZZ  "^Tl^  %^T-  r.^&^^  t^'tfli  baganne-dero.    ,t?  '  - 
Encamped  in  the    garden,   but  having    onl'if  a- •^ony 

and  a  half.  ,  : 

Pride  and  poverty.  .  . 

4  »TTTf5|  f^%  'V^^  «gf%?^-  Marani  Dilli  hagani  chuli. 

Professes  to  conquer  Dehli  but  never  stirs  out  of  his 
oum  house. 

A  great  boaster. 

5-  »iiT^  HIT%  f|fi  mm  %T^^T  ^«I  ^  ^^T.    Marnai 

marnai  Dilli  janchha  jo  kbarho  hatha  kwe  nikara. 

Se  would  fight  his  way  to  Dehli,  but  does  not  wish  to 
strike  a  blow. 

A  great  boaster. 

6  ^f%  'grf^  ■^•ITf^  ^S!-     Burhi  ghorhi  bandti  jina.. 

An  old  mare  with  a  saddle  of  broad  clotlu 
A  beggarly  fellow  in  fine  clothes. 

7  f^  %T  f^^?.T^  ^m  ^i%I  ^2  ^T/%'     Dilli  ko  dilwali 
mukha  chuparho  peta  khali. 

Like  the  inhabitants  of  Dehli,  who,  though  hungry  (try  to) 
look  well  fed. 

Applies  to  fops. 

8  -si^^  ^r  1^  ^T«T  f*r^  ^ITf  ^^'JtJT-     Badana  ko  ni  latta 

missi  lagawa  alapatta. 

Has  no  cloth  for  his  person,  but  needs  Missi  (  a  powder 
used  for  coloring  the  teeth  ^by  fashionable  native  women  ). 

9  »lN  l^f^f^  ^S|T  ^r  "fffwif.      Ganda  garibini  reshama 
ko  taniyan. 

A  poor  Than,  but  uses  a  silk  thread  to  tie  his  trowsers  with^ 


(     8^     ) 

10  %T^T    ^fSTT   '^JX  %T  «W-      Sautina  budtiya 
chiatai  ko  lahanora. 

4  foppish  old  lady  has  a  shirt  mae^e  of  a  mat,   (  when 
she  cannot  get  anything  else  ). 

I.  e.  Oho  accustomed  to  luxuries,  or  comforts  cannot  give 
them  up. 

11  "vg^  ^r  ^.i  ^^Tft:  ^  ^^T^.    Dedha  pau  cLuna  tebari 

men  rasoi, 

■  Only- six  ehhatdks  of  flour  (  the  smallest  quantity  necessary 
for  one  person  )  but  cooked  in  the  Tehdri. 

The  tehdri  is  that  portion  of  a  house  -which  is  visible  to  all 
who  pass  by. 

This  is  used  of  one  who  beiag  very  poor  has  haughty  airs- 
and  makes  vain  show. 

12  ^f^  l.^T'l  'st'BT  'I^.Tf-  TJnchi  dnkana  phlka  pakawana, 
A  lofty  shop,  hut  tasteless  or  worthless  sweets. 

A  man  of  note  whose  dealings  are  not  g€K)d,  or  one  who  is- 
great  ia  name,  but  has  no  wealth  or  property  to  maintain  it. 

13  iT5R  JT3I  ^TT  fSlT  f%^T-     Mana  mana  bbatr  shira  hilau. 
The  heart  desires,  but  the  head  is  shaken  in  denial. 

14  ^l{J■^  %j  -set  J  ^^«i  ^y  9T^T«    J^ama  ko  barliG  darsliana 

ko  chhoto. 

Well  reputed,  hut  bad  to  deal  with    (  literally,  great  in 
name,  but  little  to  looh  at ). 

Descriptive  of  a  man  who  has  managed  to-  get  a  good  reputa- 
tion, but  in  private  dealings  is  found  to  be  roguish,,  selfish  etc., 

FORBEARANCE. 

Eka  chula  bikha  ki  wiki  pini  jaiki   eka  sau  cbiila  amrita 
M  pi  rakhi  cbha. 


(    8&    ) 

One  cup  of  poison  should  be  accepted  at  the  hands  of  the 
man  who  has  already  given  one  a  hundred  of  nectar. 

We  should  be  willing  to  bear  somewhat  with  the  abuse  or 
ill-treatment  bestowed  on  us  by  a  benefactor. 

2  ^^  ^f  fsi^nf^  ^»I5I  ^^IT  ^uSt  41"31-     Pancha 

lai  ni  khoni  dumana  dasa  lai  ni  kboni  bithana. 

A  Dum  (  a  low  caste  man  )  ought  not  to  quarrel  for  the 
sake  of  five  rupees,  and  a  Bitha  (^patrician)  for  ten  rupees. 

This  is  used  to  show  that  one  ought  to  forbear  quarrelling 
with  others  for  small  amounts.  C.  f.  Go  not  forth  hastily  to  strife, 
lest  thou  know  not  what  to  do  in  the  end  thereof,  when  thy 
neighbour  hatb  put  thee  to  shame." 

Hisalu  ki  bana  barhi  risalii  najika  jaibera  udhlni  dincbba. 

Ye  bata  ko  kaile  gato  ni  manano  dudyala  ki  lata   sauni 

parhyanchbya. 

The  temper  of  Hisalu,  a  thorny  wild  berry  (  wild  rasp- 
berry ),  is  very  bad ;  for  it  pierces  one  who  touches  the 
plant ;  no  one  ought  to  mind  this,  for  the  kicking  of  a  milch 
cow  must  be  endured  by  every  one. 

AlHhe  field-terraces  are  full  of- this  wild  plant,  the  branches 
and  leaves  of  which  are  full  of  sharp  and  crooked  thorns.  It  is 
loaded  with  ripe  berries  in  the  months  of  May  and  June.  The 
berries  are  soft,  pulpy,  and  sweet,  and  afford  a  nice  treat  to  the 
poor  people,  but  every  time  a  berry  is  plucked  the  fingers  are  in 
daager  of  being  pierced  with  thorns. 

One  ought  not  to  mind  the  ill  temper  of  those  we  are 
benefitted  by. 

4  ^Tf^'I  HKfm  'HKff.     Kbani  gama  pairani  sbarama. 

One  ought  to  forbear  and  be  modest. 

Used  to  admonish  children  or  others  not  to  bo  fastidious  or 
quarrelsome,  but  to  lead  a  respectable  life. 


(     86     ) 
FORCE  OR  COMPULSION. 

1  3SfT«!  ^^T  ^^'^T'l  '^^r*  Bbutana  lakha  dewatana  dhakka. 
Ghosts  have  large  goats  sacrificed  to  them,  but  the  deities 

are  pushed  aside. 

Ghosts  are  supposed  to  frighten  and  take  possession  of 
people  by  making  them  sick  and  die,  so  people  thus  attacked 
worship  ghosts,  and  sacrifice  big  goats  to  them,  whereas  deities,, 
who,  though  they  have  far  greater  power  to  bless  their  devotees, 
and  who  do  not  thus  trouble  and  attack  people,  are  forgotten  or 
neglected  on  the  score  of  their  being  harmless. 

2  l^lHf^^T  if  %T  f^'TT^r  '^^R-      Nimarhiyo  gaun  ko. 
ghinaurho  padhana. 

The  headman  of  a  deserted  village  is  the  sparrow. 

E.  g.  In  an  inhabited  village  sparrows  find  a  few  nooks  or 
holes  to  live  iu,  but  in  the  village  abandoned  by  human  beings  they 
can  occupy  any  place  without  fear. 

Applied  to  a  small  man  who  exercises  great  authority,  or 
oppresses  others  with  inpunity,  there  being  no  great  men  or 
authorities  in  the  locality. 

3  fTir  f^i^^^T  "^9  ir^I-      Duna  ni  sakado  bisa  patha. 
Cannot  lift  up  32  seers,  but  can  lift  40  seers. 

Applied  to  one  who  is  not  willing  to  do  a  little  work,  but 
will  do  much  more  by  being  goaded  to  it. 

4  %T  ^^  ^»!!  5^rT^     mt  ^^T'lT^-      Ho  meri  swena 
natara  katun  tero  nakha. 

Be  my  wife,  or  I  will  cut  your  nose  off. 

Obtaining  one's  object  by  threats  and  violence. 

5  tH  ^  ^^^  5T^€|"  ^^  ^f)"^  ]H%T  ^^ff-     Ran  da- 
ki  mundali  dhola  kl  kundali  kasika  bhalo  bulanda. 

The  head  of  a  woman   and  that  of  a   drum  give  good 
sound  when  well  tied  and  beaten. 
Martial  authoritv  commended. 


(    ^7     ) 

^    TTf^    ^if^    %^    ^'i^lTI-      Mari    mari    bera    mu- 

talamana. 

Made  a  Musalman  hy  force. 

Applied  to  any  one  who  is  compelled  to  do  anything 
contrary  to  his  wishes.  Adverting  to  the  manner  in  which 
Hindus  were  forced  to  become  Mahomedans  by  the  Mahomedan 
rulers. 

J'  ^^  '^^5ij  ^TZJIJIT  ^  '^^^      Mulaijai  mulaija  jethana 

ki  swena. 

To  become  by  pressure  the  unwilling  wife  of  her  husband's 
elder  brother. 

E.  g.  According  to  cnstom  a  younger  brother's  wife  is  not 
allowed  even  to  touch  her  husband's  elder  brother,  and  vice  versa. 
So  to  become  his  wife  is  a  most  atrocious  incest. 

Used  of  one  who  commits  sin  under  compulsion. 

•8  ^'ct  ^»l€t"  ^^t  ^T^^  ^^  ^TT  ^1I^-    Meri  anguli 
tera  ankba  me  teri  mera  mukha  me. 

My  finger  is    in    your    eye,    and  your  finger   is    in 
my  mouth. 

I.  e.  you  are  in  my  power  every  way  ;  you  are  in  a 
perilous  state. 

9  ^r^i  ^r  ^T^  '^T^t'<T  f2|  ^*ij^T'     Laton  ko  yara  baton 
ten  ni  bujbado. 

A    man   who    needs   blows   to  move  him,  will  pay  no 
attention  to  mere  words. 

Applied  to  foolish  and  illiterate  people  who  will  not  do 
anything  without  coercion  or  force. 


C     88     ) 
FRIENDSHIP  &  ESTRANGEMENT. 

1  aiW^  f%»ITf  ^rc^  fSniTt'*    Wa  lani  mitain  jo  rawa 
nitain. 

Make  that  kind  of  friendship  which  will  last  for  ever. 

Caution  against  temporary  friendships  ■which  are  generally 
not  sincere,  but  entered  into  from  some  selfish  motive. 

"Those  friends  thou  hast,  and  their  adoption  tried, 

"Buckle  them  to  thy  soul  with  hoops  of  steel."     ShaJcspeare., 

2  ^^T  ^T1  ^I^  Tl%  ^it  ^I^T  ^'nr?:  T^^T-     Kaiko 

apa  hoi  rahano  kol  apano  banai  rakhano. 

Act   as    a  friend    to  another    and    have    another    as 
your  friend. 

"Do  unto  others  as  you  would  have  them  do  unto  you." 

3  ^'RIT  f^  ^Tfe  ^V^  ^T  'l^^'     Rupaya  ki  dosti  dawai 

ko  sbarira. 

Friendship  for  money^s    sake  and  the    body  fed    on 
medicine  will  not  last. 

4  ^^  ^fr  f\^  %^J%  ^T^^*      ^6"  i^eri  prita  kplain 
ka  tuku. 

Your  love  and  mine  is  on  the  top  of  a  pine  tree. 

This  is  used   when   friends   are   completely    estranged   from 
each  other. 

5  «I^T  ^r  fSi^  1^  ^T  ^T3'  Baba  ko  mitra  ffurba  ko  katha. 

The  friend  of  one's  father  and  the   treacle-wood  (  dry 
sv^ar-cane). 

E.  g.    One's  father's  friend  will  do  him  good,  i.  e.  notipiure 
him,  as  the  sugar  cane  though  dried  up  will  prove  to  be  sweet. 

Used    to    encourage    one's    father's    friend    to    do    some 
favour. 


r  89  ) 

FUTURE  APPREHENSIONS  OR  CONTINGENCIES. 

1  ^S  ^  ^^«fiT  ^"^^T^  ^«     Peta  men  larhaka  karadorha 
bata. 

Twitt  a  chain  for  the  hoy  who  is  yet  in  the  womb. 

As  soon  as  a  boy  is  born,  a  chain  either  of  silver  or  of 
thread  is  put  round  his  waist.  An  imprudent  or  impatient  person 
wishes  to  make  unnecessary  provision  for  him  while  it  is  yet 
uncertain  whether  the  unborn  child  will  be  a  boy  or  a  girl.  (In  the 
case  of  a  girl,  the  waist  chain  is  not  required). 

Used  of  needless  apprehensions. 

This  is  illustrated  by  an  incident  which  took  place  during 
the  time  of  one  of  the  Native  Princes  at  Almora. 

Once  a  contingent  force  composed  of  the  Banias  of  Almora 
was  ordered  to  go  and  fight  with  the  army  of  an  enemy,  who 
had  arrived  at  Haldwani  (at  the  foot  of  the  hills)  to  invade  the 
hill-country.  The  raw  recruits,  in  a  great  fright,  drew  out  their 
swords  from  the  sheaths  and  started  on  the  expedition.  The  Raja 
asked  the  reason  of  their  so  doing,  when  they  replied  "Sire,  we 
shall  have  hardly  any  time  to  draw  our  swords  when  we  come 
in  face  of  the  enemy,  and  so  we  must  keep  them  ready  for  the 
emergency."  From  this  the  Raja  saw  that  they  were  a  set 
of  cowards,  and  so  packed  them  off  home  again. 

2  %  "^^IT  ^T  ^I fT  ^^«T  ^I  ''Tf^*     Jai  bakhata  ko  dyo 
tai  bakbata  ko  panl. 

When  it  rains,  there  will  be  water. 

One  should  not  be  anxious  about  the  future. 
"Sufficient  unto  the  day  is  the  evil  thereof." 

3  ^^q  ^TT^r  ^^  "^^^rr     Bapa  maralo  baila  batala. 

The  bullocks    {^property)  will  be  divided   {among   the 
brothers  )  on  the  death  of  the  father. 

The  son  imagines  he  will  do  many  wonderful  things  with  the 
property  that  comes  to  him,  builds  castles  in  the  air.  But  all  is 
contingent  on  his  getting  the  property. 


r  90  ) 

GAMBLING. 

1  5IHT  ^ft  "^TT.     Juwa  mithi  hara. 

Gambling  losses  are  like  sweets. 

I.  e.    One  wants  more,  or  the  loser  wants  to  try  again. 

GIFTS  FROIVl  RELATIVES. 

1  ^TT  f%  'I^T^  ^^-     Pauna  ki  pakorhi  swada. 
Dainties  brought  hy  a  guest  who  is  a  relative  are  delicious. 

Other  peoples'  food,  possessions,  &c  seem  to  us  better  than 
our  own.     Or,  the  gift  of  a  beloved  one  is  sweet. 

Also  that  any  dainty  which  one  may  have  in  plenty  is  not 
so  delicious  nor  so  highly  appreciated  as  that  which  he  baa  not 
himself,  but  receives  a  little  of  from  another  person. 

GIFTS  OF  THE  GAB. 

1  ^^  ^nt^T  rT  ^T  ^'^  ^^-   Jalko  gicho  tailto  saba  kuchba. 
Whoever  has  a  tongue  has  everything. 

The  power  of  eloquence. 

Once  an  illiterate  but  crafty  and  talkative  man,  professing 
bimself  to  be  one  of  the  greatest  of  Pandits,  took  his  abode 
in  a  certain  city  where  he  was  much  respected,  and  regarded 
as  a  saint  by  the  people.  When  his  fame  spread  far  and  wide, 
another  Pandit  who  was  a  real  scholar  came  to  see  him  with  a 
view  to  test  his  learning,  and  sent  him  a  letter  in  Sanscrit  through 
his  servant.  A?  soon  as  the  letter  was  handed  to  the  illiterate 
man  he  opened  it  and  then  threw  it  towards  the  servant  saying 
that  his  master  had  no  ability  to  address  him  in  Sanscrit.  After 
this  the  real  Fandit  sent  him  word  that  he  would  meet  him  in  a 
literary  contest.  To  this  the  pretended  Pandit  said  "Alas  !  how 
can  a  mouse  stand  before  a  cat,  but  let  the  mouse  come  to  the 
cat  at  any  time  he  likes."  A  day  was  fixed  for  their  contest. 
In  the  meantime  the  pretender  was  asked  by  the  people  whether 
he  would  require  any  books  for  reference,  and  how  they  would 
be  able  to  know  which  of  the  two  was  victorious.  The  false 
Pandit  said  that  all  books  they  had  in  their  houses  should  at  once 
be  sent  him,  and  that  they  should  consider  him  defeated  who  wa& 


(     91     ) 

first  silenced.  After  this  the  crafty  Pandit  separated  all  the 
leaves  of  the  books  the  people  had  sent  hiin,  and  on  the  appointed 
day  sat  almost  buried  under  the  heap  of  papers.  The  other  Pandit, 
as  soon  as  he  saw  the  talkative  man,  gave  his  salutation  (Namaskara) 
to  which  the  latter  replied  by  saying  "Namaskara,  Chamatkara, 
Dhamatkara,"  (mere  meaningless  words  uttered  in  mimicry).  The 
true  Pandit  was  rather  astonished  at  such  behaviour  on  the  part 
of  the  false  Pandit.  However,  he  asked  him  again  "Kinchit  Shastra' 
Charcha,"  "Will  you  have  some  discussion  of  learning  ?''  The 
f&he  Pandit  answered  him  by  howling  "Charcha,  marcha,  kharcha,"^ 
(absurd  mimicry).  At  this  the  true  Pandit  was  astounded  and 
Gould  not  say  a  word  more,  but  silently  withdrew  from  the  place. 
By  this  the  people,  who  were  interested  in  the  false  Pandit,  were 
fully  convinced  that  he  had  won  the  victory,  and  began  to  beat, 
drums,  ring  bells,  and  blow  conch  shells  and  trumpets. 

Illustration  No.  2.  A  she-fox  being  pregnant  desired  her- 
husband  to  build  her  a  house  for  her  youug  ones.  The  fox  agreed 
to  do  so,  but  as  soon  as  he  got  his  food  he  went  out  to  another 
jungle,  and  there  basked  in  the  sun  the  whole  day,  and  returned 
to  his  wife  in  the  evening  in  time  to  eat  the  evening  meal 
provided  by  her  for  him.  In  this  way  be  loitered  for  days  and 
months,  always  telling  his  wife  that  he  was  engaged  in  building 
a  shed  for  her  offspring.  At  last  his  wife  gave  birth  to  the  young 
ones,  and  asked  him  to  shew  her  the  house.  He  took  her  and  the 
young  ones  into  the  jungle  to  a  den  occupied  by  the  cubs  of  a 
tigress,  and  placed  them  there,  instructing  his  wife  what  to  do 
and  say  on  the  approach  of  the  tigress,  viz.,  to  squeeze 'the  young 
ones  so  that  they  might  scream  out,  and  to  tell  him  (the  husband), 
on  his  enquiring  the  cause  of  their  crying,  that  the  young  ones 
were  crying  for  the  fresh  flesh  of  a  tiger  which  they  could  not  get, 
and  that  they  would  not  eat  the  stale  flesh  of  a  tiger  killed  the 
day  before.  He  then  went  and  sat  down  on  a  ridge  above  the 
cavern.  Just  as  the  tigress  came  the  she-fox  caused  her  young 
ones  to  cry  out,  which  enraged  the  tigress,  who  saw  that  her  den 
was  taken  possession  of  by  some  other  animals.  The  fox 
(as  arranged)  enquired  why  her  young  ones  were  crying,  to  which 
his  wife  replied  as  she  was  told  to  do.  On  hearing  this  the 
tigress,  thinking  that  her  young  ones  had  been  killed  and  that  now 
she  herself  would  be  killed,  took  fright  and  ran  away.  While 
thus  running  through  the  forest  the  tigress  met  with  a  monkey, 
who,  having  beared  why  she  was  running,  told  her  that  her  panic 
was  groundless,  since  she  was  queen  of  all  the  animals  of  the  forest, 
and  offered  to  accompany  her  to  her  den.  So  the  tigress  appeared 
again  before  her  don  accompanied  by  the  monkey.  The  she-fox 
repeated  the  process  of  squeezing  and   pinching   her   young   ones,. 


(  92  ; 

and  her  husband  made  the  same  enquiry  and  the  she-fox  the  same 
reply  as  before.  This  time  the  fox  said  to  his  wife.  "Tell  the 
young  ones  to  have  a  little  more  patience  :  they  will  soon  get  the 
flesh  of  a  live  tiger,  which  his  friend  the  monkey  is  kindly 
bringing  for  them.*^'  This  last  speech  of  the  fox  put  the  tigresa 
into  such  terror  that  she  left  the  place  never  to  retarn. 


GOD'S  JUDGMENTS. 

1  ^^  f^f^^T  'lf?T«    Daivi  bichitra  gati. 

The  ways  of  Providence  are  wonderful. 

C.  f.    "Man  proposes,  God  disposes." 

Once  a  pair  of  doves,  seated  on  a  tree,  were  aimed  at  with 
an  arrow  by  a  fowler  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  a  falcon 
darted  on  them  from  the  sky.  At  this  crisis,  while  the  she-dove  was 
lamenting  to  her  husband  and  telling  him  that  they  would  surely 
be  killed  either  by  the  one  or  the  other,  the  shaft  discharged  by 
the  hunter  killed  the  falcon,  and  the  sportsman  himself  was  bitten 
by  a  venomous  snake.  So  the  pair,  thus  providentially  preserved, 
narrowly  escaped  with  their  lives. 

2  Tit  ^T  I'^r?  1"^rr  f%  Tit-     Kai  ko  parabata   Parabata 

ii  rai. 

A  grain  of  mustard  into  a  mountain,  and  a  mountain  into 

a  grain  of  mustard  again. 

Used  to  represent  God's  power,  or  providence,  or  the 
transient  nature  of  things  in  this  world. 

3  I'^^^T  f^  ilT'IT  %  ^  %  ^jm    ParmesbM!-ara  ki  maya 

kain  dhupa  kain  chhaya. 

Illusion  of  Gad,  sunshine  at  one  place,  and  shadows 

at  another. 

The  transient  nature  of  wordly  things,  and  the  unequal  distri- 
bution of  human  happiness  and  misery,  regarded  as  "Maya"  or 
Illusion.     Used  to  teach  patience. 


(   93   ; 

4  HSR  f^*{  imi  ^T  5«R  f^  guiTT  ^T-    Eka  dina  buna  ko 

eka  dina  jana  ko. 

A  certain  day  is  ordained  for  one  to  rise,  and  another  day 
to  sink. 

Used  to  warn  in  prosperity  and  console  in  adversity  with  the 
thought  that  Fate  rules  all. 

5  'IT^'^^  «6T  ^''^  ^  ^T5  '^^■^^.    Parmeshwara  ka  ghara 
mu  dera  chha  andbera  ni. 

There  is  delay   in    God's  judgment,    but  there  is  no  in- 
justice in  him. 

6  5lT^n%  l>T^  STT'^I^nn  ^B^  %T^-     Nara  satnaje  aura 
narayana  tare  aura. 

Man  proposes  one  thing,  but  God  does  another  thirig. 
C.  f.    "Man  proposes  but  God  disposes." 

GOOD  LUCK. 

1  ^VT  ^I  '^T^  ^^^  ^T'll«    Andha  ka  hatha  batera  lago* 

A  blind  man  happened  to  catch  a  quail. 

It  is  almost  impossible  to  catch  a  quail,  and  for  a  blind  man 
io  catch  one  must  be  a  great  chance.  Some  events  are  entirely 
the  result  of  the  favour  of  Providence  or  fortune.  Used  to 
one  who  is  puffed  up,  through  having  gained  any  thing  by 
chance. 

2  f^TTH  ^T  HI»?%  sft^r  "^  fw^T  f ^r-  '  Biralu  ka  bbaga 
le  siko  ya  chhinko  tuto. 

It  was  the  cat's  good  luck  when  the  net  broke. 

Milk  and  curds  are  generally  kept  in  a  vessel  which  la 
hung  up  in  a  net  to  one  of  the  beams  of  the  roof,  to  be  out  of  the  way 
of  children  and  cats,  but  when  the  string  breaks,  the  cat  has  a 
feast.  Description  of  a  stroke  of  unexpected  good  luck.  C  /. 
"It  is  an  ill  wind  that  blows  nobody  good." 


(     9i     ) 

3  5=fi  mz  ^  ^T3!     Eka  bata  dui  kaja. 

One  road,  two  jobs. 

This  is  used  when  one  sets  out  for  one  business,  but  for- 
tunately accomplishes  another  object  on  his  way.  C.  f.  "To  kill 
two  birds  with  one  stone." 

4  ^''^^'gx:  W^'K  ^jt^  ^^  fW^-      Parmeshwara  cTiliapara 
pharhibera  dinchha. 

God  gives  even  through  the  roof  of  one's  house. 

This  means  that  if  one's  fate  is  good  he  will  get  every  thing 
be  needs  without  care  and  trouble. 

5  ^\Z\  W[  %}  m.ZJ'    Lata  ka  pau  bata. 

The  feet  of  a  simple  man  {lit.  dumb)  man  are  in  the  path 
{of  profit). 

A  simple  man  often  prospers  by  good  luck. 

Story.  In  a  certain  viliage  there  lived  a  very  simple  man' 
wbo  had  a  hut  and  some  cattle.  His  neighbours  being  envious  of 
him,  and  taking  advantage  of  his  simplicity',  tried  to  drive  him 
out  of  the  village.  So  one  day,  while  his  cattle  were  grazing  in  a 
jungle,  they  drove  them  down  a  precipice,  and  thus  killed  them. 
The  poor  simple  man  skinned  the  dead  cattle  and  conveyed  the 
skins  for  sale  to  a  certain  town.  While  on  his  way  he  was 
overtaken  by  the  darkness,  and  stopped  in  a  cave  in  a  jungle  ; 
after  midnight  some  thieves  with  stolen  property  arrived  and  took 
shelter  at  the  mouth  of  the  same  cave.  Hearing  their  tread  in 
the  cave,  the  man  became  much  alarmed,  and  tried*  to  conceal 
himself  under  the  hides  he  had  brought.  The  rattling  of  the 
hides  inside  the  cave  startled  the  thieves,  who,  panic  struck,  ran. 
away  leaving  all  the  money  they  had  brought  with  them.  The- 
simple  man  took  possession  of  the  money  and  went  home.  In 
order  to  measure  the  amount  of  money  he  had  received  he  asked 
for  the  loan  of  a  wooden  measure  from  one  of  his  neighbours^ 
The  neighbour,  being  curious  to  know  what  he  had  brought,  placed 
some  tar  at  the  bottom  of  the  measure.  As  soon  as  the  simple  man- 
had  measured  his  money  he  returned  the  measure,  but  a  few 
rupees  had  stuck  to  the  tar  at  the  bottom.  This  aroused  the  avarice 
of  his  neighbour,  who  asked  the    simple  man   how   and  whence  he- 


(    95     ) 

had  obtained  so  much  money  ;  he  said  that  it  was  from  the  sale 
of  the  skins  of  his  cattle.  The  envy  he  bore  to  the  simple  man, 
and  greediness  for  money,  caused  his  neighbour  to  kill  his  own 
cattle  and  take  their  skins  for  sale,  but  to  no  purpose,  for  he 
received  only  a  few  rupees  by  the  bargain.  Being  enraged  he  set 
fire  to  the  hut  of  the  simple  man,  and  reduced  it  to  ashes.  The 
simple  man  collected  the  ashes  and  put  them  in  a  bag,  and  set  off 
to  sell  them.  While  on  his  way,  he  left  his  load  by  the  road  side 
and  went  to  drink  water  at  a  spring  which  was  at  a  little  distance. 
In  the  mean  time  another  man  who  had  also  left  a  load  of  flour 
there,  went  to  drink  water  too.  On  returning  he  took  up  the  load 
of  ashes  leaving  his  own  by  mistake  and  went  his  way.  The 
simple  man  also  returned  and  took  the  load  left  by  the  other  man. 
Seeing  some  strange  marks  on  the  load  he  opened  it  and  found 
that  it  contained  flour.  Then  he  took  the  load  to  his  home  where 
he  again  asked  his  neighbour's  measure  to  ascertain  the  quantity 
of  the  flour.  His  neighbour,  having  found  that  the  simple  man 
received  flour  in  lieu  of  the  ashes  of  his  shed,  set  fire  to  his  own 
shed,  but  could  not  sell  the  ashes. 

This  story  is  also  applicable  to  the  proverb.  "Whoever  digs 
a  pit  for  another  will  himself  fall  into  it." 

6  %^  ^T  >TT1^  ^^  '^T^T-     Helu  ka  bbaga  le  melu  paka. 

-J  vj 

(  Wild)  pears  have  ripened  to  the  good  lucJc  of  a  jackal. 

The  jackals,  when  other  food  is  scarce,  in  the  cold  season, 
have  wild  pears  to  eat. 

Applied  to  one  who,  when  on  the  brink  of  ruin,  is  saved  by  a 
lucky  accident. 

7  fifi^fTfT  5BT  ^irf%  T^*r  ^rf^  KT^.     Kl&amata  ka  agarlii 
llama  pani  bharada. 

Knowledge  will  bring  water  (is  a  servant)  before  a  luchy 

person. 

Story: — A  very  learned  and  a  very  lucky  man  by  chance  met 
each  other  in  a  foreign  country,  and  being  strangers  there  they 
agreed  to  divide  equally  whatever  they  might  be  able  to  earn.  For 
some  months  they  subsisted  entirely  upon  the  earnings  of  the 
learned  man.  But  at  last  his  income  failed,  and  both  were  in 
danger  of  starvation.  Whereupon  the  learned  man  said  to  the 
other,  "Now  it  is  your  turn  to  do  some  thing  for  our  support." 


(     96    ) 

The  lucky  man  then  went  to  the  court  of  a  king,  and  with  his 
cluh  knocked  the  crown  off  the  king's  head.  When  the  courtiers 
•went  to  pick  up  the  crown  they  saw  a  venomous  snake  entwined 
about  it.  Thinking  the  man  had  saved  him  from  the  snake,  the 
king  was  very  grateful,  and  asked  what  reward  he  should  give  him. 
The  man  replied  'I  want  nothing."  The  next  day  the  man  again 
went  to  the  king's  court,  and  taking  the  king  by  the  hand,  dragged 
him  out  of  the  building,  the  roof.of  which  fell  in  as  soon  as  the  king 
had  got  out.  The  king  now  more  than  ever  thinking  himself  under 
obligation  asked  the  man  to  name  his  reward,  and  when  the  half 
of  his  kingdom  was  asked,  he  freely  gave  it  him. 


8  «liT^T 'Jt^  ^T  ^1«!T  «IT^-  Kalagorukasapanabachharu. 

Perfect  calves  of  a  dumb  cow. 

Applied  to  a   clever   man   whose   father   is   an   idiot   or   a 
simple  man.     Used  ironically. 

GOOD  OR  BAD  SIGNS  OR  OMENS. 

1  Ji'^Jlf^  'ST^  SRT  ^^T  ^^r  '"Trf-     Hunyari  dali  ka  chala- 

chala  pata. 

A  promising  tree  hears  shining  leaves. 
Applied  to  promising  boys  or  girls. 


2  %^  ^1  ^"SITSR  %^J  ^TH  Mil*    Jaika  mukha  subaka 


taika  karama  bhaga. 

One  who  has  good  words  in  his  mouth  has  good  luck 
in  store. 

I.  e.   Whoever  is  affable  will  be  fortunate. 

3  ^ta^Tf^  *^T  ^"fTW  f^  *IT'JrT.     Anahoti  kala  betaina 
ki  mala. 

To    attempt  impossibilities  is   like  wearing  a  garland 
of  the  Betaina  fruit  or  flowers.     (^Melia  sempervirens). 


(    97     ) 

The  Belaina  tree  is  supposed  to  be  haunted  by  an  evil 
spirit.  A  garland  of  the  fruits  or  flowers  of  the  tree  is 
suggestive  of  an  evil  spirit,  and  so  they  are  never  used  for  this 
purpose.  In  the  same  way  to  attempt  a  work  which  is  beyond 
one's  power  is  suggestive  of  ruin. 

4  "^alT^t  %J  r^TT^T  '»^T'T«     Banja  gaun  ko  ghinaurbo 
padhana. 

Sparrows  are  the  headmen  of  deserted  villages. 
C.  f.    "Among  the  blind  the  one-eyed  is  king. 

5  STTTTT  ^f^  ^T^Rr*     Jamana  bati  kamana. 

No  sooner  up  than  it  quivers. 

If  a  plant,  as  soon  as  it  has  sprouted  up  from  the  ground, 
quivers,  it  is  sure  to  wither  ;  the  proverb  is  applied  to  boys  and 
girls  who  learn  bad  habits  from  their  childhood,  and  so  are  sure 
to  be  ruined. 

6  5T7r  ^%T  ^T^T  ailf^-     Jetbo  cbelo  bodalo  ganti. 

Hhe  eldest  son  is  clothed  in  sackcloth. 

This  is  spoken  by  parents  grieving  for  their  eldest  son  who 
is  in  adverse  circumstances  ;  or  in  regard  to  the  first  crop  or  th& 
first  attempt  at  anything  which  has  proved  a  failure. 

7  arrf%  %^  ^Jfk  %^l  T^f^  ^^TJ?  ^liTf%?n"  %^T-    Tyarbl 
dekha  josbi  dekhu,  marani  bakhata  kararbiya  dekba. 

While  well  all  castes  of  Brahmans  ( Tyarhi,  Joshi  8fc) 
came  to  me,  hut  when  at  the  point  of  death  the  Kararhiyd 
Srahmam,  only  comes. 

In  the  first  instance  this  was  used  by  the  Banias  of  Almorah 
who  employ  Kararbiya,  Brahmans  as  their  priests.  While  well 
they  have  dealings  with  all  sorts  of  people,  but  when  they  are  at  tha 
point  of  death,  no  one,  except  the  Kararbiya  Brahmans,  who  have 
to  perform  the  last  religious  ceremony  for  the  dying  man,  will  come 
near  them.     Hence  the  proverb. 

This, is  applied  to  adverse  circumstances  or  evil  omens  which 
fill  one  with  apprehensions  of  ruin  or  downfall. 

M 


(    98     ) 

8  1?^  ^^  qiT  STT'IfTT  ^^^  ^t^2^I-     ETsa  ghara  ka  nau 
noata  kushala  kan  bata  ho. 

If  there  are  nine  opinions  in  a  household  what  peace 
can  there  be  ? 

"A  house  divided  against  itself  cannot  stand." 

9  oJiT^  %  ^rsf  "^^Tf^"^.     Byaha  ko  saguna  rangwali 

bata. 

The  prospects  of  a  marriage  are  known  from  the  time 
of  the  JRangwali  (beginning J . 

E.  g.  When  a  marriage  day  is  fixed  the  women  of  the 
households  of  both  parties  as  a  preliminary  rite  prepare  a  purple 
dye  made  of  the  infusion  of  Kusumhha  flowers  (safflower,  carthamus 
tinctorius)  in  which  first  of  all  they  tinge  the  sheet  of  the 
•would-be  bride  and  after  that  their  own  sheets.  If  the  color 
'On  the  sheets  "turns  out  brilliant  they  take  it  as  a  good  omen, 
and  if  otherwise  they  interpret  it  accordingly. 

One  applies  this  proverb  to  himself  when  he  is  disappointed 
■by  the  failure  of  'his  first  efforts  in  an  undertaking. 

10  !l»?^WT  it  ^T  ''^fl^^T  TfJI*!-      Namarhuwa  gaun   ko 
chamarbuwa  padhana. 

The  head  man  of  a  decaying   village   is  chamarhuwd 
("pinched  and  destitute  J. 

The  village  is  as  its  headman,  i.  e.  suffers  from  his  in- 
competency etc. 

11  f^^fni^jf  "ni  Ta%t  ?lt^.      Nehianiyan  puta  ghurtdon 
ganaa. 

Boys  doomed  to  be  ruined  get  goitres  on  their  Jcnees. 

Applies  to  one  who  is  attacked  early  with  diseases,  or  is 
addicted  to  bad  habits  from  his  boyhood. 

12  j)t  ^T  '5'Tr^T  %^-     Gaun  ko  sayano  cbori. 

If    the   headman   of   a   village   is   a   thief    then   all 
will  steal. 

Evil  example. 


(     99     ) 

13  ^j^  ^i-f%  eiij  f^^ir^T  1T»T.     Jani  dali  ka   khasakhasa 
pata. 

A  tree  decaying  has  stiff  leaves. 
Earlv  signs  of  evil. 

Jaba  shyala  ki  kambakhti  aunchhya  taba   basti  ka   fcarafa 

aunchha. 

JSy  ill  luck  a  jackal  has  to  run  towards  a  populous 
place,   f  where  it  is  hunted  hy  dogs  or  men  J. 

One  struggling  with  a  stronger  antagonist  or  superior  numbers. 

15  ^J12^  airz  ^T«6T2'  ^IZl-  Ugatadi  gotba  ka  katai  kata. 
Se-buffaloes  are  only- horn-  in  the  cattle  shed  that  is 

about  to  be  ruined. 

Used  of  one  who  is  baffled  in  all  his  purposes. 

16  rmx.fSi  a[^  ?R^x:  m\^  TTOftl%x:^r€t  'i^^gT'i     Puna 

rapi  shatru  sbankara  jage  ugatadi  kirmoli  pankhara  lage. 

The  ant  gets  wings  just  before  its  death.  When  Kdm- 
deo  awoke  Mahddeo,  he  himself  was  killed. 

When  men  begin  to  act  in  a  strange  manner  their  ruin  is 
near.     Judicial  blindness. 

Note.  Kam  deo,  the  Indian  Cupid,  a  child  of  Brahma,  or  as 
some  represent,  of  Vishnu  and  Lakshmi,  was  promised  by  Brahma 
dominion  over  the  hearts  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  three  worlds. 
On  one  occasion  he  ventured  to  discharge  a  shaft  at  Shiva  or 
Mahadeo  when  he  was  engaged  in  ascetic  meditation  in  the  forest. 
Mahadeo  was  so  incensed  that  with  a  glance  from  the  eye  in  the 
centre  of  his  forehead  he  consumed  the  god  of  love  to  ashes, 
though  he  afterwards  took  birth  again. 

17  STT^  ^T  •TT'^TZT-     Naudi  ka  nau  bata. 

Nine  paths  to  Naudi  fa  village  in  Oarhwal  having 
a  separate  path  from,  each  of  the  neighbouring  villages 
by  which  it  is  surrounded  J. 

Applied  to  members  of  a  family  each  having  his  own 
different  opinion. 


(    100    J 

18  "^ig  ^^I^  Tl%tsi  'ssjeRjg,     Chala  sukala  grahana  akalu. 

An  earthquake  (foretells J  abundance  of  crops,  but  an 
eclipse   (^foretells J    scarcity  and  famine.    . 

19  -^r  ^JRtgjgj   <T«T€srr^r'      Budha    bamatyala  tana 

sutyala. 

If  the  old  men  of  a  household  become  mad  fby  marry- 
ing young  wives,  or  doing  something  else  totally  unbecom- 
ing  their  age  J  the  yownger  men  of  that  house  are  ashamed 
and  mortified, 

(For  they  are  not  in  a  position  to  reprimand  their  elders-).. 

20  x^%7  ?IT^  T^fl"  1T»T-    Pailo  gasa  makhi  pata^ 

A  fly  fell  on  the  first  morsel. 

I.  e.    Misfortune  overtook  his  first  venture,   an-  ill  omen  of 
future  success. 

21  ^    tr  ^^^f%  ^  ^  ^Tfl^Tf^  ^f%-       Ke  jaw 

beti  wall  kurhi  ke  jau  roti  wall  kurhi. 

The  house  where  there  are  many  girls  {daughters)  anc^ 
the  house  which  has  to  supply  relatives  with  bread  are 
sure  to  be  ruined. 

Respectable  people  have  to  give  a  large  dowry  on  the- 
marriage  of  their  daughters,  and  so  whoever  has  many  daughters- 
has  heavy  expenses  on  their  account,  A  rich  or  well-to-do  man 
who  is  obliged  to  feed  all  his  relatives  at  his  own  expense  is  alsa 
liable  to  be  ruined. 

22  ^f  fli  ^fk.  W!^■S^fZ^    Gaun  ki  siri  galyatba  bati. 

The  condition  of  a  village  can  he  judged  or  guessed 
from  the  path  which  leads  to  it. 

A   man's    character    can    be    judged    from    one    of    tig- 
actions. 


(     101     ) 

^Tf%.     Baga   ko  gotha  bati  bakaro  Iljana  ki  nai  baga 
palakiya  ki. 

The  leopard  has  carried  away  a  goat  out  of  the  coW' 

house :  I  do  not  care  for  that,  hut  I  care  that  the  leopard 

has  found  a  relish  in  ^  or  way  to  )  the  cowshed. 

Apprehension  of  injury  from  an  enemy  who  has  hit  on  a 
means  of  doing  one  an  ilUturn. 

GOOD  WORDS. 

1  Hf%  ^T(T  9^  ^TJrT*    Bhali  bata  suna  ki  rata. 

A  pleasant  talk  is  like  a  golden  night. 

A  golden  night,  that  is,   a   night  during  which   one   sleeps 
soundly. 

"Ointment  and  perfume   rejoice  the  heart :    so  doth  the 
sweetness  of  a  man's  friend  by  hearty  counsel."      Proverbs  27,9. 

GRATITUDE. 

1  1T^  ^^T  'WI^T  5^  if^^T*      Pani   pino  magaro  ni 
patyuuo. 

Drink  all  you  want,  but  do  not  spoil  the  spring. 

This  means  that  the  things  from  which  benefit  is  derived 
ehould  not  be  injured.     Censure  of  ingratitude. 

C.  f.    "Let  every  man  praise  the  bridge  he  goes  over." 

2  %^  VT*T  ^T^T  ^^T  ^*T  IT^T*    Jail^o  bhata  kbano 
taiko  gita  gano. 

Sing  the  praises  of  the  man  who  feeds  you. 


(    102    ) 

SUiry.  Once  a  man  with  his  servant  arrived  in  a  foreign 
city.  Soon  after  their  arrival  the  servant  bought  along  with  the- 
other  necessaries  for  food  some  egg  plants.  He  kept  an  egg  plant 
with  him  to  shew  to  his  master,  and  made  of  the  others  a  dish 
of  vegetable  curry.  On  taking  his  meal,  the  master  havincr 
exceedingly  relished  the  vegetable  praised  it  to  his  servant,  and 
directed  him  to  have  the  same  every  day  for  him.  To  this  the 
servant  said,  "Very  good  Sir,  I  shall  do  so,  you  are  quite  right 
in  admiring  the  vegetable.  Let  me  shew  you  the  raw  plant.  It  is 
the  best  of  all  vegetables  in  the  world,  consequently  God  has  made 
it  after  his  own  color  and  form  (referring  to  the  black  stones, 
" Salic/rdma"  which  are  worshipped  and  which  the  egg-plant 
resembles),  and  with  a  view  to  save  it  from  sun  and  water  He  has 
attached  an  umbrella  to  it,  freferring  to  the  "Shinda"  or  small: 
twig  to  which  the  vegetable  is  fastened)."  In  consequence  of  eating 
the  vegetable  for  many  days  in  succession  the  man  was  attacked 
severely  with  a  complaint  which  made  him  disgusted  with  the 
vegetable,  and  so  he  told  his  servant  not  to  buy  the  vegetable 
any  more,  as  it  was  a  nasty  thing.  To  this  the  servant  rejoined. 
"Very  good  sir,  I  shall  not  get  it  again.  It  is  the  most  obnoxious 
in  the  world,  as  is  evinced  by  the  verdict  of  God,  inasmuch  as 
its  face  is  blackened  ;  and  in  addition  to  this  a  stick  is  thrust  into, 
it  (as  a  sign  of  its  being  cursed  j."  On  this  the  man  said  to  him 
again,  "Well  servant,  you  are  an  odd  fellow,  you  were  praising 
the  vegetable  the  other  day  so  highly,  but  now  yon  speak  ill  of  it." 
To  this  the  servant  replied.  "Sir,  I  certainly  did  as  you 
say,  but  judge  for  yourself  ;  am  I  your  servant  or  the- 
vegetable's  ?" 


GREAT  MEN. 

1  I^T  ^T  M  ^^^^T   *IT  M«    Puro  tarau  adamiro  marau-^ 
An  efficient  man  saves,  but  tlie  inefficient  one  Mils. 

2  Z^  ^q^T  %J  zkxk'ri  5TI!?T  ^'l^I  %J  ^J^J  ^rT-     Thula 

thuparba  ko  tbulo  seta  nana  thuparho  ko  nano  seta. 

The  greater  the  dunghill   the  greater   the  heat,   the 
smaller  it  is,  tlie  less  heat. 

Great  and  rich  men  have  more  anxieties  than   other   people. 


f    103    ) 

3  %T  fs[iHVmj  ^J  ^iffT.     Jo  bidhigaya  so  moti. 

All  that  are  pierced  are  pearls. 

E.  g.  The  pearls  which  have  been  pierced  and  are  ready 
to  be  worn  are  considered  real  pearls,  and  more  valuable  than 
those  not  pierced. 

Applied  to  men  who  having  received  some  high  position  are 
afterwards  always  regarded  as  great  men, 

4  ^f  T  ^13  fQ^f%^T2-    Barha  latha  ki  barhi  kbata. 

JBig  timber  makes  a  biff  bed. 

I.  e.  Great  people  should  do  noble  deeds. 
This  is  often  applied  to   great  people   either  to   encourage 
them  to  noble  deeds  or  to  dissuade  them  from  doing  a  mean  thino-. 

5  '^TT  ^I  I'^T  ^*T^?T^»    Barba  ko  gussa  cbutarba  tali. 

The  anger  of  the  great  is  under  their  haunches. 

I.  e.  They  hide  it  by  sitting  upon  it.  A  great  man  suppresses 
his  anger,  and  does  not  give  vent  to  it. 

Illustration.  Once  a  scoundrel  threw  a  stone  at  a  nobleman 
■who  was  taking  a  drive  on  his  own  estate.  The  nobleman's 
attendants  and  companions  were  so  angry  with  the  man  that  they 
beo-an  to  abuse  him  and  threatened  to  beat  him,  but  the  nobleman 
checked  them,  and  threw  a  gold  Mohara  towards  the  man,  saying 
"A  fruitful  tree,  is  generally  pelted  at  by  poor  people  for  the  sake  of 
the  fruit  on  it,  and  so  the  poor  man,  considering  me  to  be  a  fruit- 
ful tree  threw  the  stone  at  me  in  the  hope  of  getting  something 
from  me  ;  and  so  he  should  have  it."  This  noble  conduct  of  the 
gentleman  filled  all  with  admiration  for  his  gracious  and  for- 
giving disposition. 

6  i^T^T  ^^  '^^T  ^1T?!*    Cbboto  kboto  barba  samai. 
^IZJ  f^lT'f  f^l  ^?T  TT'fi  5|i^^-     Chbota  bigarbani  barba 

Biafa  karani. 

Small  m£n  (i.  e.  subordinates)  err,  and  great  men  («.  e. 
superiors  )  have  to  forgive. 

C.  f.  "To  err  is  human,  to  forgive  divine." 


f     104     ) 

7  ^f^  ^T  ^"nT  '^^•'    Hathi  ka  pauna  hathf. 

An  elephant  must  be  the  host  of  another  elephant. 
E.  g.  The  great  can  be  entertained  only  by  the  great. 

8  ^TZT  %  ^"SI^^.     Tota  khai  barha  huni. 

A  harhd  is  made  hy  being  pierced  in  the  centre. 

E.  g.  A  man  becomes  great  by  willingly  sustaining  loss  for 
the  good  of  others.  BarM  is  a  cake  of  flour  of  Urda  (a  kind  of  pulse), 
■with  a  hole  in  its  centre,  *iud  cooked  either  in  gM  or  oil.  It  is 
called  "Barlio^''  only  when  it  is  pierced.  This  is  cooked  only  on 
festival  days. 

9  ^ffsi  sg^T  ^T^^T  TfT^T  ^mr^T-    Hathi  jyuno  lakha 
ko  mariyo  lakha  ko. 

An  elephant  either  alive  or  dead  is  worth  a  lac  of 
JRupees  (  equally  valuable  in  either  state  ). 

A  dead  elephant  is  very  valuable  on  account  of  its  bones  which 
are  so  much  in  demand  that  they  are  worth  nearly  as  much  as  the 
living  animal. 

Used  of  great  men,  who,  whether  in  power  or  out  of  power  are 
equally  weighty  and  useful. 

10  ^f%  W^.     Syu  ki  khala. 

The  skin  of  a  tiger. 

Applied  to  exalt  the  value  of  a  man  formerly  great,  though 
how  reduced  to  an  ordinary  level,  comparing  him  with  the  skin  of  a 
tiger  which  though  an  inanimate  thing  (powerless  or  harmless)  is 
eiill  made  use  of  for  frightening  animals. 

GREED. 

1  fvi  «^mn  1   ^T^  ^T^T  ^5511^1^  ^^T^I-     Bhinde 
khana  ku  jogi  hoyo  paila  basa  bhukho  rayo. 

One  became  an  ascetic  (  a  wandering  beggar  )  in  order 
to.  get  much  food  given  him,  but  starved  on  the  first  stage 
of  his  journey. 

Beware  of  covetousness. 


f     105     ) 

2  wef^  ^^51 .     Lalachi  be  chaina. 
A  covetous  man  is  always  restless. 

C.  f.  "Covetous  men  are  bad  sleepers." 

3  ^mi  ^T  ^r  ^^Tf5iHr  ^rft  ^r  Jif  f%ir«    Apna  ghara 
ko  bura  nibbau  cliori  ko  gu/ha  ini|;ho. 

The  sugar  of  one's   own   house  is  not  liked,  iut  the 
treacle  obtained  hy  theft  is  found  sweeter, 

^'Stolen  waters  are  sweet." 

4  ^t^  ^f  JIT"^?.    Aunrai  ktiaun  gabai  khaun. 
Should  I  eat  the  covering  of  an  embryo  or  the  embryo  ? 

E.  g.  It  is  prolii'bited  for  any  one  to  eat  an  sdibryo   of  aii 
(«dibl«  ;    anim.il    but    if   one    eats    it    he  does   so   for  greediness. 
C.  f.  "Is  thy  servant  a  dog  that  he  should  do  this  thino;  ?" 
The  reply  of  one  charged  with  an  act  of  great  impropriety. 

5  ^7^"g  "^f^:  •^^.     Lalacba  buri  balai. 

Covetousness  is  a  great  curse. 

That  is,  it  brings  one  jnto  trouble  ;  as  when  a  jSy  in  its 
^reei  for  honey  loses  its  life  ia  the  honey-pot, 

GUILtY  CONSCIENCE, 

1  ^IT  ^T  ^Tf%^   JtT'n^T.     Chora  ka  dadhi  men  tinako. 
A  straw  on  the  beard  of  a  thief 

A  thief  is  suspicious  of  the  slightest  movement  made  by 
others,  fearing  he  may  be  detected.  It  is  said  that  once  when 
many  people  suspected  of  theft  were  brought  together,  to  find  out 
t1ie  culprit  a  wise  man  cried  out,  "There  is  a  bit  of  straw  on  the 
beard  of  the  thief."  No  sooner  was  this  said  than  the  real  thief 
put  bis  hand  on  bis  beard  with  a  view  to  remove  it,  and  in  this  way 
was  detected. 

N 


(     106    ) 

2  J3JI  ^T^  %^J  ^J^\   %t%r.      Mriga     api   hagau   api 
cbaunkau. 

jT/^e  deer    is  frightened   hy    the   noise    of  his    own 
droppings,  {on  dry  leaves  J. 

A  guilty  conscience. 


HABITS  &  NATURE, 

1  TT^  'STW  'IT  I^^T  1W  t'T^t^'H.      Masu   khanu  para 
harhako  gala  ni  bandhanu. 

Eat  animal  fodd  if  you  will,  hut  do  not  tie  the  bones 
round  your  neck. 

I.  e.  No  one  should  be  a  slave  to  his  passions  or  make 
a  show  of  his  evil  habits. 

Note.  The  eatin*  of  animals,  especiall3'-  the  cow,  is  regarded 
by  all  Hindu  castes  as  extremely  wicked. 

2  ^TIT  '^T  W  f^l?;-      Mau  gai  para  lau  nigai. 

Even  when  one's  family  is  ruined  the  evil  passion 
does  not  cease. 

3  ^IT  ^Tf^  %  I^T  cT  %  %f^^(^  %  iSJlTI^T-    Chora  chori  hai 
gayo  ta  ke  beripheri  hai  laga  gayo. 

If  a  thief  gives  up  stealing,  will  he  also  give  up  looTcing 
about  him  ?  {as  a  thief  looks  about  stealthily  for  articles 
to  pick  up). 

Applied  to  one  who  claims  something  on  the  merit  of  his 
bavin  o-  given  up  evil  deeds,  but  who  cannot  be  entirely  trusted. 

4  "gyt  ^T  ^f  T  ^it  "^W  ^T  %f  T  '^t^<       Chai  ka  berha  chai 
bansa  ka  berba  bansa. 

Chdi  will  spring  from  the  roots  of  Chdi,  and  bamboo 
from  the  roots  of  bamboo. 

The  son  will  be  as  his  father.  "Chdi"  is  an  inferior  kind 
of  bamboo. 


(     107     ) 

5  falTT'Sr  ^■'^  <Tr<TI  f%  m^-     Blrana  ghara  tata  ki  bana, 
Otie  expecting  to  have  fresh  and  warm  food  even  at 

the  house  of  another,   or  one  accustomed  only  to  warm 
food^  suffers  in  a  strange  hoWSe. 

Used  of  tine  who  becomes  a  slave    to    some    habit,    or    who 
cannot  change  his  habits  easily  ;.  want  of  adaptability. 

6  "gfffJiT  »T5T  ■^flT^T'l  f^lf'iTI'T.   Chutiya  mana  batasana 
bina  ni  raunu. 

A  self-indulgent  and  foolish  fellow  cannot  live  without 
hatdshds  (a  sweet  made  of  sugar). 

Applied  to-  one  who  is  addicted  to  self-indulgent  habits. 

7  i^^]-^f%?ii  J7^f5i«3T3  'iTlS^at*  ^%  '^TZ-   Dindo  gurbiya 
gurba  ni  khawa  pacbba  ut!iika  larbo  cbatau. 

One  fond  of  gurh  (treacle)  will  not  eat  it  if  it  is  given, 
hut  afterwards  {secretly I  he  will  lick  even  the  stone  or  the 
wood  with  which  the  sugarcanes  are  pressed. 

People  addicted  to  certain  (even  harmless)  habits  are  often 
ashamed  of  them  in  public. 

8  ^IT:  f^i?r^  ^^^r  m'^^  f  HT"^  f5l"^^%f.    Mora  singarba 
badala  jawana  swabbaba  ni  badalewa. 

Door  posts  o,nd  arches  can  be  changed,  hut  not  one's 
habits. 

I.  e.    when  a  man's   character  is  formed,   it   is   hopeles.3    to 
expect  any  radical  change  or  improvement  in  him. 

9  ^r  ^T  "^  ir^T  ^T^  l^WT'iTfl  ^T'tT*    Kutta  ko 
pucbba  tbola  gbdlyo  para  bango  bi  bango. 

In  order  to  make  the  tail  of  a  dog  straight  it  was  put  in  a 
hollow  bamboo  and  kept  there  for  12  years,  but  when  it.  was 
taken  out  of  the  bamboo  it  again  became  crooked.  ■; 


C     108.    ) 

Applied  to  natural  defects  or  the  stupidity  of  a  man  which 
is  not  changed  by  traininof  or  education. 

C.  f.  Protefbs  27,22  :  "Though  thou  shonldst  bray  a  Wl 
in  a  ino'tar  among  wheat  with  a  pestle,  yet  will  not  his  foolishness 
depart  from  hiin," 

C.  f.  "What  God  has  made  crooked  cannot  be  made  straight." 

Illustration.  A  Brahman  finding  his  boy  stupid  and  thick- 
headed sent  him  to  Kashi  (Benares)  where  he  put  him  wnder  the 
tuition  of  a  Pandit  so  that  be  might  turn  out  a  learned  man. 
After  studying  for  12  ypiirs  at  Benares  he  at  hist  came  home 
professing  to  be  a  le:rned  Sanscrit  scholar.  As  the  people  of  his 
family  and  neighbourhood  were  very  anxious  to  hear  some  good 
doctrines  expounded  by  him,  they  brought  a  book  and  placed  it 
before  him  for  the  purpose.  He  took  up  the  book  and  began  to 
turn  over  the  leaves,  and  at  last  fixing  his  eyes  on  a  certain  page 
tears  began  to  flow  from  his  eyes.  The  audience  seeing  him  in 
this  condition  thought  that  he  had  met  with  a  pathetic  passage 
which  had  made  him  feci  so  deeply.  They  waited  for  some  time 
ihat  he  might  explain  it  to  them,  but  when  they  found  him  still 
absorbed  they  asked  him.  "0  honorable  Pandit,  purify  our  ears 
by  explaining  what  has  afffcted  you  so  keenly."  On  this  the 
fandit  cried  oat.  "I  am  very  sorry  to  see  that  all  the  letters 
fof  the  alphabet)  which  were  so  big  and  large  at  Kashi  have 
become  so  thin  and  small  here.  This  has  made  me  so  sorrowful 
and  anxious." 

On  further  examination  it  was  found  that  during  the  1  2  years 
the  man  resided  at  Kashi  he  was  learning  the  alphabet  alone,  in 
which,  for  beginners,  the  letters  are  written  very  large  either  on  a 
tablet  or  slate.  When  he  saw  the  same  letters  written  so  small 
in  the  book  he  could  not  make  out  what  made  them  so,  and  so  ha 
began  to  ciy. 

This  is  something  like  a  story  told  by  IMTontaigne  in  bfs 
Essays,  of  a  youth  who  was  sent  by  his  parents  to  Paris  to  be 
educated,  and  on  his  returning  to  his  home  in  the  provinces,  his- 
father  gave  a  great  feast  and  invited  all  his  friends  and  neighbours 
16  meet  his  son  and  observe  his  wonderful  accomplishments.  The 
young  man,  however,  never  opened  his  mouth,  until,  as  the  guests 
were  departing,  he  caught  sight  of  the  moon  rising,  and  exclaimed 
'■Bless  my  soul !  I  do  believe  you  have  got  the  same  moon 
here  that  we  have  at  Paris." 

10  ^T^'^fl  «1%T^  ^I^^   Horbabuddhinakorha  aukhadha. 

Thi7'e  is  no  wisdom  or  uH(  for  an  idiot,  and  no   medicine 
for  leprosy. 


(     109    ) 

Illustration.  Onc6  an  idiot  with  a  basket  of  cakes  was  seut 
by  the  head  of  the  family  to  one  of  his  rel.itives  living  at  some 
distaftCe  iri  another  viil-ge.  When  he  had  travelled  a  mile  or 
iwo  lio  happert."d  to  l""k  back  and  saw  his  own  sh;idow.  Thinking 
the  shadow  to  be  another  man  following  him  in  nope  of  geitirtg 
something  he  threw  a  cake  behind  him  and  continued  his  way. 
After  going  on  a  few  steps  he  again  looked  round  and  seeing  the 
shadow  he  again  threw  a  cake.  In  this  way  he  went  on  throwing 
out  cakes  till,  a  little  before  sun-set,  he  had  emptied  the  whole 
basket.  Looking  back  at  his  shadow  again,  he  asked  "What  would 
you  have  now  ?"  He  then  threw  away  the  clothes  he  had  on.  Just 
at  this  time  the  sun  went  down.  Then  the  idiot  referring  to  his 
shadow  Cof  course  supposing  him  to  be  another  person  following 
him)  said,  "Now  he  has  gone,  when  he  saw  that  I  had  nothing 
more  to  give  him." 

11  'ftTT^T  ^TT  f5iir'^'«7T»     Hira  ko  kira  bigarbatd. 
A  diamond  is  spoiled  by  a  streak  [flaw )  in  it. 

C.  f.    Ecclesiastes  x.  i.      "A    dead    fly   causes    the    ointment 
of  the  apothecary  to  stink  :    so  doth  a  little  folly    him    that   is    in 
reputation  for   wisdom    and    honour."       "A    little    leak   will    sink 
a  great  ship." 
And  Tennyson.     "It  is  the  little  rift  within  the  lute, 

"Which,  slowly  widening,  makes  the  music  mute." 

12  %i'5T^r  ^I^Slir  ^I^^I  55^  IT^T-      Jo  dadbo  so  dadho 
jo  rayo  puna  gado. 

Whatever  has   been  burnt  is   burnt,  but  the  rest  should 

he  saved. 

Used  to  pursuade  one  to  abstain  from  evil  habits  which  have 
already  caused  him  much  damage  or  loss,  in  order  to  save  himself 
from  further  ruin.     "Never  too  late  to  mend." 

13  It^'il^  5Bf%  m^  ^^^  %^f^  f^?T?'T.    Mai  kammala 
kani  cbhorun  kammala  mai  kani  ni  cbhorbanu. 

/  wish   to  leave   the   blanket,   but  the   blanket  does   not 
leave  me. 


(    no   ) 

E  g.  Ouce  a  black  bear  was  seen  floating  down  a  river 
on  the  bank  of  which  some  people  were  washing  and  bathing. 
Thinking  that  it  was  a  black  blanket,  one  of  them  swam  to  it, 
but  no  sooner  did  he  come  near  it  than  tho  drowning  bear  tightly 
embraced  the  unfortunate  man,  who  also  began  to  sink  with  it. 
Seeing  matters  in  that  way  the  people  on  the  shore  called  oat 
to  the  man  to  leave  the  blanket  and  save  himself.  But  the  man- 
being  unable  to  rid  himself  of  the  supposed  blanket  replied  as 
in  the  proverb. 

This  phrase  is  generally  used  in  reference  to  old  habits  which- 
cannot  easily  he  given  up. 

14  Kf^^TJ^  ^ZlKi  T^\-     Mari  re  randa  khatai  bina. 

A  widow  dying  for  want  of  acid. 

Used  in  condemning  bad  habits.  Acid  is  tho  most  insignificant 
part  of  one's  food,  and  can  easily  be  dispensed  with.  To  die  for 
want  of  acid  is  to  die  for  want  of  some  thing  that  is  not 
necessary,  but  one  addicted  to  it  cannot  remain  happy  or  contented 
without  it. 

15  •?grT%t3iTg  'TT  ^T^tT   ^fiiiSin.      lUata  dhoi  jawa. 

para  adata  kakba  jawa. 

One  can  clear  himself  of  his  guilt,    but  how  can   he   get- 
rid  of  his  habits  ? 

Habit  is  second  nature. 
"A  wicked  man  is  his  own  hell." 
"The  mind  is  its  own  place  and  in  itself, 
"Can  make  a  hell  of  heaven,  a  heaven  of  hell."  Milton^ 

16  %tT  S"!  ^"'^  ^T^'^'l'?^  ^r  4"^^  %^  ^T  JTim^T.   Jo  trina 
Lara  so  kancbana  hara  jo  kanchana  hara  so   prana    hara. 

Ore  who  steals  grass  will  steal  gold,  and  one  who  steals 
gold  toill  commit  murder. 

The  habit  of  stealing  should  at  once  be  checked  in  a  man,  to 
prevent  his  going  on  to  commit  graver  offences. 

17  ^[ij  5lf%Jl^I  ^'l   f^^f%-       Jyorho  jaligayo   paina 

ni  jali. 

The  cord  is  burnt  up,  but  the  tioist  is   not  burnt  (^.  e.  re- 
mains visible ) 


(  111  ) 

Applied  to  a  man's  retaining  his  proud  and  grave  habits 
even  after  his  prosperity  has  gone,  or  to  one  who,  being  naturally 
proud  or  conceited,  will  be  so  even  when  he  becomes  poor. 

18  oj^  qt^  %  »I^5|^  ^XJ^m  %  ^m  ^t.      Purhipala 

hai  gayun  ta  namo  narayana  hai  laga  gayun. 

Though  lam  excluded  from  food,  yet  how  can  I  be  precluded 
from  uttering  a  salutation  {namo  narayana). 

Literally  this  is  a  saying  of  an  ascetic  who  is  entitled  to  food 
from  other  people.  The  Jbcfi  says  although  he  is  not  allowed  the 
food,  yet  he  will  still  have  the  right  of  uttering  his  blessings. 
(namo  narayana).  A  Joel's  duty  is  to  utter  "namo  narayana" 
to  the  people  he  goes  to,  who  in  their  turn  have  to  feed  him  or 
give  him  alms,  and  so  if  the  Jogi  does  not  get  anything  from 
any  one  he  will  not  abstain  from  his  habit  of  saluting  God, 
("name  narayana"  means  God  be  saluted). 

This  is  used  regarding  one's  own  relations  and  acquaintances 
who  are  not  only  unwilling  to  help,  but  even  to  see  one. 

19  i!3lT%  e^l  TI^  ^JT'^^I^T-      Najara   hai   bacho    mala 
yarana  ko. 

As  soon  as  a  thing  is  out  of  sight  it  becomes  the  property 
if  my  friends  {ironically)  the  thieves. 

A  caution  against  habits  of  carelessness. 

20  ^T3i  ffl^T  ^T^f%  ^T'^f  f»>%T  ^T^'^t*     AJa  gijo  kakarbi 
bhola  gijo  bakari. 

One  who  is  tempted  today  by  a  cucumber,   will  be  tempted 
tomorrow  by  a  goat. 

The  beginnings  of  bad  habits  should  be  punished.  Nip 
the  sin  in  the  bud. 

21  ^T^I  ^'^■^IT  '^T  ^P^T?!  Kano  kachabai  dundo  anyai. 

A  one-eyed   person  is  a  slanderer,  and  a  lame  man 
is  unjust. 

I.  e.  Such  persons  are  to  be  feared,  since  they  usually  make 
up  for  their  defects  by  dishonesty. 


C     112     ) 

22  »TT5IT^T  f%  ^  ^1%J'    Ma  jarho  ki  me  jarho. 
Whether  cold  in  the  month  of  Md  ( Mdgha,  January ) 

or  whe7i  it  is  raining. 

I.  e.,    Cold  is  dup  to  rain,  but  not  to   the  montli  of  January. 
Used  when  some  effect  is  attributed  to  a  wrong  cause. 

23  ^T^T  "^TTm  jirTT  031  ?:i'»^f^  ^'  Tf  T^I*      ^alo 

Bamana  goro  shudra  inana  dekhi  kanpa  maha  Rudra, 

A   darh-hued    Brahman    and  a   fair-skinned    Shudra 
frighten  even  God  (Rudra). 

Generally  a  Brahman's  complexion  is  fair  and  a  Shudra's  dark. 
The  contrary  is  much  dreaded  as  a  freak  of  nature  ominous  of 
disaster. 

24  ^T^  'l^'T  D^T  f^T  ^T^  ^T  ^Ilfl"-      Moclihi  swarga 
gayo  puira  inoebbi  ko  mochbi. 

A  shoe-maker  went   to  heaven,    but  he   became  a  shoe- 
maker again. 

Once  in  very  old  times  a  shoe-maker  was  taken  to  the  king- 
dom of  heaven  by  a  virtuous  king  along  with  his  other  subjects, 
but  on  his  arrival  there,  the  shoemaker,  not  finding  his  ordinary 
food,  which  consisted  of  filthy  things,  asked  permission  to  return 
to  earth,  where  he  became  a  shoe-maker  again.  The  dog  returning 
to  his  vomit. 

25  ^z  ^Tilt  ^T  TTlft*    Theta  mochhi  ko  mcclihi. 
The  shoe-maker  again  became  a  shoe-maker. 

The  same  meaning. 

26  »TT^  f^  '^f%  ^fTfcr  HT  ^fTfW  Vr  TcTTf«3  Vt-     Mala  ki 
charhi  yetani  bhai  utani  bbai  utani  bhai. 

The  bird  of  the  Plains  grew  to  such  and  such  a  size  and 
then  fell  down. 

This  is  generally  applied  to  wicked  habits  and  conduct 
which,  when  contracted,  gradually  gain  ground  and  eventually 
«nd  in  ruin.. 


(    113    ) 

2^    IR^I   f%HT^  TTQ  ^9^^-      Hvuna    Ilimala    mala 

basakala. 

Main  cotnes  from  the  clouds  which  accumulate  in  the 
snowy  range  during  the  cold  season,  and  from  the  plains 
during  the  rainy  season. 

A  proverb  describing  the  Kumnun  weather. 

28  ^icfsjj  ^Tfis  ^ff\  f^^  ^fx.  ^r  I'S  f'ltr-      Apnna 

■  «  • 

ghara  ki  clilni  nioliau  cbori  ko  gurba  mit'io. 

The  sugar  of  one's  own  house  is  not  liked,   hut   the 
treacle  obtained  by  theft  is  found  sweeter. 
"Stolen  waters  are  sweet." 

29  ^T^  ^  "ST^  '^^i^  ^Rr  ^T   »?l^r'     Cala  kl   bat£ 

khajanda  dana  ko  gicho. 

Tlie  hands  of  a  child  and  the  tongue  of  an  old  man 

transgress. 

Chilflren   seize  forbidden  things   and   garrulous   old   people 
say  many  things  they  ought  not  to. 

30  %I^T^  ^T  5TT  ■'CT'T  ^r  ^^-     Chaumasa  ko  jara  raja 

ko  kara. 

Fever  during  the  chaumasa   (June  to  September  J   is 

like  a  tax  levied  by  a  king. 

Every  one  has  to  suffur  more  or  less    from    such   fever,  it  is 
common  to  all,     C.  f.    '"Necessity  has  no  laws." 

31  f^W^I  ^^T  f^  'ITT.     Bikha  ko  kirho  biklia  me  rau. 

An  insect  which  grows  out  of  poison  lives  on  poison. 

I.  e.    One  brought  up   in  bad   society   or  in   an   unhealthy 
country  lives  on  without  any  inconvenience  or  regret. 

0 


C    114   ) 

HEALTH. 

1  ^I^PJI  ^T^I  ^^I5it-     Arogya  labho  labhanan. 

Sealth  is  the  best  gain  of  all. 

C.  f.  "Eka  tandurasti  hazar  nyamata"  or  "Health  is  more 
valuable  than  a  thousand  luxuries  or  dainties."  "Health  is  above 
wealth." 

2  7T«i  "^^ff  ^  ?3^^   ^^»T«      Mana  basanta  ki   khalaka 

basanta. 

Tfhen  it  is  spring  time  in  the  heart  the  whole  world 
is  green. 

-3  ^fx:  ^(%  ^Hg  ^^^  ^^.    Meri  cbeli  kushala  mushalai 
mushala. 

When  my  daughter  is  well^  there  are  pestles  without 
number  {to  husTc  out  paddy  and  millet). 

I.  e.  A  man  in  health  has  no  want  of  employment  or  tools 
to  work  with,  and  if  he  is  sick  his  tools  are  useless  to  him. 
Used  to  encourage  one  not  to  despair  of  finding  work. 

HELP. 

1  ^^f%  ^'a  ff  m^\  »J%  ^T  ^^  ^^-      Marani  bakhata 
bakaro  gusain  ka  mukha  obanchha. 

A  goat   when  being    sacrificed    looks    round    at    its 
master. 

I.  e.  When  a  man  is  in  straitened  circumstances  he  resorts  to 
his  master  or  friend  for  help. 


(     115     ) 
HELPFULNESS    (true). 

1  %T  ^T1  ^'!r(%ir  ^T  ^f  ^'n  fnfa;..     Sau  saga  luno  mitho 

sau  chhuin  dena  mithi. 

Salt  alone  is  better  than  a  hundred  vegetable  dishes, 
and  one  gift  is  better  than  a  hundred  words. 

Deeds  are  better  than  words. 

H01VIE. 

1  ^wi  ^X  f^§|"  rf  ^^*li«    Apano  ghara  DilU  tea  bht 

sujha.. 

^ven  at  Dehli-  one  remembers  or  things  of  his  home 
^native  land). 

C.  f.  "There  is  no  place  like  Home." 

2  9tt^  ^5!  '^ifl^T^T-    Griorarha  kana  chanta  pyaro. 

To  the  wild  goat  the  precipice   {where  it  is  born  and 
where  it  lives)  is  dear. 

A  man  is  fond  of  his  native  land  however  bad  it  may  be. 

3  ^^  f^  ^Tf^  vf^-     Ghara  ki  adhi  bhali. 

Salf  a  loaf  at  home  is  better  than  a  whole  one  abroad^ 

Applied  to  dissuade  one  from  leaving  his  home  for  a  foreign 
country. 

4  ^siSlTTI  «fif^  Zt^ fl^iig.    Banjara  kani  Tandai  sujanchha. 

A  Banjdrd  looks  always  towards  Tdndd. 

I.  e.  The  place  from  which  he  set  out.  Banjaras  are  Plains 
grain  dealers  who  take  grain  to  sell  in  the  hills.  The  Banjaras  of 
Tanda,  a  village  on  the  road  to  Moradabad,  are  indefatigable  grain 
dealers,  but  they  love  their  home.  Every  one  always  looks  forward 
to  the  accomplishmont  of  his  undertaking. 


(  116  ; 

HOPE. 

1  ^T%  ^  ^T^  ^TT^T  "^T^'     Tani  ka  sasa  ghuturljo  basa. 
•J  >  ■ 

The  frog  croaks  by   the  aid  (in  hope)  of  the  water. 

A  1  OOP  and  weiik  person  ciin  only  achieve  anything  by  the 
patronage  of  a  {ireater  inaH.  or  a  poor  nsan  lives  his  life  by  support 
or  in  hope  of  snp|)ort  from  some  great  man. 

C.  f.  "Quench  not  hope,  for  when  hope  dies,  all  dies." 


HVPOCRITES. 

1  ?"fT  ^3?ir  '».'%  WfTT-     Bi'iddha  beshya  patibrata. 

An  old  harlot   becomes  chaste  {literally,  faithful  to 
her  husband). 

1.  e.    One   who  loses   the  power  (of  doing    evil)   becomes 
discreet  and  pious. 

2  ?9fi^  ^^  ^?f?^  i^J^  ^^?^T  iw  ^^T  ^i?^  iryg  :#f f  T 

fiTl  ^57-     Klianda  klierl  kanda  inula  liagada  kheii  musa, 

gala  tera  kotiiula  m;it'mla  kwirha  tera  usa. 

To  all  appearance  the  cat  is  living  on  mere   roots   and 
ve::etables,  but  hairs  of  mice  and  feathers   of  birds   are 
found  in  her   d>ing.     There  is   a  necklace  on  her   neck 
but  her  speech  is  pious. 

Applied  to  hypocrites  and  deceivers. 

Story  Once  u  cat  thrust  her  head  into  a  pot  of  ghi,  but  could 
not  extricate  it  sigaiii.  In  the  attempt  to  free  herself  the  pot  was 
broken,  but  its  nfck  remained  round  her  neck  as  a  necklace. 
Being  i  ■  this  plight  she  was  unable  to  catch  her  prey.  She  how- 
ever contrived  a  plan  to  obtain  food,  and  went  boldlv  to  the  birds 
and  mice,  and  said,  '0  friends,  I  have  sinned  much,  but  now  repent 
for  what  I  have  do'ie,  and  have  therefore,  in  order  to  get  forgive- 
ness and  mercy,  put  on  this  necklace  and  vowed  never  to  eat  animal 
food,  or  kill  any  animals  whatever  in  future.  We  animals  are  all 
sinners,  let  us  now  go  to  Hardwara  (a  famous  place  of  pilgrimage") 
and  get  our  sins  washed  away  in  the  Ganges.  When  the  birds  and 
mice  protested  against  this  statement  of  their  adversary,  she  swore  to 


(  iiT  ; 

her  abstinence  from  flesh,  and  began  apparently  to  live  on  roots 
and  vegetables.  She  thus  overcame  the  suspicions  of  the  birds  and 
mice  and  started  with  them  for  the  shrine.  On  the  evening  of  the 
first  day  they  enciinped  in  a  cave  ;  the  cat  occupied  the  innermost 
part  of  it,  telling  her  companions,  with  a  view  to  frighten  them, 
that  the_iiingle  was  full  of  lions  and  tigers,  and  th.-it  they  might 
escape  if  they  liked,  but  that  she  herself  being  fatigued  would  re- 
main in  some  safe  corner  of  the  cave  (wishing  all  the  time  that  the 
animals  might  ask  to  be  allowed  to  occupy  the  inner  part  them- 
selves). To  this  the  animals  objected'and  said,  '"Friend,  our  safety 
depends  on  you,  you  are  the  most  powerful  among  us.  We  are 
powerless  to  defend  ourselves  ;  do  you  sit  at  the  entrance  to  defend 
ns,  and  let  us  occupy  the  safer  part  of  the  cave."'  The  cat  feigned 
to  dislike  this  proposal,  but  eventually  consented,  and  all  went  to 
sleep  in  their  respective  places.  At  night  the  eat  quietly  ate  up 
some  of  the  birds  and  mice.  In  the  morning  she  said  to  the 
animals,  "0  mice  and  birds,  some  of  3'ou  are  surely  not  true  to 
your  word,  for  I  saw  some  of  you  run  away  last  night,  but  1  dare 
not  arrest  them  for  fear  of  blame."  The  animals  being  quite 
deceived  by  this  stratagem  thought  that  what  the  cat  said  was  true. 
In  this  way  their  number  began  to  decrease  day  by  day,  but  no  one 
disbelieved  the  cat's  story,  as  in  the  daytime  she  apparently  lived 
on  leaves  and  roots.  One  day,  somehow  or  other,  the  fact  reached 
the  ears  of  a  fox,  who  advised  the  mice  and  the  birds  to  examine 
the  cat's  dung.  They  did  so  and  found  it  mixed  with  hairs  and 
feathers.  Then  they  got  frightened  and  blamed  themselves  much 
for  putting  confidence  in  their  natural  enem}',  and  expressed  their 
amazement  in  the  proverb  : — ("The  cat  eats  only  vegetables  &o"J, 
Hypocrisy.     Wolves  in  sheep's  clothing 

3  gJl^T  WlrT-     Bagula  bhagata, 

4  f^^J^  alW^-     Bidal  vaisbnava. 

5  ^J%^  sq;^  ^Jj.     Go  rupa  byagbra  karma. 
The  heron  looks  like  a  saint. 

E.  g.  The  heron,  in  order  to  catch  fish,  stands  on  one  lew  in 
the  water,  and  looks  as  if  it  was  praying  to  God,  but  as  soon  as  it 
sees   its    prey    it    plunges   in  after  it. 

So  the  cat  becomes  a  vaishnav  (  i.  e.  a  worshipper  of  Vishnn 
one  who  abstains  from  all  animal  food  )  and  assumes  this  form  the 
more  easily  to  catch  birds  etcetera. 

So  also 

A  cow  in  form,  a  tiger  in  deeds. 


(    118     ) 

6  %j^  V  HT^T  »I«!  ?f  %(%.    Hatha  men  mala  mana  men- 
kainchi. 

In  his  hands  a  rosary,  hut  scissors  in  his  heart. 

7  %j%j  Jf^j  ^%x  fkX}^  ^»l^t  "l^^-     Nau  sau  musa^ 
khaibera  biralu  haja  son  pahuncho. 

After  eating  900  rats  the  cat  has  gone  on  a  pilgrimage. 

This  represents  one  who,  after  leading  a  loose  life,   falsely 
professes  to  be  a  most  pious  or   religious  man. 

8  ^'Sf^  'S^f^  I5f%  ^^f^-     Mukharhi  hasadi  puchharhi. 

dasadi. 

Smiling  face  and  stinging  tail. 

Applicable  to  one  who  is  very  polite  to   others  in  their   pre- 
sence, but  in  their  absence  injures  them. 
"Fair  to  one's  face." 

9  ^^  t'TET  ^2  ^r-     Mukha  mishta  peta  dushta. 
Sweet  mouth,  wicked  heart. 

10  TTT?  ^T  TfT"^T»I  f^l.^T  "^  ^T1-      Kata  ko  rata  baga 
dina  ko  padabaga. 

Hed  leopard  at  night,  and  a  Fada-bdga  {small  leopard) 
during  the  day. 

I.  e.  Very  humble  in  appearance   but   dangerous.     "Uriah 
Heep."     "Wolves  in  sheep's  clothing." 

HUNGER  THE  BEST  SAUCE- 

1  'J'3  f%(3  f%  ^T»l*l  f^rSf-      Bhukha  mitbi  ki  bbojana 
mitbo. 

Is  hunger  delicious,  or  the  food  ? 
C.  /.  Hunger  is  the  best  sauce. 


C     119    ) 
IGNORANCE. 
1  ^x  ^T  ^<3  ^f?r«    Andha  ko  mukha  bbiti. 

A  blind  man  turns  his  face  towards  a  wall. 

I,  e.  One  ignorant  of  n  matter  is  always  liable  to  take  a  wrong 
direction  ;  a  blind  man,  not  knowing  whither  he  goes,  is  apt  to  run 
against  a  wall,  or  is  often  seen  turning  his  face  to  the  wall,  perhaps 
to  avoid  the  glare  of  the  light. 

Applied  to  one  who  is  labouring  under  wrong  views 
tbrongh  ignorance. 

ILL  RECOMPENSE. 

1  ^frT  ^^T  ^T  k^jm  1^  ^\XJ  gRT  5^7  TT^T-     Buti  kard 

ka  chhai  mana  gala  mara  ka  nau  mana. 

The  labourer  gets  six  mdnds  {three  seers)  and  he  who 
blows  his  cheeks  (one  who  talks  hut  does  not  work) 
receives  nine  mdnds  {four  and  a  half  seers).  A  mAnd 
equals  half  a  seer   of  capacity. 

Used  by  one  who  is  ill-paid  for  bis  work  in  comparison  with 
another  who  gets  well  paid  for  very  little  or  no  work. 

This  is  also  used  ironically  of  educated  men  who  are  highly 
paid  for  their  work. 

2  ^\^X.  "S^rm    ^Z^\fK  %    «)T^.      Nazara  baba   patwari 
hai  jawa. 

O  Ndzir  may  you  become  a  Fatwdri. 

One  very  much  pleased  with  a  man  who  holds  the  post  of  a 
Ifdzir  wishes  him  to  become  a  Patwari  (an  inferior  post}. 

Applied  by  one  who  is  ill-rewarded  for  his  good  services 
by  an  officer  or  master. 

3  ymimj  m^  ^T^  ^T'5'l.     Dhupaca  kada  angore  dadana. 

In  offering  incense  he  gets  his  fingers  burnt. 
Same  as  above. 


C     120  .) 

4  ^T1  ^T«li^  ^Bfsl^T'     Homa  karana  me  hatha  jalo. 
In  offering  the  sacrifice  he  burnt  his  hand. 

Samo  nieaninn;  as  .nliove. 

Jfoma  yCa7-ana=pouriDg    ablutions    of  glii   etcetera   into   the 
sacred  fire. 

IJ^^r  ^r  ^sfT-     Jaina  gayo  vishnix  pada  ui  ko  kuchha  na 
katha,  jaina  gayo  bhaganaulo  uiko  rupayon  ko  tbailo. 

One  who  sings  the  praises  of  Vishnu  ( God)  gets  noticing, 
hut  one  who  sings  love  ditties  {obscene  songs)  gets  hags 
of  money. 

Used  by  one  who  is  ill-rewarded  for  his  good  services.      Evil 
is  rewarded,  but  virtue  is  without  recompense. 

6  ^!T  ^^T  ^^  "TK  ftf  ''T'lr  ^T^-  ^51  ^^T  J^^T^T^ 
^^  fV^I'^IT.  Jaina  karo  wara  para  wiku  patha  cbara. 
Jaina  karo  nika  chara  wiku  dhika  cbara. 

One  who  makes  a  show  of  work  done  is  rewarded  with 
eight  seers,  ( 2  quarts^l  seer  )  but  he  who  has  done 
honest  work  is  driven  out. 

Applied  to  one  whose  good  services  are  not  appreciated  or 
ill  rewarded. 


7  finfiSQ  ?g-%  ^T^utz  %(^  »TT^T       Miyan  iyu  kbusbi 

bhaya  inta  kbaincbi  maro. 

When  my  husband  is  pleased  icith  me  he  flings  a 
brick  at  m^. 


(     121     ) 

It  is  generally  a  custom  among  the  villagers  for  the  hasband 
to  throw  lightly  a  small  bit  of  earth,  stone  &c  towards  bis  wife  as  a 
token  of  his  being  pleased  with  her.  But  the  person  alluded  to  in 
the  proverb  hit  his  wife  with  a  brick  with  such  force  that  ho 
hurt  her. 

Applied  to  one  who  having  been  relied  on  or  entreated  for 
help  by  another  foolishly  does  something  which  injures  the  other. 
C.  /.  "More  zeal  than  knowledge." 


ILL  LUCK. 

Bagale  maro  tau  dauno  rito  bhela  parho  tau  dauno  rito. 

The  peg  remains  empty  whether  the  animal  has  been 

killed  by  a  leopard  or  has  fallen  down  a  precipice. 

Whatever  the  cause  may  be  the  loss  is  evident.  There  are 
particular  pegs  called  "danna"  in  a  cowshed  for  each  cow  and 
calf,  to  which  they  are  tied  at  night.  If  any  animal  has  been  killed 
or  has  died,  the  peg  remains  empty,  hence  the  proverb. 

2  "€1^7  V^iE  ^^  f^  ^^l.      Rito  bharinchha  toto  ni 
bharinu. 

An  empty  vessel  can  be  filled  up,  but  the  vessel  with  a 
hole  in  the  bottom  cammxtt  be  filled  %p. 

Description  of  a  very  unlucky  or  discontented  man. 

Nitya  nama  ko  chutiya  naina  payo  dhhis  mu  cbhayo  beda 

mu  ayo. 

My  name  is  Nityd.     I  am  called    Chutiya  ( foolish  ). 

I  was  on  a  height,  but  have  fallen  low. 

Applied  by  one  who  is  mourning  over  his  misfortune  which 
has  caused  him  to  be  nicknamed  a  fool  and  brought  about  his 
degradation. 


(     122    ) 

1  ^^T  ^i^f^^I  «6^^RT  ^\^  ^  SPTT^-      Kala  karun 

Vidya  karun  data  ni  deta  mai  kya  karun. 

I  use  my  skill  and  learning,  but  if  God   does  not  help 
me,  what  shall  I  do  ? 

Applied  by  one  who  finding  all  his  attempts  to  better  his 
circumstances  frustrated,  bemoans  his  bad  fortune. 

5  %%t  ^t  «li'T  ^^t  «RT-    M^i  j'^^^  """^5  karma  lijaun  kan. 
I  shall  go  there,  but  where  shall  I  leave  my  ill  luck? 
I.  e.  Change  of  place  cantiot  change  a  man's  ill  luck. 

kaunchha  duda  bbata  khaunla  karma  kaunchlia  dagarhai 

raunla. 

The  heart  desires  to  eat  milk  and  rice,  but  ill  luck  says 
she  will  not  leave  me. 

7  'ss^Tffl  %J  W^m  "^^  ^T  «R^  ^f%  m^^^l  1-     Akarami 
ko  kapala  burunsa  ko  phula  jaiki  basana  nai. 

The  forehead  of  an  unfortunate  man  is  like  the  flower 
of  Burunsa  {rhododendron),  being  without  any  scent. 

IMMODESTY. 

1  JJ*  ^r  rT  ^T  ^'g  ^^T  1^^  ^r^  ft^r-     Eka  danta  ko 
mola  karo  battisa  kholadiya. 

Being    asked    the   price    of  one    tooth    he    showed 
thirty-tioo  teeth. 

Want  of  due  reserve. 

Also  applied  to  shameless  women. 


(     123    ) 

2  ^rfSr^  ^T'3TT<T  TT^  ^^  ^«T.      Saini   le  khola  danta 

marada  le  pai  anta. 

When  a  woman  shows  her   teeth  {speaks)  man  finds 
her  motive. 

Used  to  show  the  impropriety  of  a  woman  conversing  with 
men.  It  is  not  the  custom  among  Hindu  women  to  converse  freely 
with  men  other  than  their  own  relatives. 

IMPOSSIBILITIES. 

1  »f^T  T^^T  'J'sR  WK.^  5  ^T^T  VII     Marho  maiyo 
bhukhana  chhurkyon  ku  lawa  dhana. 

One   who  has  died-  of  starvation     needs  rice  for   his. 
funeral  ceremony. 

If  he  had  had  the  rice  before,  he  would  not  have  starved. 

2  ft^T  ^Tf  'fiT^  ^^T"%  TT^-      Wika  lyawa  phaula  jaika 
ni  naula. 

Demanding  fruit  when  we  have  not  the  fruit  tree.. 

Asking  for  a  thing  which  is  not  to  be  had.  Phaul'z\so  means  a 
copper  or  brass  jar,  and  naul  also  means  a  well.  So  the  proverb 
may  be  rendered  :  Demanding  a  jar  of  that  water  of  which  there  is 
no  well — asking  an  impossibility.. 

3  5i^iJTT!l^^«Tg 'flTn^sJT'^-      ^a  Jiau  mana  tela  jala 

na  radha  nacha. 

Neither  will  nine  maunds  of  oil  be  burned,  nor  will 
Rddhd  dance. 

Used  regarding  something  which  seems  to  be  impossible  for 
a  man  to  accomplish  by  any  amount  of  effort. 

4  T^  t|^T  'ST'ST  ^1%  "t^  ^Y^-     Hyun  parho  danda  budhi 
mari  panda. 

The  snow  fell  on  the  ridge,  but  the  old  lady  died  in  the 
upper  story. 

Used  as  an  expression  of  wonder  referring  to  things  uniar- 
telligible  or  improbable. 


(    124    ) 

5  ^m  ^%j   ^  ^«^T  "JT^  m^^h      Jakha  syurho   ni 
akarbau  takba  sabalo. 

To  thrust  a  thick  iron  bar  in  a  place  where  a  needle  cannot  go. 

Used  to  derote  a  small  space  or  accommodation  which  too 
many  persons  wish  to  occupy  ;  or  when  a  large  number  has  to  be 
supported  on  a  small  quantity.  "The  camel  going  through  the 
needle's  eye." 

6  TT3IT5BT^^   ^TW   %  ^^I'5l.      Eaja  ka  gbara  motyun 
ko  akala. 

Dearth  of  pearls  in  the  house  of  a  king. 

This  is  used  to  express  wonder  and  impossibility,  and  is 
need  when  a  great  person  claims  to  be  destitute  of  what  every  one 
supposes  him  to  have. 

7  ft\ji\j  '^\^  HT'ff^tT  ^Tfw  ^1 IRT-  Titaro  bani  bhanajo 
dbani  kakba  chbaya. 

A  partridge  never  learns  to  speak,  and  a  maternal  nephew 
never  does  any  work. 

Applied  to  maternal  nephews  who  belong  to  another  caste 
and  therefore  do  not  like  to  work  in  their  uncles'  houses. 

8  fit^TT  VZ  "a^UR  >ff  ^^T  ^^^T^r.     Bbaun  tera  bbata 
bukanana  bbaun  tero  balabano. 

/  will  either  chew  your  parched  grain   or  plough   your 
fields  (I  cannot  do  both  at  the  same  time). 

E.  g.  A  woman  employed  a  ploughman  to  plough  up  her  fields. 
According  io  the  custom  the  ploughman  was  to  get  a  meal 
at  noon.  While  eating  his  food  he  of  course  stops  the  ploughing 
and  unties  the  bullocks.  In  order  to  make  up  or  prevent  this 
interruption  she  devised  a  scheme  to  feed  him  with  parched 
Bhata  { pulses )  instead  of  rice  or  Chapdtis,  thinking  that  the 
ploughman  while  chewing  the  grain  would  continue  ploughing. 
But  the  ploughman,  on  the  Bhata  being  placed  before  him,  said 
as  in  the  Proverb.  This  means  that  no  one  can  do  two  things  at 
the  same  time. 

Applied  by  one  who  is  pressed  to  do  many  things  at  the 
same  time. 


(     125    ) 

9  «»T  WTTI  sn^^  Wi  ^X.^  ir^HJ  ^^  «3«ll^51-    Duma 

cbhora  byakbana  bhukha  marana  prabatba  kaleu  sutyalana. 

The  children  of  a  Duma  (a  loio  caste  man)  go  supperless 

to  bed,  and  in  the  morning  they  ash  for  what  was  left  from 

the  evenings'  meal. 

( Breakfast    usually    consists    of  what    was   left   from   the 
evening  meal  ).   Looking  for  impossibilities. 

10  ^T  ^^T  ^1  ^^^|5|  ^7  ^TT  ^^^  ^if^.    Jo   mera 
mukba  ni  bulani  so  mera  gbara  ke  all. 

Will  she,  who  does  not  talk  with  me,  come   to  my  house  ? 
He  who  takes  no  interest  in  me  will  not  do  me  any  favour. 

11  ^f^«|QT^Z*    Syai  Binasara  gbata. 

Water-mill  on  the  mountains  of  Syai  and  Binasara. 
(  These  have  no  or  very  little  water  in  them  ). 
An  impossibility. 

IMPROPER  FRIENDSHIP. 

1  •n^T^  f^  ^I'flt  «W(%  'SITI*      Nadana  ki  dosti   phusa 

ki  aga. 

Friendship  with  a  fool  is  like  a  fire  of  grass. 
I.  e.    Eises  high  at  first  but  dies  out  quickly. 

2  ^^  ^1  ^lf^  ^  I^Tf^  '3'SF*    Mukba  lagai   dumani 

lya  gusyani  luna. 

If  you  are  kind  to  a  JDumani  (low  caste  woman)  she  will 

take  the  opportunity  to  ask  for  salt. 

A  caution  against  being  very  intimate  with  the  poor,  as  they 
will  surely  ask  for  help  of  some  sort. 


(     126     ) 

3  ^fjJV   ^"C  ^H    '^tIt*      Larhyayun  kukara  jibha. 

chatau. 

A  dog  petted  or  caressed  will  lick  one's  mouth. 

Intimacy  with  poor  and  mean  people  should  be  avoided. 

4  TT^^  ^T'^  ^f T  fr^«     Randa  ki  yari   sada  khwari^ 
Association  with  a  {vicious)  woman  is  always  ruinous. 

5  ^I^r  f%  '?1"<7  "^T^  f%  Mtw«  Ochha  ki  prita  balu  ki  bhita. 

The  friendship  of  a  mean-minded  man  is  like  a  wall 
of  sand  {will  not  last). 

Parallel  to  what  is  elsewhere  said  : — that  the  friendship  of  a, 
mean  man  is  like  the  shadow  of  the  first  half  of  the  day  i.  e.  great 
at  first  bat  declining  every  moment,  while  that  of  a  noble-minded 
person  is  like  the  shadow  of  the  second  half  of  the  day,  i.  e.  very 
small  at  first  but  increasing  every  moment  until  sunset. 

IMPROPER  UNION. 

1  ^K^Z  ^  "^^  ^X^Z  %J  «3^^«     Chharapata  ki    syainl 

barapata  ko  khasama. 

A  wife  picked  up  hy  chance  {out  of  the   ashes  or  leav- 
ings) and  a  husband  taken  out  of  a  number. 

Such  a  wife  wishes  to  ruin  her  husband,  to  whom  she  is  not 
properly  married,  and  the  latter  in  his  turn  wishes  to  cheat 
his  wife. 

Caution  against  such  unions. 

INADEQUATE  OR  INSUFFICIENT  HELP. 

1  %\^  ^  Wm  ""iX^  %T  «S^.     Hathi  ki  khaba  pyurarhl: 
ko  pbula. 

A  flower  of  the  Pyurarhi  or  pyuli  in  the  mouth  of  {i.  e.  to 
feed)  an  elephant. 

Applied  to  inadequate  or  insufficient  help   given   to   another. 


(     127     ) 
INATTENTION. 

XJ^^  X.J^^W^     Bara  barasa  Ramayana  suni  bera  pucbhana 

lago  ki  Rama  raksbyasa  cbba  ki  Rawana  raksbyasa  cbba. 

One  who  has  heard  the  Ramayana  recited  for  twelve  years, 
at  the  end  enquires  whether  Rama  or  Rawana  was  the  devil. 

Used  of  one  who  pays  no   attention   to   what  he   reads   or 
Jiears.     A  dullard. 

INCOMPETENCY. 

1  ^T'»  ^^  ilf%  ''^^'T  Sfi^r  ^f«  "^^^  f^fM^IT^^T*     Apa 
karma  cbborbi  para  karma  karau  taiki  akala  bidbina  barau. 

One  who  leaving  his  own  profession  or  worh  follows  that 
of  another  is  deprived  by  God  of  his  wit  or  wisdom. 

Story :  Once  a  fox  having  found  an  elephant  drowned 
in  a  marsh  mounted  upon  the  corpse  in  order  to  eat  its  flesh. 
Seeing  one  of  their  brethren  in  that  position  and  allured  by 
the  corpse,  other  foxes  approached  him.  Seeing  them  come 
there  he  began  to  act  boastfully  over  the  dead  body  of  the 
elephant,  and  forbade  them  to  touch  it,  saying  "How  can  you  bo 
allowed  to  eat  the  elephant  killed  by  me  alone  ?"  This  speech 
struck  them  with  awe  and  astonishment.  But  hunger  and 
natural  rapacity  for  animal  food  compelled  them  to  implore 
the  fox  again  for  permission  to  share  the  treat  with  him. 
He  granted  their  petition  on  the  condition  that  they  ack- 
nowledged their  allegiance  to  him  as  their  future  king.  All 
agreed  to  do  so.  As  soon  as  they  all  had  devoured  the  flesh  of 
the  elephant  the  crafty  fox  ordered  them  to  convey  him  on  a 
throne  (otherwise  there  was  no  distinction  between  him  and  the 
othersj  and  address  him  as  their  king,  "Hathamalla"  or  destroyer 
of  an  elephant.  So  he  was  seated  on  a  big  throne  made  of  grass 
and  rags  firmly  tied  to  his  tail,  and  was  thus  borne  by  the  other 
foxes  wherever  he  went.  One  day  they  all  entered  a  sheep-fold, 
when  no  sooner  was  the  alarm  given  than  the  watch-dogs  were  set 
on  them.  This  caused  a  panic,  the  foxes  dropped  the  throne  and 
ran  away.  But  the  so-called  king  being  unable  to  run  on  account 
of  the  heavy  throne  fastened  to  his  tail,  was  torn  to  pieces 
by  the  dogs. 


(     128     ) 

2  ^Wt  ^fT  ^n^T^T  iS^^fz  mz^fZl^J-     Naula  kawa  le  gu 
khayo  tbunai  bati  lata  patayo. 

A  young  crow  in  attempting  to  tat  filth  smears  its 
beak  with  it. 

Used  to  denote   one  who   is   caught  in   doing   a   sinful  or 
unlawful  act,  and  punished  for  it. 

3  ^T!i3|jin^  ^  h!»I  5ft^  'T^   ^nr^  Zt»r.    Anjanale  khai 

bhanga  niche  munda  upara  tanga. 

One  not  acciistomed  to  hemp  throws  his  legs  upwards  and 
bends  his  head  downwards  ( becomes  senseless  or  mad ) 
when  he  eat'<  it. 

Used  of  one  who  suffers  in  conseq[uence  of  his  undertaking 
business  beyond  his  control. 

4  ''^['5  ^%T  if'^  ^^TT«  Andu  ghorbo  gandu  sawara. 

A  vicious  {uncastrated)  horse,  and  a  bad  rider. 

Applied   to   one   who   fails   in   any   new   business   through 
ignorance  of  the  matter. 

5  ^T%    «i^  Wl»\  %J  '3*T'^.      Kacho  baida  jyana  ko 

khatara. 

A  raw  (  half  trained  )  qua^k  is  dangerous  to  life. 
Inefficiency  in  work. 

6  %^  m^J  VT^T  "m^  '^  ^^'    Adakharho  bhano  bajanai 
runchha. 

An  empty  vessel  continues  to  make  a  noise, 

C.  f.    "Empty  barrels  make  most  noise." 
Shallow-minded  and  incompetent  people. 


(  129  ; 

^  ^^5^  ^^  ^'T  ^   W^'     Adapuri  vidya  jiya   ki 
kala. 

A  little  learning  is  a  calamity  to  the  soul. 

■C.  f.  Pope's  lines     "A  little  learning  is  a  dangerous  thing  : 

"Drink  deep,  or  taste  not  the  Pierian  spring.' ' 

8  vlT^  oTT^  ^T^  ^re'S.    Nakha  joka  poka  aserhu. 

Leeches  in  the  nose,  aserhu  applied  to  the  rectum.  {^Aserhu 
is>an  irritating  grass  the  smell  of  which  causes  sneezing). 

When  leeches  enter  the  nose  of  any  animsl  this  grass  is  put 
inside  its  nostrils  so  that  the  leeches  may  come  away  with  the 
sneezing  which  the  grass  produces.  If  the  grass  he  applied  to  the 
rectum  it  will  of  course  have  no  effect  on  one's  nose. 

Applied  to  persons  who  are  inefficient  in  their  professions. 

9  ^T^f'I  «fTp3  ^Z\  ^ir  ITT^*    Hani  nijani  khuta  ai  lagi. 
One  not  knowing  how  to  u^e  an  axe  cuts  his  own  foot. 

10  ^f^  f|"^T  ^^•»f%  ^T'TW'    Peta  ki  pirha  ankhanaki 
aukhadha. 

Pain  in  the  stomach  and  medicine  to  the  eyes. 
Inefficiency  in  any  business  or  profession. 

11  ^  %T  ^T^r  fsd^  ^^^.      Sarpa  ko  khayo   bichhi 
ko  mantra. 

Bitten  by  a  snake,  but  treated  as  if  stung  by  a  scorpion. 
Incapacity. 

12  *rTKf^5»Tt^  ^t^l  ^T^  ^T^.      Mara  nijani   kandha 
ai  lagi. 

The  unsMlful  woodman  strikes  his  own  shoulder, 

Q 


f    130    ) 

13  ^%T  ^TH  TT  qif^  5T5T  5^^  ^TTT  lf»IT  '31131.     Jaiko 

kama  ui  kani  chhaja  dusaro  karata  thinga  baja. 

The  work  is  profitable  to  one  who  is  trained  to  the 
profession,  but  it  proves  ruinous  if  undertaken  by  any 
other  person. 

INCONGRUITY. 

1  €fs  f%  Wl"^  1^  ^T  2^T«    Chhinta  ki   ghagari  gaji 

ko  tala. 

A  shirt  of  chintz,  patched  with  a  piece  of  Gaji 
(  coarse  cloth ). 

Applied  to  inappropriate  or  incongruous  things. 

INDEPENDENCE. 

1  IT  IT^T  «!   ^T*'   ^^I'lrr*       Gurha    klano   na   kana 

chherhono. 

One  who  does  not  eat  Gurha  {treacle)  will  not  have  his 
ears  pierced. 

E.  g.  About  the  age  of  eight  years  boys  have  their  ears 
pierced,  and  girls  their  noses  and  ears  at  the  age  of  five  years, 
and  sweetmeats  are  given  them  at  the  time  to  take  their  thoughts 
off  the  pain.  But  if  the  sweets  are  refused,  the  ears  will  not  be 
jiierced.  So  if  one  avoids  putting  himself  under  obligations 
to  others  he  will  be  saved  much  trouble. 

2  ^fr  ^T^  ^^T  ^t  3111  ?.t  ^^f%   <T^  ^fz  kl,      Teri 

dathf  tera  jaun  jakha  bati  sakadi  takha  bati  lau. 

The  sickle  is  yours,  and  the  whole  barley  field  is  yours  ; 
you  can  reap  wherever  you  please. 

One  is  master  of  his  own  property  in  regard  to  its  disposal. 


(     131    ) 

S  ^IT^r^r  ^^^  1?!^  'B'it^*  Paibalo  tau'amiri  natara 
pbakirl. 

Enjoy  what  is  within  reach,  forget  what  is  unattainable. 

4  ^rfe  ^T^T  .^f  ^T^T  ^  fgl^  ^t^r*    Sati  hola  tau  naula 
men  kuti  kbaunla. 

If  we  have  paddy  we  can  husk  it  in  our  own  navels. 

Used  to  denote  tbat  if  one  has  enough  food  he  is  not 
dependent  on  any  one.  Paddy  is  husked  in  a  mortar  with,  a  pestle 
but  if  one  has  paddy  but  no  mortar  he  can  husk  it  in '  his  navel. 
I.  e.   He  can  contrive  some  way  of  cleaning  the  grain. 

5  ^lf^  1T^  ^[^  cTt'lf^'    Apani  gaji  ball  tapani. 

One  can  burn  his  clothes  {or  cloth)  to  warm  himself. 

(The  man  would  have  died  in  the  cold  night  if  he  had 
not  burned  it). 

The  good  things  of  others  are  of  no  use  to  a  starving  man. 
A  man  must  use  what  he  has  got. 

Applied  to  one's  own  possession  which  he  can  dispose  of  in 
any  way  he  likes. 

6  ^I^  vt  "l^f^r  Wnt«    Bacbbi  bbai  na  luti  lagi. 

No  calf  was  born,  and  hence  no  shin  disease  {very  common 

among  the  calves)  attached  it. 

E,.  g.  If  one  has  no  wealth  or  property  he  is  Hot  troubled 
with  it.     Little  goods  little  care. 

7  Sjf^f'i  'tT9T1TT?T  fTTI^  '^I'ti-      Jan  dekbi  tawa  parata 
tan  gawani  rata. 

Wherever  I  shall  find  Tawd  Parata  {  vessels  used  for 
kneading  and  baking  their  cahes )  there  I  ^ill  stop 
the  night. 


(     132     ) 

These  vessels  are  absolutely  necessary  to  a  traveller,  who  has 
no  vessels  of  his  own,  but  has  to  borrow  them. 

This  is  applied  to  one's  settling  in  ft  place  where  be  finds  a 
means  of  livelihood. 

8  ^t^T  ^T  ft^»)«    Ankho  phuto  pirha  ge. 

As  soon  as  a  sore  eye  is  plucked  out  the  pain  goes. 

One  finds  relief  as  soon  as  he  gets  rid  of  troublesome  thfngs. 

9  ^T'J^T  Tnxn  RT  Tl  ^3^1'    Apano  ranga  raaga  parai 
ranga  dhaturo. 

The  colour  which  I  chose  is  the  best  colour,  but  the 
colour  which  others  choose  is  like  that  of  the  poisonous 
plant   called  "Dhaturd."    fThe  thorn  apple,  Datura). 

We  think  our  own  advice  and  opinion  the  best,  those  of 
others  worthless. 

10  f^f%f%^r  ^  ?^f»I  fwftlilT  ^  IJ^T'^*      Ni   miliya 
ka  tyagi  miliya  ka  anuragi. 

Se  despises  a  thing  which  it  is  impossible  to  get,  but 
of  which  he  would  be  fond  if  it  were  attainable. 
"The  grapes  are  sour." 

11  ^'TOT  ^T  «liT  ^  TT5IT*    Apana  ghara  ka   saba  rdja. 
Every  one  is  a  king  in  his  own  household. 

This  is  used  when  one's  actions  in  his  own  private  affairs 
are  called  in  question,     C.  f.    "Every  man's  house  is   his  castle." 

12  ^V^  ^X.  if  ^^;K  31^.     Apana  ghara   men  kukara 
shera. 

A  dog  is  a  lion  in  its  own  house. 

Applicable  to  one  who  treats  others  with  disrespect  while 
in  his  own  house.  C.  /.  "Every  cock  fights  best  on  his  own 
dunghill." 


(     133     ) 

13  ^^f^  mf^  ^'^•I  V}}f^.    Apani  bar!  sabana  pyari. 

Every  one  has  to  take  Ms  own  turn,   or  is  vnlling   to 
undertake  his  own  turn  and  not  the  work  of  another. 

14  ^vm  cTTt  ^  (^f%1T  ^m  »I^«TT'r«     Apana  tana  men 
cbirhiya  laga  masbtana. 

A  bird  is  regaled  hy  its  own  song. 

I.  e.  Every  man  does  what  pleases  him.  Every  one  follows 
his  own  bent. 

15  ^qi^  Hlflr  5|?a  Wd  SJIt^  cT<i  TU  ^T«ft»      Apani  mani 
jakba  muga  jani  takba  muga  kba^i. 

If  one  has  his  own  grain  it  is  available  for  food 

wherever  he  goes. 

Said  by  one  who  has  no  friends  to  feed  him  while  away 
from  home  or  on  a  pilgrimage.    Expressing  his  independence. 

17  ^H«5  W[^  5J»II^«    Bojba  cbborbi  jagata  ke. 

If  I  give  up  the  load,  why  should  I  be  taxed  for  it  ? 

(In  reference  to  the  tolls  that  people  have  to  pay  on  all  sorts 
of  loads  &c). 

This  is  applied  to  one  who  gives  up  any  duty  or  service,  and 
thereby  thinks  himself  freed  from  all  further  responsibility. 

18  ^Tf%  1TT1T  if  qT^T  \\  %  gT»i5.    Basi  bbata  men 
Parameshwara  ko  ke  lagancbba. 

Why  should  God  be  thanked  for  stale  rice  ?  (that 
is,  rice  left  over  from  a  previous  meal  J. 

This  is  made  use  of  in  speaking  of  a  thing  already  got 
or  gained. 


(     134     ) 

19  ^^^T^T  5T3f  «lt^r   f3  ^^«     Chala  thaiila  jakha. 
jaunla  takha  kbaunla. 

Come  along,  wallet,  wherever  we  go  we  will  have  food. 

E.  g.  On  a  journey  people  take  their  own  grain  with  them, 
in  a  bag,  and  so  are  certain  of  food  wherever  they  may  go. 

Applied  to  independent  people,  also  used  in  reference  to 
one's  stomach  (wallet)  saying  that  he  can  fill  it  (with  foodji, 
wherever  he  goes. 

INDIFFERENCE. 

1  ^Tf^  liT  ^•l«fiT  1I1T.     Hatbi  ka  kana  ka  makha. 

As  flies  to  the  ears  of  an  elephant. 

Applied  to  one  who  disregards  all  advice,  orders,  or  sugges- 
tions regarding  a  matter  in  which  he  is  concerned.  (The  elephant 
is  quite  indifferent  to  flies  on  his  ears). 

2  ^RT  ^  5IT  3|f%5i  ^«TTTi!I  ^f^^.     Ghuna  ghuna  jalige 
kutarana  kakhi  ai. 

Where    does    the    smell    of    burning    come  from  ?' 
(Kutarana  means  the  smell  of  burning  cloth  J. 

Applied  to  one  who  though  already  on  the  point  of  being 
ruined  is  still  indifferent  to  his  own  interests,  or  though  his 
character  has  been  stained  still  he  is  indifferent. 


INDULGENCE. 

1  ^f%  ^T?  «RT  '^f%  ^31^.     Barhi  larha  ka  barhi  kharha. 
The  one  greatly  loved  goes  to  a  deeper  ditch. 

Generally  used  with  reference  to  children  and  young  people 
whose  ruin  is  due  to  the  indulgence  of  their  parents  and 
guardians. 


(    135    ) 

2  ^  WSJT^  ^T^  "HT  «?TT^  5tST^.     I^lii  larhyai  ka 
dari  puta  larhai  ka  bbikhari^ 

A  daughter  spoilt  becomes  a  prostitute,   and  a  spoilt 
son  a  beggar. 

Caution  against  indulging  children. 

INDUSTRY. 

1  ^f2  ?Iia$T  ^rt  ^t  ^I^TftS!  ^jm   ^Zji.      Beti  na 
jcbano  kutai  bbaun  buwari  na  kbano  katai. 

£oth  one's  daughter  and  one's  daughter-in-law  must 
thresh  corn  to  live. 

This  is  only  applicable  to  agriculturists  who  make  use  of 
this  phrase  in  the  sense  that  every  member  of  their  family  must 
wor"k  for  his  living.  It  is  also  us?d  to  imply  that  one's  daughter 
must  be  treated  as  somebody's  wife,  as  one's  daughter-in-law 
is  the  wife  of  one's  Bon. 

2  '^■^  ^tJT  ^^T    ^5  5^5JT.     Barbi  pbajara,  cbula  mu 
najara. 

The  kitchen  has  to  be  looked  to  early  in  the  morning. 

One  must  earn  one's  food  first  of  all. 

Applies  also  iionieally  to  one  who  is  more  eager  to  eat  than 
work  in  the  early  morning. 

3  ^It^  >n^T   ^T^t"  q^Tf'l^f^T*      Bhikbon  bbara  osi 
gbarba  ni  bonda. 

No  one  can  expect  to  get  mu^h  (lit.  loads)  by  begging, 
or  to  fill  jars  with  dew. 
Necessity  of  toil. 

4  ^^%  ^in^  ^^%  'n^,       Gbaskai  lyalai  pbasakal  palai. 

If  you  bring  much  you  will  get  much. 

Applied  to  one  who  is  rewarded  according  to  his  labor,  or  the 
service  rendered  by  him. 


f     136    ) 

5  «f5^  U^  «'g^  nt^r.     Jatukai  gurha,  utukai  mitho. 

The  more  treacle  you  put  in,   the  sweeter  will  be 
the  food. 

I.  e.  The  more  labor  one  bestows  on  his  work  or  business 
the  better  result  will  he  have.  Equivalent  to,  the  more  a  field 
is  manured  the  better  will  be  the  crop. 

6  qri^T  f%li  ^tft"  %  ^T^  f^  f^r^tlt'f*     Khano  dhilai 
banti  jau  kama  dhilai  ni  bantinu. 

A  meal  postponed  is  shared  by  others,  but  the  work 
delayed  will  devolve  on  one's  self. 

Prepared  food,  if  not  taken  at  the  moment,  is  liable  to  be 
eaten  by  other  people  or  thrown  to  the  dogs  and  cats,  but  work, 
if  delayed,  will  fall  on  himself  alone. 

7  gr%  ^I  JBT^fJ  ^1%  ^»!!.     Undo  ko  sabana  ubho  ko 

luna. 

Salt  com^s  from   the  high  lands,  and  soap  from  the 
Tlains. 

E.  g.  In  former  times,  when  the  country  salt  did  not  find 
its  way  to  the  hills,  the  people  used  to  be  supplied  with  the  salt 
of  the  upper  country  (Thibet),  and  with  soap  from  the  Plains. 
The  head  of  a  family  in  his  old  age  exhorts  his  family  to  be  as 
industrious  as  he  was. 

8  T^^T  ^^i  Mftii  ^TJ'     Rito  batai  bbariyun  batai. 
Whether  unburdened  or  with  a  load  one  has  to  travel 

the  length  of  the  road. 

This  is  used  to  induce  one  to  take  a  load  with  him  i.  e.  to 
lead  a  busy  life.  Since  life  is  to  be  lived  whether  with  work 
or  without  it. 

9  ^ifll  ^^^T  M^  Tjm^J.      Sanji  dharano,  panji  ra- 
khano. 

First  earn  and  then  take  care  of  your  earnings. 

C.  f.  "Much  food  is  in  the  tillage  of  the  poor  :  but  there 
is  that  is  destroyed  for  want  of  judgment.'' 


(     137     ) 

01  ^ffT  ^T^T  ^T*T  ^IfT  %r  f^vt  ^C? ^»IW.    Satu  kbayo 
sata  bagata  dhau  ni  bhal  eka  baofata. 

0»<?  ate   Sdtti   (  me«Z  o/"  parched  grain  )  se«e;»  times, 
but  was  not  even  once  satisfied. 

Satu  represents  what  is  gained  from  begging  ;  better  work 
and  get  sufficient  to  satisfy  all  needs. 

11  WTT'ft"  ^^T'o'l"  ^T  ^  'tt'ST  ^I'bV.     Tu  rani  mai  rani 
ko  kuta  china  dani. 

You  are  a  queen,  I  am  a  queen,  hut  who  loill  husk 
the  millet  ? 

This  is  applied  ironically  to  members  of  one's  family  to 
induce  them  to  work,  for  if  each  thinks  himself  a  lord  or  master 
no  one  will  work,  and  in  that  case  the  family  will  be  ruined. 

12  3^7«|T  f%«iTQI    J^fls  ^tm.       Nana  ki  bana  thula  H 

dhana. 

The  young  ought  to  accustom  themselves  to  habits  of 
industry,  so  that  when  they  grow  up  they  may  know 
how  to  work. 

Custom  in  infancy  becomes  nature  in  old  age. 

13  f^^f  'RWT  ift'^T  ^1  (^^'ft^T-    Bi°a  apna   mariya 
ewarga  ni  dekbino. 

No  one  can  see  heaven  without  dying. 

I.  e.  If  a  man  wishes  to  accomplish  some  good  work,  or  gain 
some  great  end,  he  must  do  it  himself, 

14  ^^T''^  %  ^VilX  H^T»     Bekara  hai  begara  bbalo. 

To  work  for  nothing  is  better  than  to  remain  idle. 

R 


(     138     ) 

E.  g.  In  native  states  every  one  is  bound  to  do  the  work  of 
the  state  without  wages,  which  is  called  "Begara."  This  kind  of 
work  is  taken  by  the  ruling  Prince  in  lieu  of  dues,  and  thereby 
absolves  the  subjects  for  some  time  from  further  calls.  These 
services  devolve  on  every  one  by  turn  in  the  native  states. 
The  phrase  is  also  made  use  of  and  acted  upon  by  one  who  keeps 
himself  employed  in  some  way  or  other  instead  of  being  idle. 


15  iqJi^T  ^I^IIT  ''^T'^  ^  '91'^T.     Mangano  apna  bapa 
thain  laga  buro. 

To  heg  even  of  one's  own  father  is  bad. 
A  censure  on  begging  and  laziness. 

16  ^T^T  V"^  '3T^T  ^  ^■^^T^'    Matha  bhari  lano 

peta  bbari  khano. 

JBring  a  full  load,  and  then  eat  your  stomach-full. 
This  is  used  to  encourage  labour  or  diligence. 

17  ^^^  T'^rf^  %T'!I  {^  ^^rf^*    P'^sa  ki  rasyari  sauna 

ki  gbasyari. 

A  coohfor  the  month  of  Fusa  C  January  J  and  a  grass- 
cutter  for  the  month  of  Sauna  f  July  J . 

Used  to  induce  one  to  do  the  work,  saying  that  it  is  very 
easy,  and  that  no  one  but  a  fool  can  refuse  to  do  it. 

In  January  the  weather  is  coll  and  so  a  cook  is  well  off  near 
the  fire.   In  July  (rainy  season)  grass  grows  everywhere  in  plenty. 

18  f^T,  \j  miM^  %T.     Shira  ko  jamana  paira. 

The  feet  are  the  surety  of  the  head. 

This  means  to  say  that  as  long  as  one's  feet  move  (  are  alive 
to  walk  )  the  head  is  safe. 

Used  in  regard  to  a  business  or  household  which  will  go 
on  only  so  long  as  it  is  properly  managed. 


(     139     ) 

19  «j^g  ^  i|;  ^cji^.     Nakala  me  ke  akala. 

What  genius  or  intellectual  power  is  required  for 
copying  a  paper  ? 

Used  to  pursuade  one  to  do  the  work  he  is  entrusted  with 
by  saying  that  it  is  easy  to  be  done. 

20  %rl%  '^f^  ^^  'filf^^f^  Hlf^    Jorhi  jhaguli  na  ki 

phari  kari  jhaguli. 

One  ought  to  earn  money  for  his  clothes,  hut  not  to  take 
too  much  care  of  it. 

Ghara  jani  chhun  batia  jani  chhun  teri  kheti  ni    hixni  ta 
main  ke  karun. 

I  worTc  at  my  house  and  go   to  the  jungle  for  the 
purpose  ;  if  your  husbandry  fails  what  can  I  do  ? 
I,  e.  I  do  my  best,  if  the  tillage  fails  it  is  not  my  fault. 

'±2  UTH  %j  ^uj  \x^\  st^tHt*    Maranu  ko  laga  sobato 

nahati. 

JSfo  leisure  even  to  die. 

Used  to  signify  refusal  to  undertake   another  business  when 
one  is  already  fully  engaged. 

23  %T  ^T^T  ^^T^T  ft"5RT  ^I^  ^'Tf  T  %I^r-    Jo  ^ato  saralo 
wlka  hatha  chuparha  bola. 

Whosoever    will  mend  a  icicle    will  get  his  hands- 
greased. 


(     140     ) 

An  encouragement  to  industry,  for  any  one  who  will 
work  will  get  something  from  the  work. 

25  efijH  'zirTT  f%  ^[T  «zjr^r.     Kama  pyaro  ki  chama 
pyaro. 

Is  one  to  he  valued  for  his  work  or  for  Ms  skin  ? 
Industry  is  worth  more  than  beauty. 

27  ^il^T'':  €t  ^"^  ^T^  %\  ^^T*      Kumhara  ki  sati 
dhobi  ko  murda. 

Tlie  potter's  wheel  and  the  washerman's  club. 

As  these  two  tools  are  constantly  in  use  they  have  become 
proverbial. 

Used  of  one  who  never  has  any  spare  time,  being  always 
engaged  in  work. 


'o   o 


28  mJf^  %f7T1Tr?T  ^Tf^  SlffTTfH.    Adhikheti  pati  adhi 
jata  pd.ti. 

Cultivation   of  the  fields  is  only  half  the  farmer's 
worh,  for  he  must  also  watch  his  crops. 

Industry  must  be  accompanied  by  care  and  thoughtfulness. 


29  5II31T  f^'lT^T  517^7  ^1T^.  Nana  tina  ko  jarho  dhunga 


men. 


The  cold  of  children  is  on  a  stone. 

This  means  that  a  stone  suffers  or  bears  the  cold  on  behalf 
of  a  child  who  moves  about  and  works. 

Used  to  stir  and  pursuade  children  to  work  even  during 
intense  cold. 


(     141     ) 
INFLUENCE. 

1  ^T^  'l^r  «r^  'ST^  %r^T  5^r  I^itT  ^T^.  Hatha  pujau 
eka  hatha  hato  pujau  hazara  hatha. 

A  hand  (hatha)  reaches  a  distance  of  one  cubit,  but  the 
Hdtd,  the  influence  of  relationship  reaches  thousands 
of  cubits. 

The  far-reaching  power  of  family  influence. 

INHERITANCE. 

1  ^^^^'[  f*  JR'TrC  ^'T?!  ^m.  '^W^'ri  ^l^.  Baba  ki  kamain 
saputa  khawa  na  kaputa  khawa. 

Neither  a  good  son  nor  a  bad  one  enjoys  the  property 
left  by  his  father. 

E.  g.  A  good  son  ■will  earn  for  himself  and  thus  will  not  care 
for  his  father's  property  :  and  a  bad  son,  who  does  not  earn  any- 
thing will  have  to  sell  the  property  bequeathed  to  him  by  his 
father.  Hence  the  proverb  is  used  to  induce  fathers  not  to  leave 
anything  for  their  sons. 

2  ^l^f  ^T    "^XZJ  1^1^  ^T^'3T«       Bhayon  ka  banta 

bathaguli  ka  rekha. 

The  shares  of  one's  brothers  and  the  marlcs  on  the 
palms  of  the  hands  cannot  be  obliterated. 

INJUSTICE  &  OPPRESSION. 

1  "^ilF  ^»|T^  ^s^irf'^'^T^IT  ^T^T^  ^^T*   Banasungara 

le  ujyarha  khai  ghara  sungara  ka  thola  thecha. 

The  trespass  was  committed  by  wild  pigs,  but  the  snout 
of  the  domestic  pig  was  criished  (for  it  was  easier  to 
punish  a  domestic  pig  than  the  wild  one  J. 

This  proverb  denotes  injustice  in  which  a  real  culprit,  owing 
to  his  being  wealthy  and  crafty  escapes  the  punishment,  and  an 
innocent  poor  person  is  punished, 


(     142     ) 

2  1(967  ^^I^^r  11^  %^t'2  ^T^.      Kaika   ghalaghala 
gasa  kaison,  pata  upasa. 

One  gets  pulpy  or  dainty  morsels,  and   the  other  has 

to  starve. 

Used  of  mismanagement  or  injustice,  under  which  one 
member  of  a  certain  community  or  sect  is  very  much  favored, 
and  others  totally  neglected. 

3  zn  ;ss\j  ^JX  ^^JX  4l  ^I^  'ST'S  ^r^.    Thaga  thathero 
chora  sunara  khau  koli  dada  Iwara. 

Cheats,  vessel-makers,  thieves,  goldsmitlis,  and  weavers 

steal,  hut  the  hlachsmith  is  scorched. 

E.  g.    The  former  five  steal  the  precious  metal  they  work  io, 
but  the  blacksmith  is  scorched  by  the  heat  of  his  fire. 
Miscarriage  of  justice. 

4  ^^rif^  ^tl^TI  Trf^  "^TfM  ll^T-     Kanali  lagai  dana 
mari  bandhi  sauda. 

Causing  one  to  give  alms  hy  heating  him  with 
nettles,  and  forcing  one  into  a  hargain  by  heating  and 
binding  him. 

Applied  to  oppression. 

5  ^%  '^  "fT^  ^.     Jaile  sai  taile  pai. 

6  ^%  ^^T^T  %T^^  f^llT^T'      Ji^ils  saharo  so  kabhain 

ni  baro. 

Whoever  endures  patiently  attains  his  motive  eventually^ 
Used  to  console  aggrieved  people. 

7  Jixt^  f^  "^T^  ej"^-      Gariba  ki  aha  buri. 

The  sighs  of  a  poor  man  are  very  bad  (dangerous) . 
Used  to  dissuade  people  from  oppressing  poor  people. 


(     143     ) 

8  ^  ^^Z  >rs^t  ^3-  Kumun  son  ditha  Garha  son 
pitha. 

One  looks  towards  Kumaun  and  turns  his  bach  towards 
Garhwal. 

Said  regarding  the  partiality  of  one  in  power  who,   while   in 
Garhwal,  favors  those  who  are  in  Kumaun. 

Used  only  in  Garhwal  regarding  injustice. 

9  f%^T?rT  ^T  "^S^-     Bida  dyo  ko  bajra. 

A  thunderbolt  out  of  a  clear  sky. 

Applied  to  one  who  suffers  innocently,  or  to  a  sudden 
unexpected  misfortune. 

10  f%X.\^    iTfr^T   ^^SJ^  ^T  f^  'a^f  ^^   f^^^T. 

Biralu  mariyo  sabanaledekhodudhakhatyonkailenidekho. 

The  cat  killed  is  seen  by  all,  but  the  spilt  milk  is  seen 
by  none. 

This  is  used  when  one's  own  faults  are  exposed  and  those  of 
another  are  hid. 

I.  e.  The  woman  is  blamed  for  killing  the  cat  whose  dead 
body  is  seen,  but  the  milk  taken  by  the  cat  is  not  seen  by 
any  one. 

11  3131  ^f^  "^1  ^TT^t  sfi^WTT'     Chhota  huni  barho 
barha  son  Karatara. 

As  a  great  man  is  to  a  poor  one,  so   God  is  to   the 
great  man. 

I.  e.  Oppressors  of  the  poor  will  be  punished  by  God, 
Illustration.  Once  a  small  cow  was  pursued  by  a  bigger 
cow  to  a  jungle  where  a  leopard  having  caught  sight  of  the  big  cow 
began  to  go  after  it  with  a  view  to  kill  it,  but  before  he  killed  it 
he  was  pursued  by  a  fire  which  had  caught  the  forest,  and  barely 
escaped  with  his  life. 


(  Hi  ) 

12  %^y  jjT.    rr^  '^^^  I'?.      Jaiko  mara  taiku  pachisa 
parha. 

One  in  whose  family   a   death  occurs,    will  have   to 
pay  -Rs-  25I-. 

E.  g.  In  old  times  the  kings  used  to  levy  a  tax  on  deaths 
called  ^^Harlia  Aara"  =tax  on  bones.  Hence  the  proverb  applied 
to  one  who  in  addition  to  injury  inflicted  upon  him  is  also  punished 
by  the  Court. 

13  oR^sf  ^TT  ^.^  '^I^T'     Kakha  uro  kakha  parhyo. 
What  threatens  and  what  happens. 

E.  g.  This  refers  to  clouds  which,  while  hanging  over  in  one 
place,  thunder  and  lighten  in  another  place. 

Used  of  injustice  by  which  an  innocent  person  is  punished. 

14  %1T  '^1^1  %T'!!  Tf  ir?I  ft"^^  "^ftl^T   Wi"      Jaika 
ankha  sauna  men  garha  wi  kana  hariyo  sujha. 

One  whose  eyes  are  taken  out  in  the  month  of  July 
believes  the  earth  to  be  green  always. 

Applied  to  one  who  does  not  try  to  see  the  present  aspect  or  state 
of  things  but  delivers  his  judgment  on  his  past  experience    alone. 

Once  during  the  prevalence  of  a  certain  famine  a  king, 
■while  engaged  in  hunting  deer,  happened  to  stop  at  night  at  a 
peasant's  shed,  where  he  was  fed  by  him  with  Gin  and  KhicharM, 
saying  that  no  other  edibles  were  to  be  had  on  account  of  the  dearth. 
After  a  great  many  years  there  was  another  famine  in  his  kingdom  ; 
reports  were  made  to  him  with  prayers  that  some  steps  should  be  taken 
to  prevent  the  people  from  starving  ;  but  the  king  took  no  notice  of 
their  entreaty,  and  said  that  they  could  live  on  Ghi  and  Khicharhi. 
(Two  parts  of  rice  and  one  part   of  dala  (pulse^  cooked  together^. 

C,  f.  The  story  of  the  French  Queen  who  wondered  how 
the  people  could  possibly  be  starving  when  there  were  such 
beautiful  tarts  to  be  had  for  sixpence  each. 

15  ^^T  ^TT^r^^r  ^I^T'     Jaiko  jantbo  wI  ko  banto. 
Sis  is  the  share  loho  has  a  club  {in  his  hand). 

Used  to  denote  misgovernmcnt  and  injustice,  where  might 
is  right. 


r  145  ) 

gaya  titira  chakhurha  jibala  parha  musabhyakurha. 

The  grain  was  eaten   hy  partridges,  hut   the  Musa- 
hhydkurhds  ( a  kind  of  small  bird  )  were  entrapped. 

E.  g.  Villagers  have  "jibdlds"  (stone  traps  for  birds^  fixed 
in  places  frequented  by  birds,  with  grain  spread  underneath  them. 
Partridges  being  of  a  very  shy  nature  pick  up  the  grain  from  a 
-safe  distance,  and  fly  away,  but  the  other  birds  (masabhyakarhas) 
being  of  more  unwary  nature  enter  the  jihdlds  of  stones  in  order 
to  eat  the  grain,  and  are  crushed  by  the  fall  of  the  stone.  A  large 
stone  or  slate  is  set  up  on  a  stick  at  the  bottom  of  which  grain  is 
placed.  The  slightest  touch  of  the  stick  by  the  beak  of  the  bird 
•displaces  it,  and  the  stone  falls  on  the  birds  feeding  below. 

Applied  to  cunning  and  crafty  men  who  put  their  evil 
designs  into  execution  entirely  for  their  own  benefit  through  some 
simple  man,  who  often  suflTers  for  them,  but  the  real  culprits 
escape  with  impunity. 

17  ^?  f^  e|^  ^^TSIT  ^T  ^TTr.     IJnta  ki  balai  bhekana 
M  khora. 

The  punishment  of  a  camel  on  the  head  of  a  frog. 

This  is  used  when  in  order  to   save  a  great   man   a  smaller 
person  is  punished  or  censured,  as  a  scape-goat. 
Applied  to  injustice  and  partiality. 

18  ^g.^  ^T%  ^1^  'KT  "^.J^^l  ^mx.  ^mj.    Alasi  kacho 
naja  kha  raja  labara  patya. 

A  sluggard  eats  raw  rice  and  a  liar  finds  favor 
with  a  king. 

1.  e.  A  lazy  man  will  not  cook  his  food,  but  chews  it  raw, 
and  a  king  listens  to  others  who  backbite  and  thus  poison  his 
mind  against  people. 

19  gg^i  ^r^  ^TW^r^  ^TT«     Ulto  chora  kotwala    danda. 

The  arrest  of  a  person  other  than  the  thief  causes  the  police 

officer  to  he  punished,  or,  in  case  the  thief  escapes,   the 

chaukidar  {watchman)  heing  there  is  caught  and  punished. 

This  is  used  in  speaking  of  a  gross  injustice  done  by  any  one. 

S 


(     1^6    ) 

20  tH  ^t|^  wq^RT  ?5TT;t  ^^  ^'a^T.     Randa  dekhi  mapa- 
ka  chhoron  dekhi  danakha. 

Oppressing  the  widow  (md  frightening  orphan  children. 

This  is  used  when  poor  people  are  oppressed  by  stronger  ones. 
C.  f.  "He  that  oppresseth  the  poor  to  increase  his  riches,  and  he 
that  giveth  to  the  rich,  shall  surely  come  to  want."  "Rob  not 
the  poor,  because  he  is  poor  :  neither  oppress  the  afflicted  in 
the  gate." 

21  ^v[[  \\  ^?3  ^^T  "^TZ  Sudha  ko  mukha  kulcara 
chata. 

Tlie  mouth  of  a  simple  man  is  licked  even  hy  a  dog. 

E.  g.  A  simple  man  is  not  dreaded  even  by  a  dog,  and  so 
why  should  men  fear  him  ? 

22  T51T  ^f%^  sTT^^T  '1^.     Puja  dekhika  bakaro  hansa. 

The  lie-goat  laughs  at  the  slight  worship  any  one  is 
going  to  perform,  in  which  its  oivn  life  is  to  be  taken  or 
sacrificed. 

Applied  to  or  by  one  who  is  punished  more  severely  for  a 
comparatively  trifling  offence,  or  without  any  formal  investiga- 
tion or  trial. 

23  m^  ^1%  ^'st  "^T^T-     Kakha  worho  kakha  torho. 

Where  is  the  boundary  of  the  field  ?  and  where  has 
the  crop  been  reaped  ? 

Applied  to  gross  injustice,  as  illustrated  by  the  story 
narrated  below  : — 

Illustration.  A  newly  married  prince  was  sleeping  with 
his  bride  while,  according  to  custom,  the  officiating  priest  slept 
in  the  next  room.  At  night  while  the  prince  was  asleep  his  bride 
saw  a  dagger  {Katdra)  in  his  belt,  as  is  the  custom  among  the 
Rajputs.  She  being  curious  about  the  weapon  took  it  out  of  its 
sheath  and  then  after  having  examined  it  tried  to  replace  it  in  its 
sheath,  but  missed  the  sheath,  and  thrust  it  into  the  body  of  the 
Prince,  who  died  instantly.  The  Princess  was  in  great  grief. 
Next  morning  the  king,  who  was  the  father  of  this  unfortunate 


{     14.7.     ) 

Princess,  together  with  his  people,  was  much  distressed  on.  account 
of  what  had  happened,  and  without  any  investigation  regarded, 
the  priest  as  the  guilty  one  and  ordered  his  hands  and  feet  to 
be  cut  oiF  in  punishment  for  the  crime,  the  Princess  meanwhile 
through  fear  and  shame  keeping  silent. 

24  ^  (?lT^T  ^  ^^T  3%T  ^'ir.     •Mai  giranera  chhyuu: 
tero  dheso  laojo. 

I  was  about  to  fall  myself,  but  now  you  have  pushed 
me  down. 

This  means  to  say  that  one  about  to  be  ruined  was  finally 
ruined  by  the  actioaof  another  who  now  gets  the  blame  for  what 
has  happened. 

Illustration :  Once  a  large  palm-tree  having  all  its  roots 
rotten  and  turned  up  was  about  to  fall,  but  it  fell  down  just  as  a 
crow  sat  on  one  of  its  branches.  Hence  the  proverb  is  used  by 
one  when  he  is  injured  by  another. 

25  iTT^T  ^3^  ^r  "^[^r-     Maro  ghundo  phuto  an.kho,. 

The  hnee  was  struck  but  the  eye  was  put  out. 

Indicating  injustice,  or  inftiction  of  penalty  upon  the  wrong 
person  or  thing. 

26  »ri^^T^T^TT^Tl'!l^riT^T^*    Magha  khaya  ama 

phaguna  laga  ghama.      ' 

Mangoes  eaten  in  Magha  (  January  )  fever  caught  in 
Phdguna  (February J. 

Applied  to  unjust  or  illogical  actions. 

27  %^  ^r  1T^  "W^T  ^r^r  ^I^*     Tairhu  kando  para 
phusaro  poko  wara. 

The  BasTcetful  of  "Tairhu"  {a  kind  of  sweet  wild  root 
which  people  eat  as  vegetable  food)  has  gone  over  the 
other  side,  but  one  has-  his  thighs  made  white  (  muddy  % 
this  side. 


(    H8     ) 

E.  g.  This  root  is  obtained  by  digging  the  earth  to  the  depth 
of  the  loin,  and  so  the  person  gets  his  thighs  muddy  in  the  attempt 
to  get  the  root  out  of  the  ground.  A  man  can  get  a  basketful  if 
he  works  a  ■whole  day.  If  the  fruit  of  his  toil  is  taken  away  by 
another  he  has  nothing  but  the  muddy  thighs  left  to  show,  hence 
he  says  as  in  the  proverb.  Applied  to  one  who  is  deprived  of  his 
earnings.  C.  f.  "One  beats  the  bush,  while  another  catches 
the  bird." 

28  5:^  ^T3  ^T  ^T^    Eka  hata  dui  bhawa. 

One  market  but  rates  two. 

Applied  to  injustice,  or  favor  or  disfavour  shewn  by  an' 
officer  of  a  court  of  justice,  or  by  an  administrative  officer  who  is 
considered  as  the  common  master  of  all. 

29  ^-[^  q[^»i  ^^  \j\r{\  ^N  M'':-     Nani  khasama  kara 

dohata  danda  bHara. 

The  grandmother  commits  adultery,  her  granddaughtei^ 
suffers  punishmient. 

30  f^«i  f%  XJH  TIcT  %r  f^*f»     Dina  ki  rata,  rata  ko  dina.. 
Day  is  changed  to  night  and  night  into  day. 

Spoken  of  flagrant  injustice. 

31  5^Tf^»lT^  ^^  f%  'fTI^.     Pkari  gali  bajra  ki  tali 
Se  who  curses  another  without  cause,   upon  his  own 

head  the  curse  shall  come  like  a  thunder-bolt. 

C.  f.   "Curses  like  chickens  come  home  to  roost." 

32  J]'^^  ^T  eBT^  ^f%?ll  ^T  351^'     Grariba  ka  kala  baliya 

ka  shyala. 

lAke  death  to  oppress  a  poor  person,  but  like  a  jackal 
to  fly  before  a  strong  and  influential  one. 

E.  g.  People  in  the  world  generally  do  not  hesitate  to  oppress 
and  rob  a  poor  person,  taking  advantage  of  his  distressed  circums- 
tances, but  they  would  shun  a  strong  man  for  fear  of  his  avenging 
himself. 


(     14'9    ) 

33  f^T^T^i  ^  f^ai^II^T"-  Gbinorhana  me  Sitaulo 
padhana. 

Among  sparrows  the  Sitauld  is  head  man. 

Amongst  small    men   the    mediocrity   is  a   king.     Generally 
used  of  oppression  or  compulsion. 

34  ^T''^^  ^  %TT  ^  ^  »lf51^T  ^T«     Auran  sun  aura  mai 

sun  gujiya  shaura. 

Others  may  he  under  others  ( their  superiors'),  hut 
a  Crujiyd  has  become  my  father-in-law  (  i.  e.  rules 
over  me  ). 

Gajadharaor  Gajey  Singh=a  man  of  high  position. 
Gaja=  Do.    of  middle    do. 

Gujiya=  Do.    of  lowest  position. 

Used  by  one  mourning  over  his  circumstances  when  he  19 
unexpectedly  oppressed  even  by  poor  men. 

35  '^[K. »!?:%  <mT  "^W  '^T^i  511  ^fe  ^f^  ^it.    Andhera 

garadi  pupabai  cbaron  juga  bati  buni  ai. 

Injustice,  disorder,  and  oppression  have  existed  from 
time  immemorial ;  lit.  during  all  the  four  ages. 

One  oppressed  by  others  generally  consoles  himself  by 
quoting  this  proverb. 

36  -^si^T  ^^  ^T^"':T  ^T'T  TT^T  ^T  ^^  '^T'a*     Andba 

cbuni  totara  dbana  maro  gbunda  pbuti  ankba. 

A  blind  man  gleans  {blasted  paddy)  empty  ears  of 
corn,  and  when  lie  would  strike  the  leg,  knocJcs  out 
the  eye. 

I.  e.  One  not  qualified  to  do  a  particular  work  should  not  be 
employed  on  it,  or  else  he  will  spoil  it.  It  also  illustrates  the 
miscarriage  of  justice  when  the  wrong  man  is  punished  by  a 
biassed  or  inconsiderate  judge. 


(    150    ) 

37  ^WTI^  f%^^  mfz  ^^  ^^-     Andhanale  sirani  bati 

gharai  ghara. 

The  blind   distribute  sweetmeats,    hut  comong    them- 
selves only. 

This  phrase  is  used  by  people  regarding  a  neighbour  who 
feasts  his  own  particular  cronies   and  excludes   others,   or   also  of" 
one  who  pretending  to  be    a  gentleman  and  unimpartial  officer  is 
interested  in  the  good  of  his  own  people  only,  and   does  not  look 
to  the  good  of  others. 

38  ^^T  "fflTT  ^  f«l^      Barho  marau  luna  ni  de. 

Tlie  strong  man  not  only  beats  one  hut  does  not  allow 
one  to  cry  in  consequence. 

This  proverb  is  generally  made  use  of  when  an  officer  gets 
angry  at  an  appeal  against  his  decision,  and  wrongly  takes  further 
steps  to  prevent  the  appellant  being  successful  in  his  appeal. 

39  f^Tf^U  ^  mrkj  fi[gf%*»?  ^^T^T.     Bira  Sing  le  khayo 

Shiba  Sing  wasayo. 

Bira  Singh  ate  gluttonously,  but  Shib  Sing's  stomach 
has  swelled  {with  indigestion). 

This  proverb  is  made  use  of  when  an  innocent  person 
suffers  because  of  the  bad  deeds  of  another,  for  want  of  proper 
investigation. 

C.  f.  "The  fathers  have  eaten  sour  grapes,  and  the  children's 
teeth  are  set  on  edge"  (Ezek.  18.  2.) 

40  TH^j  %T  ga  f5[T:^.     Barha  ko  latha  shira  me. 

The  club  of  the  stronger  must  be  borne  on  one's  head. 
There     is    no     remedy    for    what    a    stronger     person^ 
does    to    the    weaker — he    must   bear    it    patiently.       "Might   is 
right." 

41  v[j\j  %:^f^  m%T  ^  ^T^T^T*      l^larau  waisani  jaiko 
ni  rodaro. 

J3eat  one  toho  has  no  one  to  grieve  for  him  {no  one  to 
help  him). 


(     151     ) 

This  is  considered  safe,  whereas  to  beat  a  stronger  party 
would  bring  revenge  on  oneself.  Also  beat  one  who  has  no  one  to 
ask  after  him. 

42  jjj^j  %^  ^TT^  'IT^  ^rf  ^^  ^T  ^T^-     Machho 
dekhi  bbitara  hatha  sanpa  dekhi  bhaira  hatha. 

Seeing  a  fish  in  the  water  he  puts  in  his  hand,   but 
seeing  a  snake  he  pulls  it  out. 

This  applies  to  one  who  is  simple  and  poor  and  is  therefore 
oppressed  or  injured  by  others  ;  but  one  who  is  strong  and  danger- 
ous is  not  touched  by  any  one. 

43  ^riTf   ^W  %^'*i^^  ^^r     Bhutana  lakha  dewatana 
dhakka. 

Devils  get  he-goats  offered  to  them,  but  deities  are 
pushed  aside. 

This  is  applied  when  an  honest  and  submissive  man  is  driven 
out,  and  a  dishonest  and  tricky  one  is  respected. 

44  |-|15  €ti§t  'iw  %^T  ^T^T  IT^*    Waiki  lini  swena 
•we  ko  khayo  kharhu. 

Mis  wife  was  taken  and  his  ram  eaten. 
Denoting  great  injustice  done  to  one. 

45  f^HT  ^T  «T€t  ^SRT^T*     Diya  ka  tali  anyaro. 

Darkness  under  the  lamp. 

This  metaphor  is  used  of  a  man  who  does  good  to  o(hers  but 
does  not  remember  those  who  are  immediately  serving  under  him. 

46  siTSiT  ^m  if  Z^\  StT^  ^5IT  »It^  ^  '^Tl-     ^ana  goru 
men  thulo  goru  thula  goru  men  baga. 

A  bigger  cow  assaults  a  smaller  one,  and  a  leopard  the 
bigger  cow. 

Used  to  threaten  with  divine  vengeance  those  who  oppress 
their  inferiors. 


f    152    ) 

Illustration.  It  is  related  that  Brahma,  a  god  having  four 
faces,  became  proud  on  this  account,  and  thought  himself  superior 
to  the  other  gods  who  had  only  one  face.  With  the  object  of 
showing  off  his  wonderful  figure-head  he  began  to  move  about 
in  the  aerial  regions,  but  to  his  great  chagrin  one  day  met  another 
Brahma  who  possessed  eight  faces,  and  in  the  utmost  disappoint- 
ment he  retired  to  his  own  place.  The  eight  faced  Brahma  seeing 
him  thus  retreat  in  despair  became  very  proud  in  his  turn,  ixntil 
he  encountered  another  Brahma  who  had  sixteen  faces,  and  the 
last  named  again  becoming  too  conscious  of  his  superiority  was 
sent  by  the  Lord  of  the  Universe  to  a  region  ruled  over  by  a 
Brahma  who  rejoiced  in  thirty-two  faces.  The  moral,  of  course, 
is  that  people  should  be  humble. 

47  %f^T^  ^T^  ^T.]^  g5€iT^.     Chaurasu  goru  pharasu 
ujyarha. 

The  cattle  in  the  village  of  Chaurasu  are  accused  of 
trespassing  in  the   village  of  Pharasu  ( two  villages  in 
Garhwal  9  miles  apart  from  each  other  ). 
Applied  to  false  accusation. 

48  ^Tx:  ^f?i2iT  f^^Jl^rr-JT  q^^I  Irlil.      Chora   kutiya 
miligaya  ta  paharo  kaiko. 

If  a  thief  and  the  watch  dog  unite,  who  will  guard  the 
house  ?  . 

This  is  generally  used  in    regard    to    corrupt  Police    officers 
who  are  in  concert  with  thieves. 

49  |;tf  jsm  f^KT^^  ^^f^  ^j^  ^j:  ^j{^.     Dudha  khawa 
birali  pakarhi  jawa  gharawali. 

The  milk  is  drunk  hy   the  cat,  hut  the  wife  is   held 
responsible. 

Applied  to  one  who  is  responsible  for   the   trust   consio-ued 
to  hor.  ° 


(     153    ) 

-50  g^r^Tf%  ^1^  sfi^  ^J^  ^imn^-     Tusyara  ki   karha 
karha  ghama  auna  taka. 

The  frost  is  hard  until  the  sun  rises. 

This  is  applied  by  one  who  has  been  oppressed  at  home, 
bat  as  soon  as  he  resorts  to  a  Court  of  justice  the  oppressors 
tr&mble. 

51  ^^  Ji^r  5:%  Jg;^  |rr  l^r  ^%  'S;^-     Eka  guno  ekai 
shula  sau  guno  ekai  shula. 


vJ 


The  same  punishment  for  one  crime  or  for  one  hundred 
crimes. 

May  as    well   be    hanged    for    a    sheep  as  a  lamb. 

"Shiila"  is  a  sharp  and  long  iron  bar  used  by  Native  Princes 
to  impale  with  as  a  capital  punishment  (as  hanging  is  used  by  the 
British  Government). 


52  ?jg  ^jfz  33^T  'Irf^T*    Shiila  moti  shulya  patalo. 

The  iron  bar  (shula)  is  very  thick,  but  the  man  ordered 
to  be  impaled  with  it  is  very  thin. 

Once  a  native  prince  sentenced  a  convict  to  death.  On  the 
offender  being  sent  to  be  executed  his  person  was  found  unsuitable 
for  the  thick  iron  bar  fixed  for  the  purpose.  This  fact  was  according- 
ly reported  to  the  king  by  the  executioners  Cas  said  in  the  proverb). 
The  king  ordered  that  a  stout  man  adapted  to  the  thickness 
of  the  bar  be  secured  and  executed.  The  messengers  selected  a 
fat  ascetic  for  the  purpose,  and  on  his  being  taken  to  the  scaffold 
his  spiritual  guide  (another  fat  ascetic)  voluntarily  came  there, 
and  insisted  on  being  put  to  death  in  the  room  of  his  beloved 
disciple,  and  on  the  other  hand  his  disciple  also  persisted  in 
being  put  to  death,  and  so  they  both  quarrelled  about  the  matter, 
to  the  utter  embarrasment  of  the  executioners.  On  this  fact  being 
also  reported,  the  King  sent  for  both  the  ascetics  and  enquired 
the  reason  why  each  of  them  offered  himself  for  death,  to  which 
the  elder  dervish  replied  thus  : — 

"While  absorbed  in  devotion  to-day,  I  beard  an  oracle  from 
heaven  saying  that  any  man  who  should  be  sacrificed  (put  to  death) 
on  the  iron  bar  would  go  to  heaven,  where  he  would  be  made  a 
king  of  deities.     Under  such  circumstances  I   most  eagerly  pray 

T 


(     15*     ) 

tbat  in  consideration  of  my  most  rigid  penances  and  devotions 
I  may  be  allowed  to  be  executed,  as  I  alone  deserve  such  a  happy 
and  blissful  death."  This  speech  of  the  hermit  moved  the  whole 
Darhdra.  Every  one  of  the  ministers,  nay  each  member  of  the 
Royal  family  came  forward  and  asked  to  be  kindly  allowed  to 
suffer  this  death,  but  the  king  said  that  if  this  was  the  case  he 
would  willingly  die  himself,  and  was  accordingly  executed. 

Applied  to  gross  injustice  and  anarchy,  and  also  used  by 
rich  people  who  are  unjustly  and  unnecessarily  troubled  or 
oppressed  on  no  other  grounds  than  their  being  rich,  and  also 
by  one  who  innocently  suffers  only  on  account  of  his  name. 

53  i^%j  ^I^  ^ni  ft'l'l'^-     ^y^"^  ka  santha  ghuna  pislni. 

The  ghuna  {loeevils)  are  ground  with  the  wheat. 

"Wheat  is  often  infested  with  weevils,  which  are  ground 
v;ith  the  wheat.  Applied  to  innocent  persons  when  they  are 
punished  along  with  the  culprits,  only  on  the  ground  of  their 
'having  been  found  with  them.  This  is  also  used  as  a  caution 
against  remaining  in  bad  society. 

54  TO%T^  >f3  %T^-     Gryun  sola  bbata  sola. 

l^heat  at  the  rate  of  16  seers   and  Bhata  at  the  same 
rate  {16  seers  a  Rupee). 

f  Although  wheat  is  of  much  more  value  than  Bhata). 
Applied  to  want  of  discretion  or  to  injustice.  Bhata  is  a  kind 
of  inferior  pulse  eaten  by  poor  people  alone. 

55  5}j^?5ijif^.     Gorkhyani. 
Gorhhydni  or  the  rule  of  the  Gurkhas, 

Exemplification    of   oppression    and   injustice.      People   use 
this  phrase  whenever   they    complain  of   oppression    or   injustice. 
The  province  of  Kumaun  was  ruled  for  a  time  by   the    Gurkhas 
a   courageous   though    wild    Nepalese    tribe,    before    the    Eno-Hsh 
occupation  in  1815. 

56  ■^Hq  ^^^  ^T^lt  ^31^^^   ^^^  ^t  ^^.     Hamana 

kariti  kala  ki  mesha  ye  chhana  chalyun  ka  desha. 

/  acted  in  accordance  with  the  customs  of  the  times,   hut 
this  is  a  country  of  iviched  men. 

Applied  to  one  who  is  censured  or  punished  though  ho  has 
done  nothing  wrong. 


(     155     ) 

57  ^"^7  gs  rf^r  >ffl.     Jaiko  latha  taiko  bhaisa; 

The  buffalo  is  that  maris  who  has  a  club  in  his  hand,  i.  e. 
He  who  has  the  stick  has  the  buffalo. 

Representing  oppression  or  want  of  proper  government 
or  justice.  The  man  who  can  beat  off  another  takes  his  buffalo. 
G.f.    "Might  is  right." 

58  ^v^  5l?I^  ^sr*^  TI5IT  zm^^  MT^  z^i^r:  tsj^t- 
Andhera  nagari  bebujha  Kaja  taka  sera  bhaji  taka  sera- 
khaja. 

A  town  full  of  darkness  (or  injustice)  ruled  over  by  a 
careless  ruler,  where  vegetables  and  sweetmeats  sell  at  one 
and  the  same  rate.     {Descriptive  of  an  unjust  ruler). 

Once  a  saint   and   his  disciple   while  sojourning  in    various 
countries  and   cities    happened   to    arrive   in   the   aforesaid    town. 
The  saint,  who  knew  the  ins  and  outs  of  it,    did   not  wish    to    stay 
there,  but  his  disciple  being  tempted  and  allured  by  the  sweetmeats 
which  were    sold  very  cheap  there    said   to   the   saint    "0    Guru 
f  spiritual  guide  ^  permit  me  to  stay  here   for   some    time."     The 
saint  did  not  comply  with  his  request,  but  said  that  it  would  not  be 
safe  for  him  to  protract  his  residence  in  such  a  place   as  that,   and 
the  sooner  they  got  out  of  it  the  better.    But  the  imprudent  disciple 
again  eagerly  asked  permission  from  his  Guru  to  allow  him  to  live 
there  for  a  short  time.  Thus  the  saint  wasat  last  obliged  to  leave  his 
disciple  there,  with  great  reluctance,  and  said  to  him,    "Whenever 
you  happen  to  get  into  any  trouble  remember  me  ;    I    shall   help 
you."  After  some  time  a  goat  was  killed  there  by  the  fall  of  a  "wall. 
The  owner  of  the  goat  sent  a  complaint  against  the  owner  of  the 
■wall  to  the  King,  who  ordered  the  latter  to  be  hanged    for   having 
built  such  katcha  (imperfect)   walls,   but  the  accused  man   pleaded 
his  innocence,  and  said  that  the  fault  lay  in  the    mason    who  Jjad 
built  it.     The  ruler  on  this  representation  changed  his  mind    and 
ordered  the  mason  to  be  executed  in  his  stead.     The  mason   also 
in  his  turn   denied  his   guilt,   and   reproached    the   labourer    who 
supplied,  him  with  mortar.     On  this   the   man   who    had   supplied 
mortar  for  the  wall  was  doomed  to  death,  but  the  labourer  set  forth 
his  innocence  and  blamed  the  Bhisti  ( water-bearer )   for   pouring 
too  much  -water  into  the  mortar  and    making   it   too  soft   for    use. 
On   this    the    sentence    of    death    devolved    on   the    Bhisti    who 
also   cleared   himself  of    the   guilt  and    implicated   the   Kotawdl 


(     156    ) 

(  Police  Officer)  who  had  driven  his  pony  rapidly  by  him,  and  so 
frightened  him  that  he  happened  to  throw  more  water  in  the 
mortar  than  was  required.  At  this  the  Kotaiml  was  sentenced 
to  be  executed,  and  as  he  had  nothing  to  say  in  his  defence  he  was 
brought  to  the  scaffold  to  receive  his  doom.  The  noose  of  the 
cord  was  found  too  big  for  the  head  of  the  Kotawdl.  The  matter 
was  reported  to  the  king,  who  ordered  that  a  fat  man  (whose  head 
and  neck  were  adapted  to  the  noose)  should  be  selected  and 
executed  instead.  The  servants  of  the  king  after  great  search 
found  out  the  kind  of  man.  they  wanted  in  the  disciple  of  the  saint, 
who  had  become  fat  by  eating  cheap  sweetmeats,  and  he  was 
arrested  and  brought  to  the  scaffold,  where  he  remembered  his 
Guru  the  saint,  who  made  his  appearance  instantly  and  volunteered 
to  be  hanged  in  lieu  of  his  disciple,  but  the  latter  ( wishing  to 
save  his  Guni  from  death )  insisted  on  undergoing  the  sentence 
himself.  Each  persisted  in  dying  for  the  other  and  there  was  a 
quarrel  between  them  as  to  who  should  be  hanged.  This  matter 
was  also  reported  to  the  King  who  sent  for  both  the  Fakirs 
(  the  saint  and  his  disciple )  and  enquired  why  one  wished  to  die 
for  the  other.  The  saint  said  to  the  king  "0,  just  king,  a 
heavenly  vehicle  was  at  hand  to  take  to  Paradise  the  soul  of  the 
man  who  should  die  this  blissful  death.  Since  I  have  performed 
various  religious  acts  and  have  led  a  long  life  of  penance  I  alone 
merit  it  and  no  other."  On  this  the  King,  who  coveted  the 
heavenly  vehicle  for  himself,  volunteered  to  die,  and  was  according- 
ly hanged. 

59  %%  ^j-^j  ^j^  iTT^  %W  "^TIT  'JT^'ST '^T^-  Kaile 
khayo  khasu  masu  kaika  aya  pathana  ansu. 

Who  ate  tlie  fat  weat  and  who  shed  a  flood  of  tears  1 

Used  in  regard  to  an  injustice  by   which    a    culprit    escapes 
punishment  and  an  innocent  person  is  punished  instead. 

60  ^  ^T^  'Sr^T  ^fT'<;-    Kba  koli  dadau  Iwara. 

The  weaver  gains  hy  stealing  some  of  the  yarn  entrusted 
to  him  and  makes  up  the  weight  with  sizing.  But  all  the 
iron  the  hlacksmith  can  steal  is  the  sparks  that  fly  off 
and  hum  him. 


(     157     ) 

61  %Ji?iT  ^lf%  ST^T  l^ft  I'lT  5WIT  ^W*     K-hai  gaya 
darhiwala  pakarhi  gaya  junga  wala. 

Those  with  beards  ate  the  spoil  but  those  with  mustaches 
were  punished. 

(Mahommedans  wear  beards,  and  Hindus  mustaches"). 

E.  g.  During  the  reign  of  some  of  the  Mahommedan  rulers 
Mahommedans  used  to  commit  crimes  and  charge  them  upon 
the  Hindus.  Hence  the  proverb  applied  to  gross  injustice 
through  which  the  real  offenders  were  let  off  and  innocent  persons 
arrested  and  punished. 

62  %Tx:^  %f  f'l^l^T'Pr  ■qT  f%  ^  ^t  ^^  f%^^-     Aurana 
son  ni  sakulo  ta  ghara  ki  jwe  son  leka  ni  sakun. 

If  I  cannot  beat  others,  shall  T  not  be  able  to  lord  it  over 
my  wife  ? 

Used  to  imply  that  poor  people  can  be  oppressed  by  everyone. 

INNOCENCE. 

1  ^  ^[Jl^JTI  f^^  '^\^J  ft  W§'^-     Jai  angula  bikha  lago 

wi  jharhanchha. 

That  finger   which   has   been   affected  with  poison  shall 

fall  or  drop  off. 

An  assertion  of  innocence  by  people  who  have  been  mixed 
up  with  offenders. 

2  7ITf%  oJTZT  f%2^*     Cr^l'^  bata  hitali. 

Tlie  curse  {^abusive  language)  will  go  its  way. 

I.  e.  It  will  fall  on  the  unjust  party  and  not  injure  the  person 
abused,  if  he  is  innocent. 

Used  by  one  who  is  unjustly  cursed. 


(     158     ) 

hatha  ni  khoun  gata  parhi  raun  chaubata  bata. 

If  my  hands  and  my  person   do   not  offend  I  can   lie 
down  without  fear  on  the  highway. 

I.  e.  If  I  do  not  do  anything  wrong  why  should  I  fear 
to  rest  in  a  public  place  ? 

Applied  by  one  who  considers  himself  innocent,  and  hence- 
secure  from  all  danger. 

INOPPORTUNE  ACTS. 

1  »ir^T^  ^TI^I^T  ^T'l'!!  ^"^T51T  ^'^  ^^T*     Ma  bachhi. 
baga  ligayo  phaguna  daroja  banda  karo. 

The  leopard  carried  off  the  calf  in  the  month  of  Mdgha 
(^January),  and  in  Phaguna  {February)  they  put  the  doors 
on  the  cowshed. 

C  f.    "Locking  the  stable  after  the  horse  has  been  stolen." 

2  HJX.  ^  5g  co^  51TWT  "^^^T  ^"^J-     ^'ara  kun  jyun  tyun., 

jano  dwi  chela  pachha. 

If  a  woman  is  determined  to  go  to  a  paramour,  why 
should  she  go  after  she  gives  birth  to  two  sons  in  her 
husband's  house? 

I.  e.  She  should  go  while  young,  not  after  she  has  begotten, 
children. 

Used  to  condemn  inopportune  actions. 

3  aiTT  %  '^^  ^Tf^*^-     Tyara  khai  baisi  ka  dina. 

77^6  day  after  the  festival  {i.  e.  not  in  time). 

The  day  of  the  festival  is  spent  in  feasting  and  merriment. 
Any  good  thing  received  on  that  day  is  greatly  appreciated,  and 
any  guest  who  comes  on  that  day  is  well  received,  but  not  so 
after  the  close  of  the  festival. 

Used  of  inopportune  occasions. 


(     159    ) 

4  cfii^y  sitRi^  ^T  ^^I  ^tir*    Kato  na  phanto  lyau  mero 
banto. 

Neither  cut  nor  divided,  but  one  wishes  to  have  his  share. 

Applied  to  improper,  impossible  or  inopportune  requests 
made  at  a  time  when  the  other  is  not  in  a  position  to  comply 
with  them. 

5  '»Tf%  f%fcr  %T^  ^T^  ^lifilJi?;.     Bhuki  lini  thaura  bala 
jami  gain. 

The  place  to  he  kissed  is  overgrown  with  hair. 

Infant  children  are  generally  kissed  by  their  relatives.  But 
if  the  latter  are  prevented  from  doing  so  by  living  at  some  distance, 
the  former  grow  up  and  the  time  for  kissing  is  passed.  Hence  tho 
proverb  is  applied  to  lost  opportunities,  and  also  to  one  who  used 
to  listen  to  prayers  and  requests  but  now  turns  a  deaf  ear. 

6  "^ZT  if  ^^jx.  f%%T  ^T'ST  ^^T«     B^t^  ™e^  Iwara  milo 

aphara  lagau. 

A  blacksmith  met  on  the  road  is  asked  to  set   his   bellows 
to  work. 

Applied  to  one  who  troubles  another,  to  do  some  work  away 
from  home.    Inopportune  requests. 

7  ^T'H  'if^  ^r^  Kr^T'ssiT'IT  ^^-     Sauna  mari  sasu  bhado 

ay  a  ansu. 

His  mother-in-laio  died  in  Sdwana   {July)  but  his   tears 
did  not  flow  until  Bhddo  {August). 

Applied  to  one  who  wreaks  his  vengeance  for  any  grievance 
after  a  long  time,  or  to  one  who  does  a  thing  inopportunely. 

8  «ltl  'ITT'B  ^^  "^^  ^TX^  *TT5I«I.     Nanga  jaika  bastra 

bhukha  jaika  bbojana. 

One  gets  clothes  after  his  nakedness  has  been  covered,  and 
food  after  his  hunger  is  satisfied. 


(     160     ) 

Applicable  to  inopportune  aid  which  is  not  appreciated.  To 
give  in  time  of  need  is  considered  an  act  of  lasting  merit,  but  to 
give  otherwise  is  in  no  way  a  virtue. 

9  ^'»T^f^3TT  ^  ^IW  f^TTt.     Kapala  pithai  ni   poka 
pithai. 

Red  colour  applied  not  to  the  forehead  but  to  the  back. 

Bed  colour  {called  "Pitbya"  made  of  turmeric  soaked  in 
lemon  juice  for  days  to  turn  it  red). 

When  marriage  or  tonsure  or  a  son's  birth-ceremony  takes 
place  in  a  man's  house  he  invites  his  relatives  and  gives  them  a 
feast.  Soon  after  the  ceremony  is  over,  the  Pithyd  mixed  with 
water  is  applied  to  their  foreheads  in  one  oblong  streak  (upwards) 
with  a  pinch  of  soaked  rice  put  over  it,  and  then  money  or  other 
gifts  are  presented  to  them,  and  they  take  their  departure.  This 
is  considered  necessary  etiquette.  But  if  the  relatives  are  allowed 
to  go  to  their  homes  empty-handed,  and  without  receiving  the 
mark  on  their  foreheads,  and  if  presents  are  sent  to  them  after  the 
ceremony  instead  of  during  the  feast,  this  is  called  applying  the 
Pithyd  to  their  backs  instead  of  their  foreheads.  The  saving 
is  generally  applied  to  inopportune  actions. 

10  '^^fal^r^rl  ■^f.     Bunda  ge  bilayata  son. 

The  drop  has  gone  to  a  foreign  country. 

This  proverb  arose  from  the  story  noted  below. 

Once  some  perfumers  brought  perfumes  for  sale  to  a  king 
who  bought  some,  but  out  of  what  he  had  purchased  one  drop 
fell  on  the  ground,  and  the  king  at  once  tried  to  take  it  up  with 
his  own  finger  from  the  floor.  This  act  on  the  part  of  the  king 
was  considered  very  mean  by  his  ministers  and  all  others,  including 
the  perfume  sellers.  In  order  to  remove  the  impression,  the 
ministers  afterwards  purchased  many  thousand  rupees'  worth  of 
perfumes  from  the  same  strangers  and  got  it  sprinkled  all  over 
the  royal  stables,  in  order  to  augment  their  master's  fame  for 
munificence  and  liberality.  Nevertheless  the  news  of  the  drop 
had  already  gone  to  foreign  countries  through  those  strangers. 
Hence  this  proverb  suggests  a  careful,  reserved,  and  wise  dealing 
with  a  stranger,  and  shews  that  an  opportunity  once  lost  cannot 
be  regained.    Also,    "111  news  travels  fast." 


f    161     ) 

11  ^^T  SJiri^^T  ^r  ^^^.  Tero  by  a  karulo  sau 
barasa  me. 

I  will  gel  yott  married  a  hundred  years  hence. 

Applied  to  promises  to  do  a  thing  when  it  will  not  be  needed. 

12  ^f f  ^T?  MTint  ^T1  ^t^T  ^>fT^-  Khanda  awa  bhagi 
hatha  dhonda  abbagi. 

A  fortunate  man  comes  at  the  time  when  dinner  is 
ready,  hut  an  unlucky  one  arrives  just  after  it  is 
over,  flit :  at  the  time  when  people  wash  their  hands 
after  dinner  J. 

Applied  to  one  who  asks  for  anj'thing  when  it  is  too  late. 

INSIGNIFICANT  OR  UNPROFITABLE  BUSINESS. 

1  ^fT  ^Tlf^  ^T^ITT^.     Kawa  mari  barha  na  masa. 

Sy  killing  a  crow  otie  gets  neither  flesh  nor  hones. 

It  is   no   use   attempting   to   "squeeze"    a  foor    man,    by 
oppression  &c. 

2  'sf?!  ^  "^T  "^Tfat^  ^^T^T-      Danga  me  butyo  baithika 

lawayo. 

One  who  sows  seed  in  stony  land  has  to  reap  the  crop 
sitting.  (because  the  stalks  of  the  grain  grown  on 
such  land  are  very  short  J. 

Applied  to  a  small  business  which  yields  very  little  profit,  or 
to  business  started  unwisely. 

3  ^(%^  %  '^^  fi^i»lZ  ^r  ^^-  Totally  a  ko  bala  pi- 
langata  ko  baila. 

A  plough  of  grass,  and  grass-hoppers  for  oxen. 

Applied  in  derision  to  one  who  has  made  inadequate  provision 
for  any  enterprise. 


(     162     ) 
INTERFERENCE. 

1  ^TH  mr^T  fki  ^^  ^rasiT'    Ama  khana  ki  perha  ganana. 
^at  the  mangoes,  do  not  count  the  mango  trees. 

I.  e.  One  ought  to  restrict  himself  to  the  work  in  hand  ; 
meddle  not  with  that  which  concerns  you  not. 

2  "ft^Tf^T  frr^^I  %J  1T^'      Dwi  raji  tisaro  ko  paji. 
When  two  men  have  consented,  a  third  who  interferes 

is  a  fool. 

Applied  io  one  who  unnecessarily  interferes  in  the  affairs 
of  others. 

3  HT  ^  Sf  fivi  ^.     Gau  men  na  gadha  men. 

One  counted  neitlier  among  the  Tcine  nor  among  asses. 

Applied  to  one  who  has  no  concern  whatever  in  a  matter, 
but  who  unnecessarily  interferes  in  it^  or  to  one  who  is  nobody. 

4  (^[Tl^r  f%^  '51T^  ^T  ^r^-     Hira  ko  hira  lala  ko  lala. 

Diamond  to  diamond,  and  ruby  to  ruhy. 

Used  when  one  is  injured  by  interference  in  a  quarrel  io 
which  the  principals  make  friends.  Caution  against  interferenca 
with  quarrels  in  which  one  is  not  concerned. 

5  ^  ^^rl^  «lrTX:  ^  9^-      -'^^i  ^7"?  *^  ^J"?  natara bhau 

khwe  dyun. 

I  may  or  may  not  buy  a  thing  but  I  musi  spoil  the  rate 
C  increase  it  J. 

Applies  to  one  who  wishes  to  injure  others  in  a  business  in 
which  he  himself  has  no  concern  whatever. 

6  ^T  Jir^  V2  V3T  "T^  IT'S  f%^f%%  T3T-     "^ara  garha 

bhata  bhuta  para  garha  chirha  chirhai  utha. 

Bhata  {a  hind  of  inferior  pulse)  being  parched  on  thi» 
side  of  the  river,  but  the  crackling  is  heard  on  the 
oilier  side.. 


f     163    ) 

Used  of  one  who  interferes  in  a   quarrel  or  business  v/itb 
which  he  has  no  concern. 

7.  ^g  f5|  VTMTTT  rm  ^  V^HTTf^.      Baila  ni   bhara 
bharanu  guna  jai  bhara  bharanl. 

The  bullock  does  not  stir  or  Jump,  but  the  pannier. 

(Bullock  an  animal,  but  the  pannier  an  inanimate  thing). 
I.  e.   Another  person  is  interfering  on  behalf  of  the  interested 
party  (who  is  inactive)  in  a  certain  matter. 

8>  ^Tfsi  ^  ^^W  ^^  SIIT  SRT  "^^^T^-     Kaji  jyu  dubala, 

kelai  sabara  ka  andesa  le. 

O,    Cadi  why   have  you  become  so   thin  f     ThrougK' 
anxiety  for  the  city.     (The  Cadi  has  nothing  to  do  with 
public  chairs  ). 

Applied  to  one  who  unnecessarily  interferes  with  matters  in. 
which  he  is  not  at  all  concerned. 


INTOXICATING  DRUGS. 

ebarasa  ki  karau  badaboi  wi  ka  bansha  me  nirau  koi. 

Any  one  who  speaks  against  charasa  (a  narcotic  drug), 
may  no  one  be  left  to  him  in  his  family. 

2  %  ^f^T^  f^^  Htsil  fli  ^f%  ft  ^f  W  %  ^?f%  »T«t« 
Jai  larhakale  nipi  ganja  ki  kali  wI  larhaka  hai    larhaki 

bhali. 

The  boy  who  does  not  smoke  charasa,  a  girl  is  better 
than  he. 

Both  the  above  are  used  by  those  in  the  habit  of  smoking; 
these  drugs. 


(     164    ) 
IRONY. 

1  'R'n^lfz^T  9'fl%T  ^T  ^^.      Anakatiyo    tiimarho   ko 
mukha. 

The  mouth  of  a  gourd  uncut. 

E.  g.  As  long  as  a  gourd  is  not  cut  open  it  cannot  be 
certainly  ascertained  what  is  inside  it,  though  every  one  is 
practically  aware  of  its  contents. 

Applied  to  unnecessary  reserve  and  precaution. 

2  53?1HT  ^i'^IT  •IT'^iffr  ^^T-      Sagalo  bhanara  nau  rati 
suno. 

TFhat  is  nine  ratis  {18  grains)  of  gold  compared  witJi 
the  whole  treasure  ? 

Used  to  induce  another  to  give  large  sums  by  representing 
that  nine  ratis  is  a  ridiculously  trifling  sum  for  a  wealthy  mans. 
Also  as  an  expression  of  wonder  that  a  man  reputed  to  be  rich 
or  great  should  be  unable  to  comply  with  a  small  request. 

3  jgj^t  <«>T  St^«RT  ^■'^  ^T  'I'fi-     Shyalon  ka  tolaka  shera 
ko  eka. 

A  number  of  j achats  hut  one  tiger. 

E.  g.  A  she-jackal  gives  birth  to  two  or  three  cubs  and  a 
tigress  to  only  one.  In  other  words  a  number  of  the  former  are 
not  competent  to  face  one  of  the  latter. 

Applied  when  a  number  of  small  men  set  themselves  fn 
opposition  to  a  man  of  great  influence  and  power. 

4  ^^1^  HT^flr  fv^Z  1X^(i[«     Salaun  saradeshi  pilang- 
ata  paradeshi. 

He  regards  locusts  as   belonging   to   his   own   country 
and  grass-hoppers  as  strangers. 

I.  e.  He  cannot  distinguish  between  those  who  are  bis  true 
friendp  and  those  who  are  not. 


(     1C5     ) 

adimi  meri  pitha  malasau  taba  mangala  gaunlo. 

Four  persons  should  ruh  my  back,  then  I  icill  sing 
the  songs  of  peace. 

E.  g.  According  to  custom  it  is  the  duty  of  every  person 
to  sing  auspicious  songs,  or  to  join  a  party  of  such  singers  of  his 
own  accord  on  a  festive  occasion,  but  if  he  refuses  to  do  so  it 
shows  that  he  wishes  to  be  bribed  or  earnestly  entreated. 

Used  ironically  to  induce  one  to  do  his  own  duty. 

6  -q-^  TI^  Wl€)"  ^T  'BT'l-     Budhi  mathi  mathi  mero 
hatha. 

Old  lady,  my  hand  is  uppermost. 

Ironically  used  of  a  person  who  either  unnecessarily  insists 
on  having  a  thing  done  by  his  own  will  and  choice,  or  pretends 
to  put  an  obligation  on  others  without  any  reason.  For  instance, 
if  his  friend  is  benefitted  somehow,  without  his  interference  or 
help,  he  attributes  the  incident  to  his  own  instrumentality  ;  if  his 
enemy  meets  with  misfortune  he  wishes  people  to  believe  that  his 
adversary  was  injured  through  his  influence,  and  so  he  was 
revenged. 

7  ^fT  %^  ^T^^T  ^  ^^r«    Grhauta  dekha  yo  relo  ni 

dekho. 

I  saw  Gahata  {a  hind  of  inferior  pulse)  hut  not  in 
such  a  heap. 

Ironically  used  to  express  astonishment  at  some  one's  extra- 
ordinary conduct  which  is  either  against  some  established  custom 
or  contrary  to  the  course  of  nature. 

Miyan  jyu  kelai  runchha  shikalai  yesi  chha.   shababa  ke 

chha  moharrama  ki  paidasa. 

JF'hy  do  you  seem  to  cry  ?  my  features  were  made  so. 
What  is    the  cazise  of  this  ?     I  loas   born  during  the 
Moharrmna    ( ichen   all   Mahomedans   are    engaged    in 
fasting  and  weeping  ). 


(     166     ) 

Ironically  used  to   condemn   people   who   show    their   folly. 
by  spoiled  work» 

9  ^^lf%  ^?I  ^(SI  VT^T'    Paharhi  kawa  deshi  bhakha. 
Sill  crow  and  Plains  language. 

Ironically  applied  to  one  who   makes  a  vain  display  of  his 
learning  in  a  foreign  tongue. 

10  ^^^T^  ^I  si^t^  "qw^Tf  ^T  ^^'     Sasurasa  ko  jawanl 

busaraha  ko  balada. 

A  son-in-law  in  his  father-in-law's  house,  and  a  bullock 
in  the  chaff  of  the  threshing  floor,  are  so  well  fed  that  they 
become  notorious. 

Used  of  men  who  stay  very  long  in  their  father-in-law's 
houses. 

11  ^lyst^T  ^T^I«T'     Samajnera  so  mauta. 
This  is  death  to  one  who  knows  what  it  is. 

Said  to  or  of  one  who  is  involved  in  a  dangerous  and  dis- 
graceful affair  of  any  kind. 

12  ^T^I«'5  f%  mzj  ^ifllir  ^^'  Baba jyu  ki  jata  asbikba 
men  ge. 

The  hairs  on  an  ascetic's  head  (an  ascetic's  hairs  are 
uncombed  lochs  called  "Jatds")  are  taken  away  or  distributed, 
as  blessings. 

The  hairs  of  a  Jogi  are  considered  sacred  and  are  supposed 
to  act  like  talismans. 

Ironically  used  of  a  man  who  devotes  all  his  earnings  to 
helping  other  people. 

13  ^-q^T  ^I^  ^'^f^  ^ZT*    Kaba  ko  jogi  kaba  ki  jata. 

Whenever  did  he  become  a  Jogi,  and  how  old  are  his  Jatds 
{clusters  of  hair  on  his  head)  ? 


(     1<37     ) 

Used  to  deride  a  man's  newh'  acquired  possessions  when  he 
gets  proud  of  them  and  thinks  himself  superior  to  those  who  have 
been  long  in  the  enjoyment  of  such  possessions. 

14  «j^?i  f%  r(lf^  fsjTTf^'    Baga  ki  mausi  birali. 

A  cat  is  a   miniature  of  a  leopard  or   bears   the  same 
likeness,  {a  cat  is  said  to  be  a  step-mother  of  a  leopard). 

Used  of  one  who  does  little  with  much  show  or  much  less 
than  was  expected  by  other  people. 

15  ^fi|%  tj^gR  ^TT  T^?^  ^f^  V^.    Maikani  pasaka  mera 
tnadhana  kani  pasaka. 

Give  food  to  me  as  well  as  to  my  friend  Madhan. 

This  is  applicable  to  one  who  besides  himself  brings  other 
people  with  him  to  be  fed  or  helped.  C.  f.  "Love  me  love 
my  dog." 

16  %«!  ^ifT  •!'BT  *fi2T«     Saiba  sachcho  naphara  jhuto. 

The  master  is  truthful,  but  the  servant  (slave)  is  a  liar. 

This  is  an  ironical  phrase  used  by  servants  to  their  masters. 
As  masters  are  always  in  the  habit  of  censuring  their  servants 
whether  rightly  or  wrongly,  and  also  of  finding  faults  and 
flaws  in  them.  Also  applied  as  in  the  fable  of  the  wolf  and 
the  lamb. 

17  '^77^  ^«T  IfTT  ^WT  ^^m^  ^^     Anta  me  suma 

aur  data  barabara  huni. 

The  miser's  money  goes   as  rapidly  as   the   benevolent 
man's  does. 

Ironically  used  to  induce  a  miser  to  use  his  money  properly. 
Money  should  be  used  for  one's  self  or  for  others  ;  otherwise  it 
will  fly  away. 

18  irTf^sRT^^-     Putali  ka  khela. 
A  puppet  show. 


(     168     ) 

E.  g.  Girls  while  unmarried  play  with  dolls,  have  dolls' 
marriages,  and  in  sport  perform  all  the  ceremonies  that  are 
enjoined  for  boys  and  girls.  Used  to  deride  one  who  spends  very 
little  on  the  tonsure  and  marriage  ceremonies  of  his  children. 

19  ^^  ^^'^J^  ^^T  ^^T  1I^«  Harha  na  masa  gala  gala 
gasa. 

Having  neither  bone  nor  flesh  one  wishes  to  have  dainty 
morsels. 

Ironically  used  of  those  who  wish  to  have  comfort  and 
pleasure  without  taking  any  trouble  to  secure  them. 

20  'gT  ^jK  g^^T  ^I3f%  ^  ^T^  3l5l^»lTf  T-  Ghara  bara 
tumaro  kotharhi  men  hatha  jana  lagaya. 

The  house  is  yours  but  do  not  use  the  room. 
Applied  ironically  to  nominal  trusts. 

Apani  dyun  ta  apana  baba  kl  jwe  araka  ki  lyun  ghagari 

khwe. 

I  swear  by  my  father  that  I  shall  not  give  anything  of 
my  own,  but  take  that  of  others  by  stripping  them  of  their 
skirts  {clothes).  Extreme  selfishness,  giving  nothing  and 
talcing  every  thing. 

A  sarcasm  against  misers  and  selfish  people. 

22  ojiy^  ^SI^T  M^   '^^m'^'        I^^'lo   akshyara  bhainsa 
barabara. 

A  black  character  {letter)  looks  like  a  buffalo  {to  an 
illiterate  person). 

23  5|?|t:  sbx  '^^^^  ^^?;  ^1.      Nagara  ka  Aswala  bai- 

khai  baikha. 

Tlie  Aswals  {first  class  Rajputs)  of  Nagara,  a  village  in 
Garhival,  consider  themselves  as  masters,  and  so  do  not 
work  them,sclves. 


(     169     ) 

Applied  to  members  of  a  family  who  all  think  themselves 
lorcla  (above  work).  An  ironical  expression  used  to  induce  such 
people  to  work. 

24  »^ii^  jjjfK  ^^f%  %  ^j(^  f5l  ?|  -aiTf^^.      Jbakha  mari 
khicharhi  khai  saji  ni  khai  basi  khai. 

One  kills  a  Jish  and  then  eats  the  roe  not  fresh  but  stale. 

(  The  roe  of  a  fish  is  called  "khiehari"   from  its  appearance ). 

Applied  to  one  who  at  first  refuses  to  do  what  he  is  asked, 
but  afterwards  asks  to  be  allowed  to  do  it. 

Story-:  Once  a  man  travelling  to  a  -certain  place  haviug 
missed  his  way  found  himself  in  a  desert,  where  he  became 
very  hungry.  As  he  was  wandering  here  and  there  in  search  of 
some  village,  he  found  a  hut  occupied  by  a  man,  with  a  tank 
before  the  hut  full  of  fishes.  The  stranger  asked  for  some  food, 
but  the  owner  said,  "My  rule  is  that  whoever  wants  a  fish  must 
catct  it  himself ;  give  me  the  meat  and  keep  the  intestines  for 
yourself."  In  spite  of  this,  the  traveller  took  a  fish  out  of  the 
pond,  but  insisted  on  having  tbe  whole  fish  himself.  The  owner 
refused  his  request.  The  stranger  at  this  became  sulky  and  lay 
down  to  sleep.  In  the  mean  time  the  proprietor  cut  the  fish  and 
set  aside  the  inner  part  of  its  body  for  the  other  man,  and  ate  up 
the  rest.  Next  morning  the  stranger  being  further  compelled  by 
hunger  was  obliged  to  take  the  intestines,  which  he  had  refused  to 
eat  on  the  former  evening.     Hence  the  proverb. 


25  ^^T  ^I'^  f^^I'HT  Wl  I':.    Harare  chora  birana  dhana 

para. 

O  thief,  why  kill  yourself  for  the  wealth  of  others. 

An  ironical    fesson   to    a    thief,  telling   him    to   forsake    his 
•evil  conduct. 

2Q  »lTq  UI^  1T«RT  '%V^-      Magha  masa  paka  ama. 

Do  mangoes  ripen  in  the  month  of  Magha  (JoMuary)  f 

Applies  to  one  who  speaks  impossible  or  absurd  things. 


(     170    ) 

27  <5Tr  fi  ^TT'Q^T  ^I^t  5IT^   5!T^^       Duma  twe  mai 

rakhulo  chorl  jari  nakari, 

O,  Duma  fa  low  caste  man  J  I  shall  keep  you  if  you 
do  not  commit  theft  and  adultery 

Dumas  are  very  useful  to  agriculturists  inasmuch  as  they 
jilougb,  do  other  works  of  tillage,  make  and  sharpen  agricultural 
implements,  carry  loads,  build  houses  &c.  But  otherwise  they  are 
great  scoundrels.  As  long  as  a  Duma  is  innocent  or  harmless, 
everyone  will  like  to  have  him  for  his  work.  Hence  the  proverb 
applies  to  a  very  shrewd  person. 

28  f%V^  31  stT^f^  5*jfc'i  f%f  f%«     Bigarhi  ge  natba  ki 
Budbarige  siddha  ki. 

Failure  is  ascribed  to  a  Ndtha,  but  success  to  a  Siddha. 

Ndtluis  are  a  sect  of  ascetics  who  take  an  active  part  in  all 
worldly  aflFairs,  but  one  who  makes  himself  noted  by  stringent 
penances,  by  separating  himself  from  the  world,  and  by  abstinence 
is  called  a.-" Siddha"  or  "Santa."  A  "Siddha"  is  believed  to  be  able 
one  to  get  impossible  things  accomplished  by  means  of  his  penance. 
He  is  revered  and  honored  for  the  sake  of  his  penances  and 
saintliness.  Hence  the  people  attribute  any  thing  spoiled  or  gone 
wrong  to  a  JS'atha,  and  blessings  to  a  Siddha.  Hence  the  proverb 
applies  ironically  either  to  one  who  is  unfortunate,  or  to  one  who 
is  very  lucky. 

29  ^r^ig  %,%  ^t  ^wSr  ^'frft^t-      Bolanu  cheli  son 

Bunano  buwari  son. 

Lecturing  one's  own  daughter  in  order  that  the  daugJiter- 
in-law  may  hear  fand  get  a  lesson  J. 

Parents  often,  even  when  there  is  no  fault  in  their  daughter- 
in-law,  reproach  or  lecture  her  by  addressing  their  own  daughter 
in  the  presence  of  the  former,  for  they  do  not  wish  to  quarrel 
with  the  new  bride.  Hence  when  a  man  wishes  to  convey  a  hint  to 
another  he  does  so  by  addressing  a  third  person  on  the  subject. 

30  ciiigq  -^  T^tsi  %T  V^-     Nakba  na  mukba  banja  ko 

rukba. 

Sas  no  nose  and  no  mouth,  is  an  oak  tree.     ( The  tree 
quercus  incana  or  dilatata.  A  Simalayan  oak  J. 


(     171     ) 

This  is  used  of  one  who  is  ugly.  The  oak  tree  which  is  very 
commou,  is  considered  an  ugly  tree.  A  proverb  ironically  used 
by  village  women. 

31  ^'^  fij^T^r^fT  %fcTT''^.    Bapa  binolo  puta  chautara. 

The  father  was  a  Binold  seed,  but  the  son    Chautara, 
i.  e.  a  beautiful  lace  made  out  of  cotton. 

Binola  is  the  small  seed  of  the  cotton  plant.  Chautara  is  a 
cotton  lace. 

This  is  applied  as  a  slur  on  a  great  man  who  is  the  soli 
of  a  poor  man,  and  also  to  denote  that  great  and  noble  men  can 
come  from  a  poor  family. 

32  KT^^T  *n^I  aPIT  ^^^  iti'IT  ^^^«      Bhasaro 

bhasaro  ky^  bolana  gandoi  jl  bolyo. 

JWhy  do  you  say  I  am,  hushy  ?    say   at  once   that   I 
have  a  goitre. 

(A  man  with  a  goitre  talks  haskilyj. 

/.  e.  Do  not  talk  ironically,  pretending  to  think  me  only 
husky,  when  you  really  mean  to  say  that  I  have  a  goitre. 
Insinuating  evil  of  a  person. 

33  ^»Tf%  %J  ^T^  fz^'^  ^r  "^1^-      Damarhi  ko  sahu 

tiparhi  ko  rau. 

ITie  man  who  has  a  Damarhi  (i.  e.  \  of  a  pice)  is  called 
a  "Sahu"  and  the  man  who  possesses  the  top  of  a  hill 
is  called  "Sau." 

1.  e.  In  former  times,  in  these  hills,  when  money  was  very 
scarce  a  man  who  had  a  Damarhi  (a  copper  coin=^  of  a  pice  ) 
in  cash  was  considered  a  rich  man,  and  a  man  who  tyranized  over  a 
few  villages  by  taking  possession  of  the  top  of  a  mountain  (called 
a  ^ar/w  or  fortress)  was  called  a  "Raii"  or  Haja.  This  was  the 
case  in  Garhwal  (the  whole  of  the  district  having  been  portioned 
out   by    petty  Rajas  called    Thakuri   Rajas)    before  the  conquest. 


(     172     ) 

of  ttie  country  by  Raja  Kanaka  Pala  in  tbe  seventh  century. 
Used  to  describe  the  anarchy  and  poverty  of  ancient  Garhwal. 
It  is  also  quoted  in  derision  of  one  who  claims  to  be  descended 
from  a  Raja. 

34  ig'StT  Wl  'i^^  f^^^  ^^     Mufata  ka  chandana  ghisa 
bs  Lallu- 

O,  Lallu  rub  the  sandal  wood  which  costs  nothing. 

Applies  to  one  who  is  very  fond  of  things  which  belong  to 
other  people  and  which  cost  him  nothing. 

Sandal-wood  is  rubbed  on  a  stone  into  a  paste,  and  then 
applied  to  the  forehead. 

35  ^i^  ^^^1  ^\l  5-      Kya  mai  goru  ka  peta  ko 
chhun. 

Am  I  born  of  a  cow  ? 
Do  you  ta£e  me  for  a  fool? 

36  3iT^^%T  f^'^I^^  ^t  '^T^  f%  5m^«      Jan  kukurho  nl 

basanu  wan  rata  ni  byani. 

Will  the  morn  not  dawn  should  the  cocJc  not  crow  ? 
I.  e.    If  you  will  not  do  the  work,  we  can  do  without  you. 

37  g?T"?T  ^  ^T^  'i^T  ^^^T  ^J'^-      Jata  na  thata  khalo 
khalo  natha. 

No  caste  and  no  land,  lord  of  nothing. 

Used    ironically    of    poor    people    who    have    nothing   to 
care  about. 

■38  ^fx:  ^T^  ^■^T  ^^  ^  ^T(%-     Teri  tauli  tera  mukha 
men  rauli. 

Your  tauli  {vessel  in  which  riee  is  cooked):  will  remain 
in  your  mouth. 


(     173     ) 

I.  e.  I  shall  not  spend  anything  for  you  but  your  own  property. 
"When  a  Hindu  dies  the  Brahmans  get  many  gifts,  but  if  the  man 
has  only  a  Tauli,  this  only  will  be  given  to  the  Brahmans,  and  only 
the  merit  of  so  small  a  gift  will  go  with  the  spirit  of  the  deceased. 
A  term  of  abuse. 

39  T^^TT  ^  ^Tfi"  ^^'^  M%r  f^H]^,     Twe  mera  saun 
jo  tu  maikana  bhalo  ni  manai. 

You  are  sworn  on  my  nornie  to  love  me. 

Used  as  an  ironical  phrase  against  another  who  does  not  love 
the  speaker.  This  means  to  say  that  one  loves  another  naturally, 
but  not  hy  force. 

40  fT^  ^51   'BT'??t  5I5I  "FT  ^  TT'll'l'*      Tumai  kanu 

manadi  janu  tu  mai  manadi. 

Sow  do  you  regard  me  ?    I  regard  you  just   as  you 

regard  me. 

Used  generally  ironically  between  persons  who  are  not 
very  friendly. 

41  -^VW.  '^T^^i'TT^  %\T.^  \j  ^^Tt'TT.     Kuraaiya  apun 

kamaiya  aurana  so  chumaiya. 

Natives  of  Kwrnaun  earn  for  themselves,   hut    are 

miserly  to  others. 

This  is  a  Garhwali  proverb  showing  how  the  Garhwalis  look 
upon  the  people  of  Kumaun,  who  are  very  keen  in  business  but 
also  very  clannish. 

42  iiT^^T  ^quiT  'n^T^f^  1^^  'i^iW-      Parmeshwara 
apana  gadha  kani  haluwa  khaoncbha. 

God  allows  his  asses  to  eat  sweets. 

Applies  to  ignorant  (incompetent)  people  who  are  promoted 
to  high  posts. 

Generally  used  by  those  who  think  that  incompetent  people 
have  secured  the  places  they  themselves  ought  to  have  had. 


(     174     ) 
43  u%7  ri  j}]'^^^  ^J\  gjailE.      Eso  ta  gobara  me  laga 
laganchha. 


o 


Such  use  of  the  word  "bara"   {best)   is  also  found  in 
^'Gobara"  {cow  dung). 

Once  the  Emepror  Akabar  the  great  asked  his  chief  Minister 
Birabar  where  the  suffix  "bara"  should  be  used.  The  minister 
replied  that  it  was  used  in  qualifying  such  names  Sitabara, 
iladhabara,  Birabara.  The  Emperor  again  asked  him  why  not  in 
Akabara  ?  to  this  Birabara  replied  as  in  the  proverb.  Hence 
the  origin  of  the  proverb.  Applied  ironically  to  one  to  show  that 
his  position  or  power  is  too  low  in  comparison  with  another  of 
similar  rank  or  name  to  cope  with  him. 


IRRETRIEVABLE  LOSSES, 

1  «TT  f%^T»T  Ql^r  ^  ^2  '»'^»T  %^T  ^'     Chhorha  diyo 

ta  dhokho  ke  luta  parhi  ta  lekho  ke. 

Any  thing  given  up  should  not  be  thought  of,   and  of 
that  which  has  been  stolen  why  keep  an  account  ? 

Used  by  one  who  has  lost  anything  irretrievably. 


JEALOUSY. 

'Rl^  »1T  ^f%  5i*lt^«       BiranI   dekhi  lai  paiarai  apan£ 
dekhi  nangi,  bapa  ki  akala  gai  wahi  na  mangi. 

Seeing  his  wife  naked,  and  that  of  another  well  clothed 
and  adorned,  the  man  says  that  his  father  was  a  fool 
inasmuch  as  he  did  not  espouse  the  other  woman   to  Mm. 

-  Blaming  others  for  one's  own  mismanagement  or  ill  luck. 


(     175     ) 
2  "^^TeRt  T*}^  aft^T  ^'lt^«       Hunda  ki  risa  janda  ki 


kblsa 


j4.  well-to-do  person  is  envied  and   a  ruined  man  is 
laughed  at. 

Used  as  consolation  on  appropriate  occasions.    No  one  should 
wonder  at  such  treatment  by  the  world. 


JOINT  PROPERTY. 

1  ^T'tt  «(T«R^I  «IT1  '^^T^-    Sajhi  bakaro  baga  ni  kbawa. 

T/ie  goat  that  is  the  joint  property/  of  several  persons 
is  not  killed  even  by  a  leopard. 

I.  e.  Such  property  is  never  taken  care  of  by  any  individual, 
each  leaves  it  to  the  care  of  others  than  himself  and  so  it  is  not 
noticed  by  the  leopard.  C.  f.  "Every  body's  business  is  no 
body's  business." 

2  ^^T  '^'ir  ^^T  '^T  TT^^  ^^T  ^1  "^l-    Sero  bago  sero 

bago  maneka  raero  laga  bago. 

7}he  irrigated  land  was  washed  away,  and  a  little  of 
mine  was  also  washed  away  along  with  it. 

Applied  to  those  who  do  not  care  for  the  loss  of  their  own 
shares  in  the  joint  property  thus  damaged.  The  application  of 
this  proverb  is  to  any  joint  property  which  when  damaged  is  not 
likely  to  be  repaired  as  no  one  is  much  interested  in  it. 

This  corresponds  to  what  is  elsewhere  said  that  the  loss 
or  pain  shared  along  with  five  or  more  persons  is  not  painful 
at   all. 


KINDNESS. 
1  ^T^T  f^^T^-     l^^lo  biralu. 

Children  and  cats  should  be  treated  with  equal  kindness. 
Used  against  treating  children  and  cats  cruelly. 


(     176     ) 
KING  &  HIS  SUBJECTS. 

1  5I%T''^T5ir  r(f^  'ITSTT'     Jaso  raja  tasi  parja. 
As  the  king  is  so  are  his  subjects. 

(1).  The  (greatness  of  the  King's  station  causes  hiin  to  be 
imitated  by  all  his  subjects,  and  (2  >  the  laws  which  he  ordains 
influence  powerfully  the  character  of  the  people. 

2  TSIT  TTTT  sillfTT  5TTi!jf«      Raja  marau  jagatara  janau. 

Whe7i  a  king  punishes,  the  world  knows  the  fact. 

This  is  used  to  lessen  the  mortification  of  receiving  punish- 
ment from  a  ruling  authority. 

3  TTW  ^T  fT^  'l^T'7  T^-     Raja  ko  tela  pala  me  mela. 
The  oil  given  by  a  Raja  should  he  taken  in  one's  skirt. 

I.  e  Never  refuse  the  gift  of  a  king  no  matter  how  much  it 
may  inconvenience  you.  It  is  also  considered  as  good  luck 
whatever  be  the  value  of  the  gift  when  it  is  given  by  a  king. 

4  ^^j  TTS?!  f%  ^f^  ^Kmj-     Sela  raja  ki  ghani  parja. 
A  kind-hearted  king  has  nume"0us  subjects. 

A  cruel  master  and  a  tyrannical  king  are  very  often  deserted 
by  people  on  account  of  oppression  and  want  of  regard,  and 
those  of  opposite  nature  are  resorted  to  for  the  sake  of  justice  and 
mercy.  C.  /.  "In  the  multitude  of  people  is  the  king's  honor  but 
in  the  want  of  people  is  the  destruction  of  the  prince." 

5  TTsTI  '^^^  ^q   "^^^f   ^?:  f^^'a^T*      Eaja   chalada 
megha  barasada  kui  ni  dekhado. 

No    one    knows    when    the    king    will    move,    and    the 
cloud  rain. 

(Alluding  to  the  secret  aud  sudden  moA'ements  of  the  old 
Indian  Kings). 

C.  f.  "The  heaven  for  height,  and  the  earth  for  depth,  and 
the  heart  of  kings  is  unsearchable." 


r  177  ) 

LAME  EXCUSES. 

1  'S^VT^  ^T  m\^1  ^Z^^l-      Asaku  bharl  ka  kakha 

tataofftrha. 

One  unable  to  carry  his  load  complains  of  the  strings, 
{by  which  the  load  is  tied  on  to  the  back,)  being  tight. 

This  applies  to  one  -who  heing  unable  to  do  a  thing,  finds 
fanlts  with  or  blames  others.  C.  f.  "A  bad  workman  complains 
of  his  tools." 

2  ^1T^  %  ?I^  l%r  ^T«7  V."^  1T^«  Shyala  ko  gu  cbainu 

parho  sata  samudra  para. 

Jackals'  dung,  when  asked  for,  is  said  to  be  seven 
vceans  away. 

This  is  applied    to   a  useless   person  who   when  told  to  do 
any  work    refuses  to   do    so,    or    promises    to    do    it   aftprwards. 
Applied  both  to  the  lazy  man,  who  is  likened  to  jackal's  dung 
which  is  very  plentiful,  and  to  his  excuses. 

3  siT^t  KTZ  <ai!lft  ^Tf  %tg  ^^jr^  HTW  f^^T"S.  Xakara 

bhata  kbanadi  kharha  cbaunla  bukaika  bliata  ni  badha. 

O,  beggar,  do  not  dig  a  pit  for  yourself,  if  you  have 
'already  devoured  the  raw  rice,  how  can  the  rice  you  are 
cooking  increase  ?. 

A  small  quantity  of  raw  rice  when  cooked  occupies  a  much 
larger  space.  The  beggar  having  eaten  some  of  the  raw  rice 
obtained  in  begging,  in  excuse  for  the  small  quantitv  he  cooks 
for  his  companions  says  the  rice  was  bad,  and  is  rebuked  by  the 
above  saying, 

4  ill^  ^alT'ST  ^r»n!F  ^t»ir-     Nacha  nijano  angan  bango. 

Not  knowing  how  to  dance  9h3  complains  of  the  floor 
being  umeven. 

C.  f.    "Bad  workmen  quarrel  with  their  tools." 

W 


(     178    ) 

5  ^a^t  *lftl^T^»f^  ^  ^T^-      Hala  son  marigayo  rel)- 

harha  ko  kala. 

A  bullock  becomes  as  dead  for  the  plough,  but  is  death 
on  his  food. 

I.  e.    Devours  his  evening  meal. 

Applied  to  one  who  makes  lame  excuses  about  doing  any 
•work,  but  is  very  fond  of  food. 

6  ^rf^l^T  ^^^^■     Pothi  ka  baingana. 

The  Baingana  (egg  plants)   of  the  books  are  quite 
different  from  that  which  is  eaten. 

This  is  used  as  an  ironical  excuse  for  doing  what  13  prohibit- 
ed by  the  scriptures.  A  story  is  connected  with  this  which  gave  rise 
to  the  proverb. 

Story : — Once  a  Pandita  expounded  from  his  book  some 
doctrines  to  his  wife,  among  others  this,  that  "one  was  not  to  eat 
Baingana''  in  other  words  that  "any  one  who  eats  Baingana  will 
^o  to  hell."  After  hearing  the  precept  the  woman  became  disgusted 
with  the  Baingana,  the  only  vegetable  she  had  in  her  field.  Next 
day  she  cooked  bread  for  her  husband,  fthe  Pandita;  and  placed  it 
before  him  without  any  vegetable  food.  At  this  the  Pandita 
became  very  angry,  and  reprimanded  her  for  not  having  prepared 
the  Baingana  veget^ible.  Whereupon  she  reminded  her  husband 
of  the  doctrine  which  he  had  explained  to  her  regarding  the 
vegetable  ;  the  Pandita  being  thus  silenced  by  his  own  doctrine 
cleverly  explained  that  the  real  Bainganas  are  quite  different  from 
those  spoken  of  in  the  book,  and  are  therefore  to  be  eaten. 

filTin  f^vj.  Sadliu  santana  kana  kuchha  roka  thoka  nahatr 

jo  apna  apa  girani  giranadiyau. 

Nothing  is  forbidden  the  Faquira  ;  lohy  do  'gou  stop  the 
pieces  of  meat  ?   Let  them  come  on. 

Ironically  applied  to  those  who  never  mind  doing  an 
improper  or  wrongful  thing  because  they  are  great  and  rich  men 
or  like  saints. 


(     179     ) 

A  man  of  busiues  one  day  invited  an  asectio  ( Vaishnaba  or 
devotee  of  Visbnu,  of  the  sect  who  rigidly  abstain  from  animal  food 
living  in  the  neighbourhood,  to  a  grand  feast.  The  hermit  said 
he  would  never  come  to  the  dinner,  because  mutton  was  being 
cooked  there.  The  pian  admitted  the  fact  but  assured  him  that  the 
meat  would  be  cooked  quite  separate  from  the  other  kinds  of  food. 
On  this  condition  the  ascetic  agreed  to  accept  the  invitation.  The 
man  went  to  his  home  and  had  the  animal  food  cooked  in  a 
separate  kitchen.  When  the  dinner  was  ready  all  the  people 
invited  to  the  feast  sat  down  in  rows.  The  hermit  also 
took  his  seat  among  them.  All  the  various  kinds  of' 
food  were  put  in  dishes  and  placed  before  them  all.  The 
ascetic  insisted  on  each  kind  of  food  in  sufficient  quantity  being 
put  in  his  dishes,  so  that  he  might  not  have  occasion  to  ask  for 
any  thing  more  after  the  meat  had  come  to  the  table.  fFor  they 
think  that  any  food  touched  by  the  vessel  in  which  meat  is  cooked 
becomes  polluted).  And  so,  after  getting  enough  for  himself,  he 
permitted  the  other  people  to  do  what  they  pleased.  After  this  the 
cooked  meat  came  for  distribution.  While  it  was  being  given  ta 
all,  the  ascetic  being  tempted  by  the  savoury  smell  of  the  meat  and 
soup  said  "I  think  the  soup  consists  of  nothing  but  Ganges, 
■water"  to  this  all  who  were  present  said  "Certainly.'*  Then  he 
said  "I  must  have  some  of  it,  there  is  nothing  wrong  in  taking  it, 
for  it  is  made  of  Ganges  water,  but  the  cook  should  take  the 
greatest  care  that  no  pieces  of  the  mutton  come  to  my  dish, 
otherwise  I  will  leave  the  food  and  go  away."  They  gave  him 
the  soup,  which  further  tempted  him,  for  he  had  not  tasted  it 
before.  He  again  asked  for  it,  by  that  time  very  little  or  no  soup 
had  remained  in  the  vessel,  and  so  the  cook  was  obliged  to  empty 
the  vessel  into  the  Hermit's  dish,  putting  a  spoon  to  the  mouth 
of  the  vessel  so  that  all  the  remaining  soup  in  the  vessel  should 
flow  out,  but  none  of  the  bits  of  the  meat,  as  desired  by  the 
Faquira.  Seeing  this,  the  ascetic,  wishing  to  have  the  taste 
of  mutton  also,  used  the  expression  which  has  become 
proverbial. 

8  fSlH^'OT  ^'^  f%  %n^  ^X-  Nimakhana  bhainsa  ki 
bhaiseni  kbira. 

The  Khira  {rice  milk)  prepared  with  the  milk  of  a 
buffalo  which  one  dislikes  smells  of  the  buffalo,  or  the 
milk  of  the  buffalo  which  costs  him,  nothing,  or  the 
buffalo  which  ha^s  no  m,aster  or  owner  {astray)  smells^ 
0f  the  buffalo. 


(    180     ) 

This  applies  ta  the  conduct  and  services  of  one  who  is 
disliked,  or  to  the  thing  disliked.  The  following  story  explains 
the  lame  excuses  referred  to  iu  the  proverb. 

Story :  The  temple  of  Vishnu,  where  the  idol  or  image 
is  worshipped,  is  culled  ''Thakurdora."  In  the  ceieraony  of 
worship  the  idol  or  image  is  first  of  all  bathed  with  water,  milk, 
ffJii,  curds,  and  sugar  mixed  together.  The  water  that  drops  trora 
the  image  as  it  is  bithed  is  caught  in  a  vessel,  and  is  called 
*'Charnamrita"  nectar  of  Vishnu's  feet).  After  this  the  image  is 
adorned  with  powdered  sandal  wood,  garlands  of  flowers  &Ci 
Subsequently  it  is  illuminated  with  lights  made  of  cloth 
soaked  in  ghi,  and  then  sweetmeats  and  cleansed  raw  gram  soaked 
in  water  are  placed  before  it,  which  are  thus  called  "Bhoffd"  or 
^'Pars/idda"  i  e.  an  offering.  This  last  ceremony  concludes  the 
worship.  When  the  worship  is  finished,  the  water  and  the 
'^Pai-shdda^  are  distributed  to  the  spectators  of  the  worship. 
Among  the  spectators  once  there  stood  an  old  woman.  As  usual, 
she  was  also  asked  to  drink  Cluxrandmrita.  To  this  offer  she  said 
she  had  no  teeth  to.drink  it.  After  this  came  the  distribution  of  the 
Parsh&la.  She  was  asked  again  whether  she  would  take  it,  to 
which  enquiry  she  said  '"Why  not'  I  am  nourished  only  by  this." 
The  proverb  implies  that  anything  disliked  is  avoided  with  the 
aid  of  strange  excuses. 

9  f%(%^T  ^^T  ^IT^T  •TT*      Nidino   bhano  akhano. 
nama. 

The  vessel  which  one  does  not  wish  to  give  to  another- 
is^said  to  be  in  use  {not  spare  or  empty). 

Applied  to  refusal  of  another's  request  for  feigned   reasons.. 

10  iiZ^T  ^  ^  ^^T  ^^I  "^Vil-     Lotanera  mai  cbhyua 
tero  dbeso  lago. 

iwas  about  to  fall  down  when  I  came  in  contact  with 

you  {then  I  fell  down  at  once). 

C.  f.    "Last  straw  that  breaks  the  camels'back." 
A  worthless  man   laying    the    blame    of  his    misfortunes    oa 
other  people. 


(     181     ) 
LAZINESS,  SLOTH,  OR  SLUGGISHNESS. 


1  ^^f%  f%  ^JV^  ^%  ^T^      Alasi  ki  bana  ekai  gbana. 

A  sluggard  wishes  to  have  all  his  work  done  in  a 
single  attempt. 

For  instance,   a  lazy  man  will  attempt   to   carry   two   loads 
at  one  time  to  save  himself  the  trouble  of  two  journeys. 

2  ^^flr  ^T  ^tlT  STUT-     Alasi  ka  banga  junga. 

A  lazy  man^s  mustaches  are  imtidy. 

I.  e.    In  all  the  actions   of  an   idle   man   his  carelessness  is 
apparent.      A  common  rebuke  of  sloth  and  negligence. 

3  ^TZ^T  ^T'l^I'T  ^^  SRIT  ^T3^T-     Wotada  katada  ta 

bbela  kya  lotada. 

Sad  he  worked  a  spindle,  would  he  have  fallen  down 
a  precipice  ? 

I.  e.    If  he  had  worked  for    his  living,  he  would   not  have 
been  ruined. 

4  "^ c!^  ^rTST  ^T^T^T  "^^T'J'!  vt»I  "^T^*    Batana  batana 

gbara  khoyo  cbula  pana  bbanga  boyo. 

One  wasting  his  time  in  gossiping   ruins   his   house. 
Sis  hearth  becomes  overgrown  with  weeds. 

maina  rayo  harbi  pacbbali  danwa  ligyo  kbuto  torbi. 

One  lay  idle  for  six  months,   and  at   the  end  went 
away  with  a  broken  leg. 

Caution  against  laziness,  ■which  oft^n  results  in  a  man  being 
compelled  to  sell  his  property. 


f    182     ) 

6  5^f  9  Tt'S  If^i  Hfl[  ir^fr:  «Jj|f%  »Tg^T  "fff^-    Chhuyala. 

randa  chhuyon  bbuli  dokhari  pungarhi  malasa  phuli. 

A  talkative  woman,  by  indulging  in  conversation,  has, 
her  fields  overgrown  with  weeds. 

Applied  to  one  who  lazily  leaves  his  work  undone,  or  indulges 
in  useless  amusements. 

7  f^U^Ji^  ^T2T  *^  •'T^T  1  ^TZr-  Nigalaganda  mota  na. 
napha  na  tota. 

A  fat  sluggard  causes  neitlier  gain  nor  loss. 

khasama  kani  roji  ni  milau  raai  kani  pakuno  parhalo. 

My  husband  must  not  earn  his  livelihood,  otherwise 
I  shall  have  the  trouble  of  coohing  food  for  him 
(  starving  'preferred  to  the  trouble  of  coohing  ). 

Used  to  convince  persons  fof  one's  own  family  or  household)^ 
of  the  folly  of  being  lazy  in  helping  others. 

9  ^^  '^gsi  ?ig  'iif^  ^t^  3Tg.  Duma  bala  na  mala 
kbandi  danwa  jala. 

The  Duma  will  neither  plough  nor  manure  the  fields,, 
but  at  dinner  time  is  envious. 

Said  of  lazy  people,  who  are  unwilling   to    work,    but    ready 
enough  to  eat. 

10  ^gft    %f5l  ^    f^mi^  f^T3^T'5T^l%T  ^^T  Vim. 

Alasi  syaini  ko  dudha  saga  nirabudho  bakama  ko  kasama 
bbaklia. 


(     183    ) 

A  lazy  woman  eats  her  rice  with  milk  alone,  and  a  dull- 
headed  officer  disposes  of  his  cases  hy  making  the  parties 
resort  to  an  oath. 

E.  g.  A  lazy  woman  will  not  take  pains  to  cook  curry  or 
vegetables  to  eat  with  her  rice,  and  so  an  incompetent  officer  will 
not  take  the  trouble  to  find  out  the  truth  of  a  case  by  an  exhaustive 
enquiry  and  investigation,  but  will  save  trouble  by  making  the 
parties  swear,  and  so  deciding  the  case. 

11  JTf^I  ^T'JT  f^f^^T'n'  ^'IfT  ^\ZT  ^^^f  vjmi. 
Tukurha  khaya  dina  bilaj^a  kaparba  phata  ghara  son 
bhaja. 

Lives  on  hits  of  broken  meal,   and  when  his  clothes 

turn  into  rags  runs  back  to  his  home. 

This  is  used  of  vagrants,  especially  young  village  boys  who 
out  of  curiosity  or  from  disinclination  to  work  at  home,  run  away 
to  a  town,  but  eventually  come  back  to  their  relations,  who  are 
obliged  to  feed  them  for  some  time  without  any  return,  but  they 
have  to  go  to  their  own  parents  for  renewal  of  their  clothes. 
Also  used  of  one  who  wastes  his  time  unprofitably. 

Meri  jai  saila  karana  ki  dasba  buni  tamera  bapu  ka  bbaiea 

ni  buna. 

Were  I  so  lucky  as  to  rove  about  my  father  would  not 
have  buffaloes. 

The  speaker  complains  of  his  father  having  buffaloes  (property) 
in  grazing  which  he  is  employed. 

Applied  to  sluggards  who  wish  to  waste  their  time  at  any 
risk  whatever. 

13  ^f?T  ^fn  ^  ^  W^tg  ^  %IT.  Kheti  pati  ke  nai  las- 
ana  me  jora 

No  husbandry,  but  relies  on  garlic. 


(    184     ) 

i.  e.    One  who  does  not  do  any  work  but  talks  of  costly  food. 
Applied  to  sluggards  to  stir  them  to  be  industrious. 

14  ?ixt^  •!  "^tk  ^^  ^t  "Trfe      Grai  na  bachbi  ninda  al 
achbi. 

One  who  has  no  cows  or  cahes  sleeps  soundly. 

Ironically  used  of  one  who  is  idle  and  will  not  take  on  him 
the  responsibilities  of  life. 

15  n^scT  ^fT  ^  f^%r«>I  If  ^rt  f;?TTr«      Gamu   ka 
kurba  ki  bisauna  gamu  ka  i  kurba  ma. 

Gaminu  rests,  with  his  load  on,  in  his  own  house. 

A  stay-at-home  who  does  no  work. 

The  reference  is  to  coolies  carrying  load  on  their  backs. 

16  liT  fsi  ?r^  'siw  ^^  ^T  ^qr  ^r  %n.^^  ^r  5^*   Jo 

ni  dbowa  apanu  mukba  so  kya  karau  baika  ko  sukba. 

He  who  cannot  wash  his  o-wn  face,  how  can  he   he   of 
any  use  to  another  ? 

An  idle  man  is  of  service  to  nobody. 

17  ^ts  ^  ^^  %I^T^^  IST  %^1 11^1  ^rw  sfiHl^T  ^r^T. 

Randa  ko  sanda  saudagara  ko  gborba  kbalo  bbauta  kamalo 

tborba. 

The  son  of  a  widow  and  the  pony  of  a  merchant  eat 
much  but  earn  little. 

A  widow's  son  is  petted  and  lives  in  idleness,  and  a 
merchant's  (riding)  horse  has  but  little  work  to  do.  Also  used  of 
an  indolent  fellow  who  boasts  much  but  does  little  work. 

18  ip[^^  f^ M«     Musbala  cbanda  pbirau. 

Moving  like  a  pestle  ; 

Applied  to  a  vagrant  person,     "A  rolling  stone," 


{     185     ) 

19  ?fffT  ^T  ^%m  ^^  ^  "K^l'      Kuwa  ka  mendaka  kuwa 
me  ray  a. 

The  frogs  who  live  in  a  well  remain  in  the  well  for  ever. 

Applied  to  people  who  never  leave  their  homes  but  remain  in 
one  place  during  their  whole  life. 

The  following  story  is  told  to  illustrate  the  effects  of 
such  a  life. 

Story.  Some  men,  who  had  never  moved  out  of  their 
village  before,  once  went  to  another  village  in  order  to  get  one 
of  their  sons  married  to  a  maiden  of  that  place.  They  arrived 
there  in  the  evening.  The  marriage  had  to  be  performed  in  the 
latter  part  of  the  night.  But  soon  after  their  arrival  they  saw 
the  moon  in  the  sky,  and  supposing  that  the  moon  belonged  to 
their  village  only,  and  no  other  village  had  a  similar  moon  over  it, 
and  that  their  own  moon  had  been  carried  away  by  the  people  of 
this  other  village  on  the  previous  day,  all  of  them  became  angry 
and  began  to  return  home  without  performing  the  marriage 
ceremony,  charging  the  people  of  the  village  with  the  theft  of  the 
moon,  which  they  considered  exclusively  their  own.  Seeing  this 
ignorance  the  magnates  of  the  neighbourhood  became  surety  for 
returning  their  moon  to  the  village  the  next  day  under  penalty 
of  Ss-  10,000.  Having  been  thus  assured  that  their  moon  would 
be  returned  they  had  the  girl  of  their  village  married  that  night. 
On  the  next  day  they  returned  to  their  village  with  the  sureties, 
who  showed  them  the  moon  over  their  own  village,  and  were 
then  released. 

LITIGATION  &  JUSTICE. 

1  ^(^^rf  ^  ^"3^  WT^  "^T"'     Adalata  men  cLadhanu 
gadha  men  cliadhanu. 

To  have  a  case  in  court  is  like  mounting  a  donkey.    {To  be 
made  to  ride  on  an  ass  is  the  greatest  mark  of  disgrace). 

This  punishment  was  awarded  by  Hindu  or  Mahomedan 
rulers  for  the  most  atrocious  crimes.  In  like  manner  a  litigant, 
however  respectable,  while  in  court,  is  liable  to  be  put  to 
great    inconvenience     and    dishonor.       He    is    reprimanded    by 

X 


(     186     ) 

peons  for  approaching  the  officials  etc,  he  has  to  humble 
himself  before  each  petty  official  down  to  a  Chaprdsi,  besides 
having  to  attend  the  precincts  of  the  court  like  a  vagrant. 
This  kind  of  trouble  follows  him  from  the  first  to  the  last 
stage  of  the  case. 

2  '^T'*^^  IT  ^n^^-     Bapa  dewa  ya  chhapa  dewa. 
Either  father  must  give  or  the  Court. 

This  means  that  one's  own  father  is  to  give  a  man  his  right, 
if  not,  he  will  obtain  it  by  a  decision  of  a  court  of  justice  bearing 
its  seal  (chhapa). 

3  ^jt?  ^gtif  TT5IT    ^^''SIT*     Bapa  dewa  gaun  raja  dewa 
nyau. 

A  father  gives  a  milage  and  a  king  does  justice. 

I.  e.  A  father  is  expected  to  give  his  property  to  his  son, 
and  the  king  to  do  justice  to  his  subjects. 

4  ^jjj  ^T^^T  ^^  ^3  ''if^  ^W'     Baga  bakaro  eka  ghata 
-pani  piwa. 

The  leopard  and  the  goat  drinlc  water  at  the  same  pool. 

This  proverb  is  cited  to  represent  good  government  by 
■which  the  strong  are  kept  from  oppressing  the  weak. 

5  «B$lff  f^f%  ^^t  ^  «5T'^  «B?TTTf«      Kanodi  billi  chuhon 
mu  kana  katarawa. 

The  ears  of  an  entrapped  eat  are  gnawed  by  rats. 

Used  to  denote  one  who  becomes  partial  in  his  judgments, 
or  connives  at  the  wrong  actions  of  one  to  ■whom  he  may  be  some 
way  or  other  under  obligation. 

6  fyi  %J  fyi  V\'m  %I  "^Tf^-     Dudha  ko  dudha  pani  ko 
paui. 

Milk  by  itself  and  loater  by  itself. 


(     187     ) 

Applied  to  impartial  justice.  In  legal  cases  truth  and  false- 
hood are  mixed  up  as  milk  mixed  with  vater  looks  like  milk,  but 
the  judge  separates  the  truth  from  the  falsehood  and  thus  gives 
real  justice. 

Stoi-i/.  A  man  owed  Jis-  5,000  to  another  as  a  simple  debt. 
The  money  when  demanded  having  been  refused  by  the  debtor  was 
sued  for  by  the  creditor  in  a  court  of  justice.  There  the  debtor 
denied  having  owed  anything  at  all  to  the  plaintiff.  The  plain- 
titf's  statement  was  that  there  was  no  other  person  present  when 
the  money  was  lent.  After  considering  the  case  the  judge  asked 
the  plaintiff  whether  there  was  any  animal  there  at  the  time,  to 
which  query  the  plaintiff  replied  that  there  was  a  cat.  The 
eat  was  ordered  to  be  brought  before  the  court.  When  the  cat 
was  placed  he  took  it  into  his  bosom  and  began  to  caress  it.  Just 
at  this  moment  the  defendant  exclaimed  that  that  cat  was  not 
present  at  the  time  (meaning  that  the  one  present  at  the  time  was 
some  other  cat).  From  this  the  judge  at  once  concluded  that  the 
plaintiff  was  in  the  right,  and  after  further  inquiry,  which  still 
further  convinced  him,  he  gave  judgment  accordingly. 

Compare  the  story  of  Solomon's  judgment.     I  Kings  iii. 

N^ote.  The  expression  Dudha  ka  diidha,  pani  ka  pani.  "Milk 
of  milk,  water  of  water,"  is  also  used  to  denote  the  best  part  or 
essence  of  anything.     "CrSme  de  la  creme." 

7  'il^T  "l^^r  ^Tf  '^TSIT^^  %T  ^J^'  Panso  parha  so  ddwa 

raja  kara  bo  nyawa. 

Dice  will  the    bet,   and  whatever   the  king   does  is~ 
Justice. 

This  is  used  in  representing  the  decision  of  a  king  as 
inevitable  and  final. 

8  'XfT  ^^^ml  sqTf  'J^T^T*     Puta  apano  nyaw'a  parayo. 

The  judge  must  not  favour  the  offender  even  if  he  is- 
his  men  son. 


(     188    ) 

^^51  51%I  ^^r-       Sbyala  kasi  buddhi  syu  kaso  tarana, 

duba    kasi    jarha,     dharati    ko    jaso    chharha,    akaaha 

jaso   ucho. 

The  cleverness  of  a  fox,  the  courage  of  a  lion,  the  roof 
of  Duba  grass,  (Bent  grass,  parricum  dactylon  or  cynodon 
dactylon)  for  its  evergreen  and  spreading  nature,  the  length 
and  breadth  of  the  earth,  and  the  height  of  the  heavens 
are  proverbial,  and  all  these  toishedfor  by  mothers  for  their 
sons  as  blessings. 

The  cunning  of  the  fox  is  often  illustrated  by  the  following 
two  stories. 

Stori/  No.  J.  Once  a  leopard  was  caught  in  a  trap  set  in  a 
jungle.  A  Pandita  passing  near  was  asked  by  the  animal  to 
extricate  him.  But  the  man  said,  "If  I  release  you,  you  will  kill 
and  eat  me."  The  leopard  swore  on  his  honor  not  to  injure  bis 
benefactor.  So  the  animal  was  set  free.  But  no  sooner  was  he 
(the  leopard)  at  liberty  than  he  leapt  upon  the  man  who  entreated 
the  animal  not  to  kill  him  after  he  had  so  generously  liberated  him. 
The  contest  continuing  for  some  time,  at  last  both  parties  sub- 
mitted their  case  to  the  arbitration  of  a  cow,  the  Ganges,  a  snake, 
and  a  fox.  The  cow  condemned  the  man,  saying  that  he  receired 
immense  benefit  from  her,  yet  beat  and  starved  her.  The  Ganges  also 
concurred  with  the  cow,  saying  that  men  were  purified  by  her 
water,  which  they  drink  and  make  use  of  in  various  ways,  yet 
do  not  forbear  from  throwing  filth  into  her.  The  snake  also 
delivered  the  same  judgment,  declaring  that  men  first  of  all  provoke 
him,  and  then  kill  him  unjustly.  Then  came  the  fox's  turn  to 
pronounce  judgment,  who,  after  patiently  hearing  the  findings  of 
the  other  arbitrators,  expressed  a  wish  to  see  the  position  from 
which  the  leopard  had  been  extricated.  All  therefore  went  to  the  place> 
and  desired  the  leopard  to  lie  within  the  trap  once  more,  so  that  the 
arbitrators  might  have  an  idea  of  the  facts  of  the  case.  As  soon 
as  he  did  so,  the  fox,  to  the  great  admiration  of  the  other  arbi- 
trators, said  justice  demanded  that  each  party  should  remain  where 
he  was,  and  toll  the  man  to  go  his  way,  leaving  the  leopard 
in  the  trap. 


(  189  ; 

Story  No.  2,  Once  a  traveller  met  a  fox,  who  asked  the 
traveller  where  he  was  going  to.  The  reply  was  "Be  oiF,  you 
jackal  ;  don't  meddle  with  me."  The  fox  went  away  saying  that 
though  he  treated  hirn  with  contempt  then,  he  would  afterwards 
feel  the  need  of  his  help.  At  night  the  traveller  reached  a  cetain 
village  and  there  he  stopped,  tying  his  pony  to  the  Kolu  (the  oil 
press).  The  villagers  wishing  to  rob  him  of  his  horse  gave  out 
that  their  oil-press  had  given  birth  to  a  pony,  and  in  order  to  make 
the  story  public  they  distributed  sweetmeats  and  congratulated 
each  other  on  the  event.  Next  morning  when  the  stranger  was 
about  to  unloose  his  pony,  he  was  stopped  and  told  that  the  pony 
was  the  offspring  of  their  oil-press.  The  stranger  was  obliged  to 
have  recourse  to  the  king  for  justice,  who,  during  the  investigation 
of  the  case,  ordered  the  stranger  to  produce  his  witness  the  fox. 
When  the  stranger  went  to  call  the  fox  the  fox  said  he  would  go  to 
the  king  and  give  evidence,  but  he  wanted  the  man  to  carry  him 
on  his  shoulders  Cas  a  revenge  for  the  contemptuous  treatment 
he  had  received  from  the  man^  for  fear  of  the  city  dogs  which  would 
kill  him.  As  soon  as  the  fox  arrived  in  the  court  of  the  king  he 
feigned  to  dose.  The  king  asked  him  why  he  was  so  sleepy.  The 
fox  said  "Sire,  I  could  not  sleep  last  night,  as  the  sea  had  caught 
fire,  and  I  was  engaged  all  night  in  quenching  the  fire."  The  king 
laughed  at  the  fox,  and  said  "How  could  the  sea  catch  fire,  it  is 
impossible."  To  this  the  fox  replied  "Sire,  how  can  lifeless  wood 
give  birth  to  a  pony  ?"  This  stopped  further  proceedings,  and  the 
king  ordered  the  pony  to  be  made  over  to  the  traveller. 

10  %^7  f«i^  ^%T  (q^«    Jaiko  binda  taiko  pinda. 

The  body  is  his  of  whose  seed  it  is  created. 

The  son  belongs  to  father  and  the  girl  to  the  mother,  for  it 
is  said  that  a  son  is  born  out  of  the  father's  element  and  a  girl  out 
of  the  mother's 


11  «([Zl^  tai^r  %rfT^  ^^T^.  Banta  ten  khano  worha 
ten  lawano. 

One  must  eat  one's  own  allotted  portion  only,  and  reap 
crops  up  to  the  boundary  mark  ( i.  e.  in  one's  own 
field  only  ). 


(     190     ) 

This  is  made  use  of  when  one  trespasses  on  another's  right. 
Food  is  divided  out  carefully  among  the  different  members  of  a 
poor  family. 

12  ^jvij  JTT^  ^t  jf)"  ^7JX  Hiq  ^t'^*    Mana  matha  gaun 
ni  athara  matha  daun  ni. 

No  village  beyond  Mdnd  (a  village  in   the  snowy  range 
in  Garhwdl)  and  no  number  {of  dice)  above  eighteen. 

E.  g.  There  are  only  eighteen  spots  in  dice,  and  Mana  is 
the  last  village  on  the  Mana  Pass  route  to  Thibet.  This  proverb  is 
also  found  in  another  form,  viz.  that  "no  flesh  can  he  found  beyond 
one's  nails." 

This  is  used  to  denote  the  highest  court  one  can  appeal  to, 
or  the  last  remedy  one  has  tried  with  a  view  to  obtain  justice. 
"Ne  plus  ultra." 

13  51^  ^^  ^^  ^^'^      Jasai  mukha  usai  thaparha. 

As  the  face  so  the  blow. 

E.  g.  Strike  a  little  child  a  little  blow,  a  big  man  a  big  blow  j 
or,  people  of  the  same  station  should  act  according  to  that 
station,  or  as  the  crime  so  is  the  punishment.  As  the  man  so  is 
the  work. 

14  ^rqig  ^^T  ^T^r  'l'':^^^  ^  ^T^*      Apanu  suno  khoto 

parakhanera  ke  dokha. 

It  is  no  fault  of  the   assayer  when  one's  own  gold  i» 

counterfeit. 

This  proverb  is  generally  used  of  one  who  rightly  loses  his 
case  or  gets  himself  punished  for  his  real  guilt  by  a  court  of 
justice.    (A  guilty  conscience  needs  no  accuser^. 

15  ejijcj'l)-  %  ^f''^  ^3(5i  ^-     Kakarbi  ko  cbora  muthagi 
glaau. 


(     191     ) 

Theft  of  d  cucnmher  should  be  punished  with  one  stroke 
or  Mow. 

This  means  to  say  thai  light  offences  should  meet  with  light 
punishment  but  should  not  be  allowed  to  go  unpunished. 

The  cucumber  is  the  cheapest  of  all  vegetables  and  is  freely 
given  away. 


IVIANAGEMENT    (bad). 

1  ^^  SR  ^^«!T«T«  ^^  H^f%  ^^  *l[«I.      Unne  nuna  unne 

nana  unne  wakbali  unne  dhana. 

As  the  nuna  so  is  I^dna,  as  the  mortar  so  the  dhdna 
(  paddy  ). 

The  members  of  a  certain  household  and  the  arrangement 
of  their  work  or  business  are  equally  bad.  Niina  and  Nana  are 
proper  names,    "Tweedledum  and  tweedledee." 

2  T7%^  ^T^fl  I'^^T*     ^'^^  kheti  salama  pabaro. 
Sis  village  is  in  Rau,  and  he  keeps  guard  in  Salama, 

E.  g.  "Rau"  is  ten  miles  distant  from  the  place  known 
as  "Salama." 

This  is  used  of  one  who  lives  away  from  the  place  where  his 
business  is,  which  in  consequence  suffers  loss.  C.  f.  The  master's 
eye  makes  the  horse  fat."  Rau,  a  patti  (tract  or  Putwari  circle) 
of  Parganna  Kali  (eastern)  Kumaun,  and  Salama  that  of  Chau- 
garkha  Zillah,  Kumaun. 

3  ^rg  ^T  ^75  ^  ^"T^T^  ^'i  "^^Tf^  'S-      Satu  raigyo 

sasu  mu  saparhaka  raige  buwari  mu. 

Sdtu  {flour  of  parched  grain)  is  with  the  moiher-in-law 
hut  the  dexterity  (  sicill  in  management  )  is  in  the 
daughter -in-laio. 


(     192     ) 

E.  g.  The  persoa  in  charge  of  property  is  not  competent  to 
manage  it,  but  the  one  who  has  the  wit  to  manage  it  is  not  in 
charge  of  the  property. 

f%g  f^T-     Sasu  le  buwari  thain  kayo  buwari  le  kukura 

thain  kayo  kukura  le  puchharha  hilai  diyo. 

The  mother-in-law  told  her  daughter-in-law  to  do  some- 
thing, the  latter,  instead  of  doing  it,  told  the  dog,  and  the  dog 
in  turn  refused  to  do  it  by  moving  its  tail. 

Want  of  control  in  a  honsehold. 

5  «R?rTi'Spflf%  ^Z  =^'31'^  ^  ^n^^*       Asliarfina  ki  luta 

kwelana  me  mohara. 

Gold  mohars  are  allowed  to  he  stolen,  hut  charcoal  is 
kept  carefully  sealed  up. 

"Penny-wise  and  pound-foolish." 

6  sm  ^^3  W'n'fT  ^IT  (%5I  ^fJT'fl*     l^ya  me  khala  khanu 

ta  aura  dina  ke  khanu. 

When  chaff  is  given  to  be  eaten  on  a  marriage  day  what 
will  be  given  on  other  days  ? 

Either  great  poverty  or  great  stinginess. 

7  f^^X.  TTf^  n\^'     Bigara  rau  ki  mauni. 

A  swarm  of  bees  without  a  Rao  {queen  or  leader). 

Bees  that  have  no  queen  to  lead  them  are  scattered  here  and 
there,  but  those  that  have  a  queen  keep  together. 

Applied  to  subjects  without  a  ruler,  or  children  without 
parents,  &c. 


f     193    ) 

8  •rrtffi  I^T'T  3T|}^  ^r^T.  I^al  ki  barata  thakurai  thakura. 

In  the  marriage  procession  of  a  barber  every  one 
invited  thinks  himself  a  lord  Cos  the  barber  is  every- 
body's servant ) . 

Applied  to  a  household  or  company  which  fails  because  none 
of  the  members  work  or  help,  all  considering  themselves 
to  be  masters. 

9  IT^  *it  ^'^  r?f%    VT*      HathI  kl  larhain  indaki 

barha. 

An  elephant  fight  within  a  railing  made  of  the 
castor-oil  tree. 

Applied   to   small   or   ridiculous   preparations   for   a   great 
business  or  undertaking. 

10  ^^  IS  ^^  ^T  ^^If  ^■';-      JaikI  chha  dara  so  nichlia 
gbara. 

The  one  I  am,  afraid  of  is  not  at  home. 

Applied  to  mismanagement  in  a  house  owing  to  the  absence 
of  the  head  of  the  family.  "W^en  the  cat  is  away  the  mice 
will  play. 

11  •^^  •^^\^J  ^T  ^\w  ^T  ^{fk  T^w.  I^tgi^r  %?i5rr 

^T^TIT'fi"  ^H.     Tina  lulaya  tera  aya  dekbau  yanki  i  ita. 
bbaira  wala  khaigayagbara  ka  gani  gita. 

Three  were  invite^'  ^ut  thirteen  came.  See  the  custom 
of  this  place.  Th strangers  ate  up  the  food,  but  those 
of  the  house  had  t  sing  for  it. 

Used  with  re^rd  to  unwelcome  guests  who  come  in  nn- 
expectedly  just  for  ^e  sake  of  a  meal,  and  to  want  of  proper 
management  in  oe's  household  or  business.  C.  /.  "Charity 
begins  at  home." 


(     194    ) 

12  %r  f^  %Tf^^t  (h  '?r<r»      Sau  ki  sau  biyan  ki.nata. 

One  liundi'ed  from  one  hundred,  no  seed  left. 

1.  e.    If  the  whole    is    taken    or   spent   nothing    remains    for 
further  use  (or  for  seed). 

Applied  to  bad  management. 

13  5:2B  '^':  ^T  ^T^TrTT  ^31^  ^t  "^f?  %7f^«     Eka  ghara  kri 
nau  mata  kushala  kan  bati  holi. 

A  household  which  is  governed  hy  nine   (different) 
opinions  tcill  not  thrive. 

C.  f.    "A  house  divided  against  itself  cannot  stand.  " 

MEANNESS. 

1  ^?T%^T^f^T  ^TSfFT  ^ '5^^^.      Damarbi  ko  sauda 

bazara  men  khalabala. 

One  in  purchasing  only   ^   of  a  pice   toorth   makes  a 
great  noise  throughout  the  bazaar. 

Applies  to  dealings  with  a  mean  man.     Very   small   dealings 
in  business. 

2  3ig%  WlZ'i  ^9%  ^rST"    Jatikai  cbboto  utukai  kboto. 
The  meaner  the  man  the  more  wicked  he  is. 

3  ^imr  1^  '^^T^T*     Fauna  pucbLf_  pakorba. 

He  asks  a  guest  who  is  a  relative  whether  he  should 
cook  cakes  for  him. 

The  guest,  though  naturally  willing  to, e  feasted  splendidly, 
cannot  without  impoliteness  express  his  wisl  If  the  host  puts 
such  a  question  to  hira  he  does  it  with  somemean  or  impudent 
motive.  Hence  the  proverb  is  applied  to  onevho  does  a  foolish 
and  unnecessary  thing  or  acts  with  the  ifention  of  putting 
another  to  shame. 


(     195     ) 

4  ITf^  f^'TrT^T  ^^.t  f%  ■^efi^T-     Pani  si  patalo  dhunwan  si 
bakalo. 

Thin  like  water  hut  thick  Wee  smoke. 

Used  of  a  mean-minded  and  selfish  set  of  people  who  to 
ohtaiu  their  own  ends  become  very  humble,  but  when  others  look 
to  them  for  favours,  turn  haughty  and  offensive. 

5  Jig]?r  "^[fil  ?f  ^c5  f%T  ^»I  »TT^^%^.     Gulama  Lathi  me 

chadha  phira  laga  madhara  cboda. 

A  slave  though  mounted  on  an  elephant  is  nevertheless 
a  mean  man. 

Men  of  low  descent  or  family  however  great  they  may 
become,  are  to  be  suspected  and  dreaded. 

6  ^iS^T  %T  ^"l  'S'?5'5!iT^'^T^.      Apbula  ko  dhana  daphua 

le  baja. 

The  little  wealth  of  a  mean  persoti  is  made  public  hy 
the  beat  of  a  drum. 

Used  as  a  caution  against  borrowing  from  or  dealing  "with 
one  who  is  mean-hearted  and  has  very  little  wealth. 

7  ^^T^^  ^r  "WTW  ^'i  %^T'JT'      Kacbyara  me  dhimgo 

balo  mukba  ai  lago. 

Throw  a  stone  into   the  mud  and  you  splash  your 
own  face. 

I.  e.  Direct  communication  or  conversation  or  dealing  with 
vile  persons  should  be  carefully  avoided. 

C.  f.    "You  cannot  touch  pitch  and  not  be'  defiled." 

MERITORIOUS  ACTS,  GOODNESS  OR  VIRTUE. 

1  ^T'3'^  T^T  ^T  VW*     Ankhara  bbalo  ko  bbalo. 
A  good  man's  end  is  good. 


(     196     ) 

2  Ht^^  H^^sf  ft^T  ^^  ^J^  ^7Tf%mT«    Bhikha  me  bhi- 
kha  dino  tin  a  loka  jita  lino, 

Se  who  gives  alms  out  of  what  he  has  received  as 
alms  {begged)  wins  three  worlds. 

This  proverb  is  generally  quoted  to  encourage  a  poor  person 
to  give  alms  or  support  others. 

3  v^  \w\  ^Wlt  ftw*     Bliuji  bono  satai  dino. 

To  bestow  an  alms  after  many  repulses  is  like  sowing 
parched  grain,  i.  e.  bears  no  fruit. 

C.  f.  "He  doubles  his  gift,  who  gives  in  time."      "He  gives 
twice,  that  gives  in  a  trice."     "The  Lord  loveth  a   cheerful  giver." 

4  ^jf  %t  ^^[51  ^T  ^t  9^if^»     Swarga  son  teka  ni  dharma 

son  chlieka  ni. 

Seaven  {the  sky)  needs  no  propSy  and  a  virtuous  act 
needs  no  special  time,  or  an  alms  needs  no  future 
promises  (for  its  performance  J . 

This   is   used   to  encourage  on«  to  do-  good  deeds  without 
procrastination. 

5  r«.w  t'l'WT'51  'W  fS^IWT       Nitya  nimana  dharma  thi- 

kana. 

Only  one  who   is  free  from  pride  always  can  he 
{truly)  religious. 

6  z§\  ^«T  *^  ffi"  (si^l^I*      Tuti  lagau  para  jhuti  ni 
lagau. 

Zet  poe^rtff  ee^ie,  but  do  not  be  dishonest. 
'■Tell  the  truth  sad  shame  the  devil." 

7  w  %^S  «t^  \ii  17^  fr?  «»i  fsiii^fSj  w  ^  ^Tf5r- 

Dharma  karnai  karnai  liai  jau  hani  taba  laga  ni  chharhani 
dharma  ki  bani. 

Follow  righteousness   stedfastly   though  you  may  be 
injured  by  it. 


(     197     ) 

Story.      There  was  a  very  poor   Brahmin    beggar   in   the 
kingdom  of  a  certain  king  who  was  noted  far  and   wide    for  his 
munificence  and  virtue.     The  Brahmin  and  his  wife  being  entirely 
destitute  used  to  live  on  wild  roots  and  vegetables.     Hearing  that 
the  king    gave    money   to   every   beggar    who    went   to  •  him,   the 
Brahmin  was  constantly  urged  by  his  wife  to  go   to  the   king  and 
ask   for   alms.     But    he    always    refused.       At   last   having   been 
prevailed  upon  and  compelled  by  his   wife,   he   went   to   the   king 
one  day  and   stood   before   him,   but  did  not   ask  for  any  thing. 
On    the    King's   offering    to     give    him    a   quantity    of    Rupees 
the  poor  man  refused  to  accept  them,  saying  that  it  would   injure 
him   in   his   next  stage   of    existence.      Seeing  him   so   firm   and 
determined  in  bis    refusal   the   king   was  very  grieved   and   asked 
him  to  accept  something  again  and  again.     At  length  the  Brahmin 
said  that  be  would  not  take  the  money  for  nothing,  but  if  it  would 
please  the  king  to  buy  a   certain   thing  from   him   he  would  then 
accept  the  money  as  payment.     The  king  agreed  to  this   proposal. 
Then  the  Brahmin  said  that  he  had   nothing  else  but  his   poverty, 
■which  he  would  sell  for  three  lacs   of  rupees.      On   this  the  king 
ordered  three  lacs  of  rupees  to  be  paid  to  the  poor    man  and  bought 
his  poverty  from  him.     The  Brahmin  departed.     Immediately  after 
the  bargain  was  completed  the  king's  wealth  disappeared  from   his 
treasury,    his   kingdom    was    encroached    upon    by   neighbouring 
kings,   who  left   him    nothing   but   his    own   house.      There    was 
constant  quarrelling  and  estrangement  among  the  members   of  his 
family.     One  night,  while  he  was  sitting  in  front  of  his  house  and 
broodinc  over  his  misfortunes,  a  beautiful  woman  clothed  in  red 
came  out  of  his  palace  and  asked  leave  of  him  to  go  elsewhere, 
saying  that  she  was  Wealth  and  could  not  remain  in  his  house  on 
account  of  the  poverty  he  had  bought.     The  king  gave  her  per- 
mission to  go,  and  she  went  away.     After  half  an  hour  another 
■woman  in  a  black  robe  came  out  of  his  house  and  craved  his  per- 
mission to  go,  saying  that  she  was  his  Empire  and  she   could  not 
stay  with  the  poverty  he  had  purchased.     The  king  told   her  to  go 
and  she  also  went  away.     After  a  similar  interval  a  third  woman  in 
•white  clothes  came  out  of  his  door,  who  also   went  away   with  the 
permission  of  the  king,  saying  that  she  was  his  Wisdom,  that  she 
departed  because  he  had  embraced  poverty.     After  this  an  old  man 
came  out  of  the  king's  house  and  asked  permission  to   go   saying 
that  he  was  Righteousness    or  Virtue,   and    he   wished   to   depart 
from  his  house  on  account   of  the    poverty   he   had   bought.     The 
king   however   refused   him   permission,   for,   he   said,   how  could 
righteousness  forsake  him   when  the   poverty  was  purchased  only 
for  his  sake  ?     Righteousness  could  give  no  reply  to  this  reasoning 
of  the  king,  but  having  been  convinced  of  its  force  re-entered  his 


(     198     ) 

house  and  stopped  there.  Later  on  the  three  women  alluded  to  also 
returned  to  his  palace,  but  the  king  forbade  them  to  enter.  On 
this  they  all  entreated  him  to  let  them  into  his  house  where  their 
husband  Righteousness  was  living.  They  said  they  left  his 
house  as  their  husband  (Righteousness)  was  also  to  leave  it,  but 
since  he  did  not  leave  it  they  must  return  to  remain  with  him  for 
ever.  Then  they  were  also  allowed  to  enter  the  house  and  remain 
with  their  husband.  After  this  he  became  an  emperor  instead 
of  a  king,  and  possessed  of  incalculable  wealth. 

8  sjf  VT*t!  51^0     Jii^  dbarma  tan  jaya. 

JFliere  virtue,  there  victory. 

I.  e.  Where  there  is  honesty,  truthfulness,  and  godliness 
there  victory  is  sure  and  certain. 

9  ^j  ^^  ^Tj^  ^^  ^(%  1'«:f%«      Sau  gharbi  gbara  ki  eka 

gharbi  haraki. 

One  hundred  gharhis  (  2^  gharhis  inahe  an  hour  )    to 
the  house  and  one  to  God. 

This  means  that  out  of  the  abundance  of  time  spent  on  one's 
own  business  a  few  minutes  should  be  dovoted  to  the  worship 
of  God. 

10  ^mi  T^^  ^^     TT"^^"      Punya    rekha   men  mekha 

maranchha. 

Meritorious    acts     drive    a    nail    into    the    line    of 
evil   destiny. 

I.  e.  Into  the  sutures  of  the  skull  which  are  supposed  to 
record  one's  fate.     The  nail  obliterates  the  writing. 

Story :  There  was  a  pious  man  who  had  no  son  ;  he  longed 
for  one  very  much,  but  in  vain.  Once  a  saint  came  to  his  house, 
to  whom  also  he  prayed  that  he  might  have  a  son.  The  saint, 
in  order  to  find  out  whether  or  not  the  man  would  have  children, 
went  first  to  Brahma,  and  on  Brahma's  replying  to  his  query 
in  the  negative,  went  to  Mahadeva,  who  also  told  him  that  there 
were  no  children  decreed  in  the  pious  man's  fate.  After  this  the 
saint  repaired  to  Vishnu  for  the  same  purpose  and  received  a 
similar  reply.  Then  the  saint  came  back  to  the  devout  man  and 
informed  him  of  his  fate,  and  then  went  away.     A  few  years   after 


f     199     ) 

this  event  another  saint  came  to  the  house  of  the  religious  man, 
and  complaining  of  hunger  told  the  man  he   would    have  as    many 
sons  born  to  him  as  he  would  give  loaves  of  bread.      The   pions 
man  gave  him  five  loaves  for  his  meal    which   he   ate  up  and  then 
went  away.     In  due  time  five  sous   were   born   to   the   good   man. 
The  first  saint  after  some  time  came   back  to    the    pious    man    and 
was  amazed  to  find    him   possessed    of  five    sons,    contrary   to    the 
prediction.    And  consequently  he  became  very  angry,  and  regarded 
the  aforesaid   three   deities   as    liars.       Being   indignant    he    went 
straight  to  the  highest  God   Vishnu.     As  soon   as   he  approached 
the  God  ho  found  him  very  ill  (a  form  assumed  by  illusion  in  order 
to  pacify  the  saint).     Finding  Vishnu  in  such  a   state   the    saint's 
anger  subsided,   and  he   asked    Vishnu   "0    God,  thou  hast  never 
before  become  sick  :   now  what  medicine  will  cure  thee  ?"     To  this 
Vishnu  said,  "I  can  be  cured  only  by  the  blood  of  saints."     So  tho 
saint  went  to  other  saints  with  a  cup  to  bring  their   blood   in,   and 
asked  them  for    their  blood.       Each    of  the    saints    after    hearing 
the  sad  news  gave  each  a  drop   of  blood   from   his  own   body,   and 
on  the  first  saint's  demanding  more,  all  of  them  said  that  he   could 
get  more  from  his  own  body  since  he  also  was   a   saint.     The   saint 
then  came  back  to  Vishnu  with  a  little   dried  blood   which  Vishnu 
rejected  because  there  was  so    little,    and    it   was    dry.     Then    the 
saint  said  that  he  could  not    get   more.      On  this   Vishnu   pointed 
out  another  saint  in  the  neighbourhood,   and   told   the   saint    to  go 
to  that  one  and  bring  a  cupful  of  fresh  blood.     The  saint   "went  to 
the  hermit,  and  after  representing  the  whole  matter  to   him   asked 
for  his  blood.       No    sooner    had    he    heard  this    than  the   hermit, 
to  the  utter  astonishment  of  the   saint,    gladly    cut   his    own   body 
in  several  places,  and   filled   up  the   cup.      Immediately  the   saint 
saw  Vishnu  standing  before  him,  and  heard  these  words.   "0  saint, 
behold  the  hermit  who  spared   nothing  for   me,   shall  I   not  cause 
his  words  to  turn  out  true  in   that  he   promised   five    sons   to    the 
pious  man.     You  have  been  to   so   many   saints  and   you  j'ourself 
are  a  saint,    yet   none    has   furnished    me   with    his   blood    except 
this  hermit." 

11  ^ji?  fli  51^  ^^.     Dharma  ki  jarha  hari. 
The  root  of  virtue  is  perennial. 

Story :  There  was  a  pious  man  in  a  certain  town.  He 
devoted  36  years  of  his  life  to  the  service  of  God  and  led  a  life 
of  piety  and  righteousness.  After  this  a  son  was  born  to  him, 
concerning  v/hom  God  informed  the  man  that  he  would  live  only 
12  years.     This  made  the  parents  sad   and    anxious.     When   the 


(    200    ) 

boy  became  8  years  old  he  one  day  asked  his  parents  why  they 
were  always  so  dejected  and  sad.  The  parents  at  first  wisely  and 
prudently  refused  to  acquaint  him  with  the  real  state  of  affairs, 
apprehending  that  their  doing  so  would  dispirit  him,  but  on  his 
persisting  to  know  the  matter  they  disclosed  the  secret  to  him. 
On  this,  the  son,  seeing  that  he  had  shortly  to  die,  left  his  home 
and  went  on  pilgrimage,  resigning  himself  to  the  will  of  Providence. 
While  thus  journeying  he  was  seen  by  a  king  who  was  about  to 
marry  an  ugly  faced  son  to  a  fair  damsel  of  another  king.  As  this 
boy  was  very  beautiful  the  king  requested  him  to  do  him  the 
service  of  taking  the  place  of  his  own  son  in  the  marriage 
ceremony.  The  custom  is  that  the  son  goes  with  a  procession 
of  men  to  the  house  of  the  father  of  the  girl  who  is  to  be  married. 
After  visiting  the  girl  in  her  house  he  returns  to  his  own  house 
with  the  bride.  If  the  son  is  found  to  be  defective  in  his  person 
at  the  time  of  the  ceremony  the  proposed  marriage  is  rejected  by 
the  father  of  the  girl.  In  that  case  the  bridegroom  has  to  return 
home  without  completing  the  marriage,  which  is  considered  a  great 
disgrace.  So  the  short  lived  boy  was  taken  along  with  the 
marriage  procession  to  the  house  of  the  other  king,  to  whose 
daughter  the  king's  ugly  son  had  been  espoused.  Then  the 
marriage  of  the  girl  was  celebrated  with  the  beautiful  boy,  and 
the  procession  returned  homeward.  During  the  first  stage  the 
short-lived  boy  was  dismissed  by  the  king,  but,  on  seeing  this, 
the  bride  also  deserted  the  camp  and  followed  her  bridegroom. 
By  this  time  the  appointed  twelve  years  of  the  boy's  life  were 
nearly  ended,  and  so  he  went  towards  the  Himalayan  snows  to  die 
there.  (^The  belief  is  that  one  who  dies  in  the  snows  will  go  to 
paradise).  But  while  there  he  was  seen  by  the  deities,  who  having 
pity  on  the  very  young  pair  were  anxious  to  avert  the  boy's  death. 
The  age  of  the  girl  was  found  to  be  fixed  at  120  years,  and  so  they 
found  a  way  to  increase  the  boy's  age  to  72  years  by  taking  60 
years  from  the  age  of  his  wife,  to  whom  only  50  years  more 
were  then  left,  during  which  period  they  lived  happily  together 
and  were  also  blessed  with  offspring. 

12  %I5l^tfil^  r.mj  m'S^^\(mm  ^mxj  m.     Dhan  sanjika 
rajja  ku  jyu  sanjika  jyura  ku. 

Money  gathered  or  saved  is  sure  to  he  confiscated  by  a 
king,  {as  was  the  custom  in  the  time  of  native  rulers), 
and  the  body  carefully  nourished  is  certain  to  be  seized 
by  death. 


(     201     ) 

13  ^t«  f%i  ^Tf2  51^  ■^ft  ^Tf%  "fTiif  ^fz^sl  *     Khanda  ki 
roti  jakha  bati  torhi  takna  bati  mlthi, 

A  sugar  loaf  sweet  on  all  sides. 

Applied  to  good  and  meritorious  works  which  one  ought  to 
do  at  all  times  and  under  all  circumstances. 

14  ?i^  ^5!5[fTT  ^  ^TI  f%5r«  Gurha  anyara  me  laga  mitho. 

Treacle  is  sweet  even  in  the  darh. 

E.  g.  Good  deeds  though  done  in  secret  have  the  same  effect 
and  are  appreciated  as  much  as  if  they  had  been  done  publicly. 

Used  to  encourage  people  to  perform  good  deeds  even  in 
private. 

15  Xjmi  %\  fT'l  srsiT  ^T  ^I'i-      ^aja  ko  dana  parja  ko 
snaua. 

Maja^s  alms,  and  bathing  of  a  poor  perso7i,  are  equal. 

E.  g.  To  give  alms  is  the  duty  of  the  rich,  but  the  poor 
can  get  merit  by  bathing. 

16  ^^  ^K^l'  ^^T  f^  jIT'^'     Bhali  kari  kherba  nijani. 

Goodness    fa    good    deed  J    is    never    loasted    for 
fruitless  J. 

17  ^f%  ^j^  ^Ti:  '^if^.  wimr  ^T  ir^T  ir^  ^t^  ^^%^>  ^t. 

^«ff^  ^^[fJTr  "^^^  ^^\  papilai  phali,  dharmatma  ka  chhora 
chliori  papi  ka  hali,  para  anta  me  dharmatma  ball 

The  Kali  yuga  or  iron  age  is  prosperous  to  a  sinner 
whom  the  son  of  a  virtuous  man  serves  as  a  ploughman, 
hut  eventually  the  latter  will  he  victorious. 

Used  of  strange  and  adverse  results  and  incidents 

Z 


(     202     ) 
MIDDLE  OR  MODERATE  COURSE. 

1  ^T5  ^Tf%  T'?  ^T  TTf^^T*!*      Apun  rakhi  tapa  ghara 

rakhi  dana. 

Ferform  penance,  but  without  ruining  your  health — 
Bestow  alms  but  withoat  wasting  your  wealth. 

Be  not  "righteous  overmuch." 

2  ^if  ^T^  ^^fT  f^f<m  ^«Tt^'!  TT?  fijz  m\^wkm 

■^fTT^I.  Daiirha  daurha  jandu  ta  dburiya  batandana  mathu 
mathu  jandu  ta  sahela  batandana. 

If  I  go  quickly,  i.  e.  running,  people  think  me  a  bad 
character,  and  if  I  go  slowly  they  call  me  an  ass 
or  lazy. 

A  medium  course  is  best. 

3  f^%  ^TVT^f^^    fHxmX    7^RT  f^%  ^TT.     Siru  sira- 

■J 

dhara  biru  biradbara  tukanya  bicbe  dbara^ 

Siru  to  Siradhdra  fa  mountain  of  that  name  J, 
Biru  to  Biradhar,  and  Tukanya  in  the  middle  of  the 
two  mountains. 

There  were  three  brothers  in  a  certain  village  named  Siru, 
Biru,  and  Tukanya.  When  they  were  full-grown  Siru,  in  pursuit 
of  objects  of  his  ambition,  took  an  extreme  course  and  was  ruined, 
and  in  the  same  way  Biru,  who  took  the  other  extreme,  was  also 
ruined.  But  the  third  brother  Tukanya  always  chose  the  middle 
course  and  prospered. 

4  ^I^T  ^3^  "T^t  ^T  ^^  ^^  '^^T-     Kano  laga  garbi  jau 

pirba  lagai  ni  bo. 

The  thorn  {which  has  pricked  the  foot)  should  be 
taken  out  loithout  pain. 

Used  to  encourage  one  to  go  easily  in  all  affairs  or  to  pursue 
a  moderate  course. 


(     203     ) 
MISCELLANEOUS. 

1  '^T^^^f^T^.     Arhu  berbughingaru. 

Arhu  (^apricot),  BerJiu  (wild  figs),  and  Qhingaru. 

Wild  fruits  representing  ignorant  and  mean  people  who  are 
hardly  to  be  trusted  with  any  responsible  work. 

2  ^wr  ^^tOT  T'S'^II'nT'     Andho  aluno  pahachyanau. 

A  blind  man  can  discern  food  which  has  no  salt  in  it. 

A  man  devoid  of  one  sense  can  be  made  use  of  in  other 
ways. 

3  ^^T*t  'f  ^T'UT  ^^'    Andhana  men  kano  mira. 
A  one-eyed  man  is  a  lord  among  the  blind. 

A  figure  among  ciphers.-  A  triton  among  minnows.  A  castor 
oil  plant  is  reckoned  a  free  in  a  country  where  there  are  no 
other  trees. 

4  %^  ^TT!!   ^t^l  "''I  ^'^'      Aiba  karpa  son  laga  guna 
chainchha. 

To  commit  a  crime  even  requires  skill. 

This  proverb  is  often  cited  when  an  offender  evades  detection 
and  punishment. 

5  f%^V^  m^^  m^  ^Tf%  ^T2^.      Bina  guru  bata  nl 

bina  kourhi  Lata  ni. 

iVb  way  (to  heaven)  without  a  spiritual  guide,  and  no 
marhet  (purchaser)  without  coivries  (i.  e.  money). 

This  is  often  made  use  of  by  one  coming  to  market  without 
any  money  with  him.  Villagers  when  urged  by  their  wives  to  go 
to  town  and  purchase  necessaries  strengthen  their  refusal  by  this 
phrase.  This  proverb  also  reminds  them  of  their  need  of  a 
spiritual  guide. 


(     204     ) 

6  vg  ^efi^T  ^1^1151  »tlf .     Blmla  chuka  ko  bharadwaja 
gotra. 

One    who    does    not    know   Ms   own   descent    [gotra) 
belongs  to  the  JShdradiodjagotra. 

This  is  applied  to  one  who  is  of  low  birth  but  becomes  a  great 
or  notahle  man,  or  to  one  who  justifies  his  actions  and  mistakes 
by  quoting  or  inventing  traditions  ■which  cannot  be  gainsaid. 

7  >rg  f«i'5^  5TIWT  t^T«     Bhula  bisara  janau  Ishwara. 

Unconscious  errors  and  mistakes   are  known   to    God. 

This  is  a  phrase  used  by  pious  persons  as  a  prayer  for 
forgiveness.  Also  by  those  who  have  done  their  best  in  any 
undertaking,  as  an  excuse  for  any  mistakes  or  imperfections. 

nyafa  ki  ni  jana  kyata  parawana  bingi  nijana. 

He  who  does  not  know  how  to  tie  up  his  oion  pantaloons, 
what  kind  of  a  chief  will  he  make  ?  He  will  not 
understand  his  people. 

This  is  applied  to  the  head  of  a  community  who  does  not 
know  even  how  to  look  after  his  own  private  affairs,  and  is  an 
incompetent  ruler. 

9  ■^ifi  ^T  ^f^^^IJ]  ^C!  %T  ^f%^  ■^11.     Baika  ko  dekb- 
yun  taga  syaini  ko  dekbyun  baga. 

A  vegetable  seen  by  a  man  and  a  tiger  seen  by  a 
woman  are  not  to  be  trusted,  i.  e.  should  be  considered 
as  false  reports. 

In  villages  the  women  cultivate  the  small  fields  of  vegetables 
near  their  houses,  and  the  men  know  nothing  about  them.  So  a 
man  who  professes  to  know  where  a  certain  vegetable  is  to  be 
found  is  not  to  be  believed  any  more  than  a  woman  who  says  sho 
has  seen  a  ti"er. 


(     205     ) 

10  ^T^  ^ife^T  ^T  *TT^T«     Hatha  katiyo  ko  bbarho. 
Oiie  has  to  pay  for  having  his  own  hands  cut  off. 

E.  g.  If  hands  which  are  necessary  members,  are  cut  off, 
one  has  to  pay  for  the  operation. 

This  is  used  regarding  the  loss  of  a  thing  in  constant  use 
expressing  a  double  loss. 

11  T^si  ^  ST  ^■^  ^-     Tina  men  na  tera  men. 

Neither  among  the  "three"  nor  among   the   "thirteen" 

i.  e.  worth  nothing. 

E.  g.  A  prostitute  was  reputed  to  have  thirteen  lovers  in 
one  direction,  and  three  in  another.  Over  and  above  these  sixteen, 
she  had  also  contracted  friendship  with  another  one  secretly,  to 
whom  now  and  then  she  used  to  say  that  he  was  the  dearest  of 
all  her  friends,  and  she  would  leave  him  a  greater  share  of  her 
property,  after  her  death.  In  hope  of  this  promise  this  man 
rendered  her  good  and  constant  services.  After  she  was  dead 
all  these  seventeen  appeared  to  claim  her  property,  but  as  she 
had  already  bequeathed  her  property,  some  of  it  to  the  thirteen 
and  some  to  the  three,  the  name  of  seventeenth  man  was  not 
found  either  among  the  thirteen  or  among  the  three,  so  the  man 
exclaimed  that  he  was  neither  among  the  noted  thirteen  nor  the 
three.  This  became  a  proverb  for  people  who  think  themselves 
unentitled  to  a  thing,  not  being  included  amongst  those  eligible. 

12  ^T  f^  ^Tfi]  ^^  ■^TT'^T*     Ghara  ki  muragi  dala  bara- 
bara. 

A  hen  in  one's  house  is  like  Dala  {pulse  grain  ). 

Dala  is  an  article  commonly  kept  in  the  house,  and  so 
can  be  cooked  at  any  time.  In  the  same  way  one  can  cook 
the  hen  in  his  own  possession  at  any  time  he  likes. 

Applied  to  things  which  are  easily  accessible  or  procurable 
and  are  consequently  not  much  valued. 


13  %^Wl  ^I^(?r^T  Sim  ^2T^T-      Halka  adami  ka  nakha 
men  tosa. 


(     206     ) 

A  small-minded  man  shows  anger  in  his  nose. 
C.  f.   "A  little  pot  is  soon  hot." 

14    5lQITf^  ^TfT     ^^lf%^rT«        Junyali   rata   kulyali 

tbata. 

A  moonlight  night  and  irrigated  land. 

E.  g.  A  night  with  the  moon  shining  is  equal  to  irrigated 
land.  Watered  land  is  much  valued,  as  crops  on  it  never  fail, 
and  so  a  man  walking  in  the  moonlight  will  not  stumble. 

15  ^"^^^IT  5^^T  ST.     §aba  nara  eka  sara  nai. 
All  men  are  not  alike. 

16  ^j-3(m  wf%^fI^T  ^i 'TT^nft  ^TJl^T*    Sabasa  bhuli 

kangala  paile  panda  bati  mangala. 

Well  done,  sister  Kangala,    we  should   begin   begging 
from  the  upper  story. 

Beg  from  the  rich,  the  poor  have  nothing  to  give. 

17  ^Tq^T '^ZT '^^Tf^^T  ^T^  fs^^^^r-     Sarapa  ka  khuta 

bathaguli  ka  bala  ni  dekbinda. 

No  one  sees   the   legs   of   a  snahe  or   the  hairs   of 
one^s  palm. 

This  means  that  no  one  can  tell  at  first  glance  what  genius 
or  skill  a  man  may  possess. 

18  ^qinj  ^ISI  i  ^Wfa[^f^  ^^r«      Apana  batba  le 
apano  sbira  ni  mundino. 

No  one  can  shave  his  own  head  himself. 


(     207     ) 

7.  e.  No  one  can  properly  speak  his  own  praise  ;  or  in 
reference  to  certain  actions  which  cannot  be  accomplished  without 
the  intervention  of  others  (friends  or  relations). 

19  tf  ^^  ^mj  ^^  ^T^  ^^g^T.      Jaiku  ni  sujha 

apano  ghara  so  ke  akalabara. 

One  who  does  not  fake  care  of  his  own  house,  how  can 
he  be  considered  a  wise  man  ? 

20  qx:-^  ^T1  '^^T  ^T1  ^tI?:  %I5I  f  f^5i  i^7?i.     Puraba  roga, 

pachharaa  soga  uttara  joga  dakbina  bboga. 

The  east  for  disease,   the  west  for  sorrow,   the  north 
for  penance,  and  the  south  for  pleasure. 

This  phrase  is  generally  used  by  the  hill  people  regarding 
the  hills  being  not  a  place  for  enjoyment  but  a  painful  place  of 
residence  or  of  penance. 

21  ^r^*'T^  f^  ^^  ^^fT  f^       Sau  sunara  ki  eka  Iwara  ki. 

One  hundred  strokes  of  a  goldsmith  are  equal  to   one 
of  a  blacksmith. 

This  is  used  of  one  who  after  much  forbearance  amply  repays 
another  either  for  good  deeds  or  for  bad  ones. 

22  ^^^(^  ^T  ^H  'ir^^'I^T^*     Sabana  ka  guru  gobardhana 
dasa. 

Gobardhan  Das  is  the  spiritual  guide  of  all. 

Used  to  denote  the  greatest  person  (the  chief  J  in  any 
business  or  profession.  This  is  equivalent  to  "the  paw  of  an 
elephant  covering  that  of  all  other  animals." 


(     208     ) 

23  "sqitnuj  ^^  5i7^T  ^^T^J  ^^  ^T^r.     Apana  pairajano 
paraya  paira  auno. 

One  goes  on  his  own  feet,  but  he  has  to   come   bade  on 
another's  feet. 

1.  e.  If  one  goes  to  another  of  his  own  will  for  some 
object,  it  depends  on  the  other  to  do  the  business  sooner  or  later. 

24  w?T  151TT*     Bhuta  pujai. 
Material  for  ghost-worship. 

A  ghost  is  worshipped  with  half  cooked  khicJiarJd  (made  of 
two  parts  of  rice  and  one  part  of  Ddla  (pulsej  and  hastily. 
For  the  sufierstition  is  that  while  being  thus  worshipped  the 
ghost  might  take  possession  of  the  soul  of  the  worshipper,  hence 
his  worship  is  performed  in  a  jungle,  or  in  a  place  where  four 
roads  meet,  and  very  hastily  at  night.  Hence  the  proverb  is 
applied  to  half-cooked  food. 


saga  teri  boi  na  nikayo  ankha  malku  takani. 

Your  mother  has  not  put  salt  in  the  vegetables,  why  do 
you  stare  at  me  with  red  eyes  ? 

Spoken  by  the  wife  to  her  husband,  who  is  blaming 
her  on  account  of  the  food  which  has  in  fact  been  cooked  by 
his    mother. 

Used  in  convincing  one  of  his  fault  or  in  proving  one's 
own  innocence. 

1^  %rfiil  eRT  ^^T  9Tf  T^r  ^^I«     Jogi  ka  chela  tumarlia  ka 
mela. 

The  disciples  of  a  Jogi  (ascetic)   are  as  numerous 
as  the  seeds  of  a  gourd  i.  e.  too  many  to  eotint. 

Used  to  denote  a  Jogl's  popularity. 


(     209     ) 

27  ^\  TT^ir  ^fa!  m\  Ji'jit  ^f%.     Kan  raja  Bhoja  kan  Ganga 

teli. 

TVhat  comparison  is  there  between  Rdjd  Bhoja  and 
Gangd  Teli. 

E.  g.  Ganga  was  a  king  whose  dominion  was  seized  by  Raja 
Bhoja,  who  in  addition  to  this  had  his  hands  and  feet  cut  ofF,  and 
Jeft  him  in  the  jungle.  A  Tdi  (oilman)  who  happened  to  see 
Ganga  in  such  a  pitiable  condition  took  compassion  on  him,  and 
also  thinking  that  he  could  be  made  use  of  in  driving  his  bullock, 
carried  him  home,  and  got  his  wounds  healed  up  by  putting  him 
under  the  treatment  of  a  physician.  When  the  Teli  died  his 
house  was  made  over  to  Ganga,  hence  he  is  called  "G.nnga  Teli."  ■ 
Thence  forward  Ganga  always  ridiculed  all  the  acts  of  Kaja  Bhoja 
and,  though  himself  now  only  an  oilman,  tried  to  oppose  him  as 
much  as  he  could  on  account  of  the  ill-treatment  he  received  from 
him.  Seeing  this  disposition  in  Ganga  (and  finding  him  always 
against  the  RajaJ  people  used  to  say  among  themselves  Ganga 
T'eli  cannot  be  compared  with  Raja  Bhoja. 

Used  whenever  a  small  man  attempts  to  measure  himself 
with  a  greater. 

28  5|jf5i  qgiT  117%  ^fl^T  7f%  ^"^1  'TJ^  VTSf  •      Nani  i»uja 

panchai  bhanda  thuli  puja  panchai  bhanda. 

Five  vessels  needed  in  small  worshij),  and  five  vessels 
in  great  worship. 

E.  g.  The  same  number  of  utensils  are  necessary  to  cook 
food  for  one  person  or  many.  All  men  whether  great  or  small 
have  the  same  necessities  and  the  same  fate. 

29  ^ifii^f  5}j^  1S1'i%^'T<     Lotiyo  goru  chha  maniyan. 

A  cow  which  has  fallen  down  the  hill  {and  been  killed) 
is  always  said  to  have  been  a  good  coio,  or  to  have  given 
three  seers  of  milk. 

A  thing  not  to  be  had  any  more  is  always  praised. 

30  %lfk  »lf^^^«!  5^  ^T^r  S6I^«T-      Kodbi  mari  sukanu  na 
bato  cbhorbanu. 

Tlie  leper  can  neither  die  nor  get  out  of  the  way, 

A2 


(    210     ) 

E.  g.  A  leper  lay  down  on  a  road  in  such  a  manner  that 
he  almost  closed  it,  every  one  disliking  to  pass  that  way  for 
fear  of  touching  him. 

Used  of  persons  or  things  disliked. 

31  »i^y  q'ft^.     Gadha  pachisi. 

The  donkey  age,  up  to  twenty -five  years. 
Youths  are  awkward  and  silly  until  that  age. 


32  »T7  ^"^1%  fT^^^^«     Nau  bharili  taba  dubali. 


Tlie  boat  will  fill  before  it  sinks. 

A  man  will  continue  to  prosper  under  iniquities  for  some 
time,  i.  e.  his  sins  and  injustice  will  accumulate  before  he  13 
ruined  by  them. 

33  ^^  ^^I^  'iTI^T'^''^  ^Sr  S^fl^T*    Perha  bhrashta  cha 

pangarau  nara  bhrashtn  tu  dangaro. 

A  tree  depraved  becomes  a  chestnut  tree   f  useless  J 

and  a  man  depraved  becomes  a  Ddngara,   i.  e.   one  who 

professes  to  he  inspired  by  a  deity. 

E.  g.  Some  people  feign  to  be  inspired  by  gods,  and  while 
nnder  their  influence  dance  and  predict  things,  though  their 
prophecies  generally  turn  out  false. 

34  •^^^^{  5fTT^  MT1  ^"':^-      Budba  marani  bhaga  sarani 

Old  people   die,   but    their  sayings  descend  to   the 
progeny. 

That  is,  oral  traditions  are  supposed  to  be  based  on  facts. 

35  ^?I7  ^  lif^^T*    I)bunga  me  dbarano. 

To  place  one  on  a  stone  {to  ruin  him   or  to   deprive 
him  of  his  loealth). 

To  eject  a  man  from  his  house  and  reduce  him  to  the 
<rrcaiest  want. 


(     211    )) 

36  ^g  ^jf\  ^7^  SJir^.    Khala  sati  bhola  byau. 
JPaddy  in  the  mortar  and  marriage  to-morrow. 

Applicable  to  any  important  business  for  which   the  people 
concerned  are  unprepared  as  yet. 

37  ^7t  %T^  aPTT'?!^  ^it  ^T^  ^  'TI^I^.      Koi  boda  kya 
khaun  koi  boda  ke  ma  khaun. 

One  says  "What  shall  I  eat  ?"  another  says  "What 
sauce  shall  I  eat  with  my^  food  ?" 

Used  to  compare  poor  people  with  those  who  have  plenty. 

38  ^j^T  'I  'TT^r  K^M^T*    Kacho  iia  pako  bhasbhaso. 
Neither  raw  nor  well  cooked,  but  half  done. 

Applied,  to  a  man  who  is  neither  one  thing  nor  the  other. 

MISER. 

1  ff»lf^»  ^^  'JiJ  ^  f^  HT'I  %J  ^I»I  ^I^-      Hinga  ki  dali 

phuta  ni  bina  hinga  ko  saga  ho  ni. 

The  ball  of  asafoitida  {a  spice)  must  not  be  broken,, 
but  the  pottage  must  nevertheless  he  seasoned  with  it. 

Applied   to   one   who   is   a   miser,   but  at  the   same   time 
an   epicure. 

2  Q^T  ^r    ''    '^'^THfr  %"t.        Dhela   ko  lyun  purha 

khaun. 

Would  buy  a  dhela' s  worth,  but  loould  eat  a  plateful, 
{a  dhela=^  of  a  pice). 

Applied   to   one   who   is  a   miser,  but  at  the   same   time 
an  epicure. 


almno  sas;a  howa  nai. 


3  ^m  <s,%  ^Jifr  "^  ^^$T  ^11  ^T^^-     Luna  dali  phutau  nai 

e\  \j  ^ 


(    212     ) 

The  lump  of  salt  should  not  be  used,  hut  the  food 
should  not  remain  without  salt. 

Applied  to  one  who  is  a  miser,  but  at  the  same  time 
an   epicure. 

4  ^ir^  ^IW  ^T^  ^T?^  ^"'^T  ^  %T^'I-      Khala  kbano 

kamala  odhanu  rupaya  ke  jorhanu. 

TFhat  difficulty  is  there  in  earning  money  ?  One  can 
earn  it  by  eating  chaff  and  covering  himself  with 
a  blanhet. 

Getting  rich  by  scraping  and  meanness. 

MOCK  MODESTY. 

1  •IT^'SI  f^cfilx  ^2  ^«     Nachana  nikashi  gLungata  ke. 

If  you  have   come  out   to   dance   why   should  you   veil 
your  face  f 

Applied  to  one  who  after  having  already  undertaken  a 
business  abandons  it  for  fear  or  shame  or  wishes  to  do  it  in  private. 

Women  of  good  family  wear  veils,  but  if  one  of  them 
comes  forward  to  dance  why  should  she  in  that  case  cover 
bar    face. 

2  %T?ir  ^T'^T  T^fT  ^frj.     Jota  khaya  ijjata  bachi. 
/  received  a  beating  with  a  shoe,  hut  saved  my  honor. 

To  be  beaten  with  a  shoe  is  considered  very  disgracefuL 
Persons  are  often  purposely  dishonoured  in  this  way  by  their 
enemies,  whichis  regarded  as  a  public  disgrace  for  them. 

The  proverb  is  used  by  one  who  is  injured  &r  insulted,  but 
not  in  a  public  way,  and  so  consoles  himself. 


(   213  ; 

MODESTY. 

1  HTH  (%  ^^  5i^T5I  %  MT^.    Sharama  ki  ankha  jahaja 
hai  bhari. 

An  eye  full  of  shame  or  modesty  is  heavier  than  a  ship. 
Fear  of  shame  prevents  many  from  doing  wrong. 

2  ^?:^^iT  ^fT*?^^  ^I^  ^it.    Sharama  ki  boi 

gbarha  para  muha  ghali  roi. 

The  mother  of  modesty  hides   her  face  in  a  jar  when 

she  weeps. 

Used  to  denote  that  a  modest  person  would  rather  weep  in 
secret  than  expose  the  causes  of  his  doing  so. 
Due  reserve. 

MONEY. 

1  5!T  TT  IT.     Jara  men  para. 

Money  has  wings. 

I.  e.  It  can  accomplish  strange  and  seemingly  impossible  things. 

It  is  also  used  to  denote  that  money  having  wings  does  not 
stay,  is  soon  dissipated,  and  so  one  ought  to  invest  it  in  property 
or  ornaments,  and  thus  "cut  its  wings." 

2  ^si^j  ^l\jf^  ^fT^X  •IT'^-      Dhana  ka  agarhi  makkara 

nacba. 

Haughty  and  wealthy  people  will  dance  for  the  sake 
of  wealth. 

I.  e.   Everyone  will  condescend  to  do  anything   with   a  view 

to  get  wealth  or  money. 

C.  f.    "It's  money  that  makes  the  mare  to  go." 
( Dancing   in   India   is   never   indulged   in   by   respectable 

people ). 


(     214     ) 
MOTIVES. 

1  "^IZ  ^f%  f%  =^3^1?:  ^ff  •  Chata  barhi  ki  chaturai  barhi. 

Is  cleverness  greater,  or  necessity  ? 

This  means  to  say  that  necessity  makes  one  do  odd  things 
in  spite  of  the  suggestions  of  his  cunning  or  cleverness.  C.  f. 
Necessity  knows  no  laws. 

A  man's  skill  is  not  always  a  match  for  necessity. 

2  fi(^j  lIcR^I  ^T  ^^T  ^^?T^T  ^I*    Piii^  pakado  rau  kawa 

kakarhado  rau. 

When  the  bruised  oil  seeds  are  heating  in  the  sun,  never 
mind  the  clamors  of  the  crows  {inviting  other  crows  to 
eat  it). 

This  is  used  to  confirm  another  in  his  purpose  against  the 
criticisms  of  other  people  who  have  no  concern  in  it. 

3  qirfg  ^T  =^1 T-     Patala  ka  charha. 

Chirping  birds  in  the  hushes. 

I.  e.    Pay  no  heed  to  carping  criticism. 

MUNIFICENT  MEN  &  HEROES. 

1  ?^t  ^T  faC^Ht  ^RT  ^T   ^^5^.       .Sburonka   sbirani 

daton  ka  gbara  ni. 

Heroes   have  no   heads,   and  munificent  persons   have 
no  houses. 

I.  e.  The  former  do  not  care  for  their  own  lives,  and  the 
latter  for  their  own  possessions,  as  in  the  story  related  below. — 

Stoi-y :  Shekha  Naga  is  the  name  of  one  of  the  greatest 
snakes  who  bears  on  his  head  a  most  brilliant  jewel  called  "Mani" 
and  is  so  poisonous  that  any  thing  or  animal  that  goes  near  him 
is  burnt  tc  ashes.  He  is  said  to  be  the  monarch  of  all  kinds  of 
seipents  who  inhabit  the  world  known  as  "Pdtdla"  below  this 
world,     One  day  a  munificent  man  of  this  world  happened  to  go  to 


(    215     ) 

Shekha  Naga,  before  whom  he  stood  for  a  minute  uninjured,  dnd 
paid  him  his  obeisance.  At  this  the  Shekha  Naga  was  greatly- 
pleased  with  the  man  and  gave  him  four  rubies  as  a  token  of  his 
favour.  The  quality  of  one  of  the  rubies  was  to  give  its 
possessor  as  much  grain  as  he  wanted,  and  the  second  as  much 
money,  the  third  as  large  an  army,  and  the  fourth  as  much 
religious  merit  as  he  wished  for  at  any  time.  As  soon  as  the 
man  with  these  four  rubies  came  upon  this  earth  he  met  with  a 
very  poor  old  mau  who  made  known  his  poverty  to  the  munificent 
man,  who  at  once  offered  to  let  him  have  his  choice  of  one  of  the 
rubies,  after  describing  the  power  and  property  of  each.  At  this 
the  poor  beggar  said  he  would  take  one  after  consulting  his  family, 
and  so  he  went  back  to  his  house,  and  on  consulting  his  family 
his  wife  insisted  on  having  the  one  which  gave  the  grain,  saying 
that  all  the  family  was  starving,  his  son  longed  for  the  one  which 
gave  the  army,  saying  that  by  having  the  army  he  would  bring 
empires  under  his  subjection,  and  then  would  become  an  emperor  ; 
but  his  daughter-in-law  asked  for  the  one  which  gave  money, 
saying  that  by  having  wealth  they  would  live  in  splendour  and 
comfort.  In  spite  of  all  these  demands  the  old  man  wanted  virtue 
and  piety.  Thus  they  quarrelled  for  some  time  and  each  of  the 
members  insisted  upon  his  own  choice.  After  this  the  old  man 
having  become  disgusted  with  his  family  went  again  to  the 
munificent  man  and  said  that  he  would  not  take  any  cue  of  the 
precious  stones,  but  the  liberal-minded  man  knowing  the  cause 
from  his  dejected  countenance  gave  him  all  four  rubies  and  went 
away.  The  poor  man  returned  to  his  home  in  great  delight, 
blessing  the  munificent  man  who  had  such  little  desire  for  such 
valuable  things. 

2  5^^  ^TT^  '*T^  %!^I5T«  Kharha  khaika  bharha  hondana, 

A  hero  is  brave  even  though  he  has  only  grass  to  eat. 

Bravery  depends  upon  the  disposition  of  the  man,   not  upon 
the  food  he  eats. 


MUTABILITY  OF  WORLDLY  WEALTH. 

1  %r|  ^^7  3TT  '^T^T  ^T  "^mj'      Jo  deyo  ya  kbayo  so 
apano. 


(    216    ) 

Only  lohat  one  has  given  (  in  charity  )  or  eaten  is 
one's  own. 

C.  f.    "Hethat  giveth  to  the  paor  lendeth  to  the  Lord." 

MUTUAL  RESPECT. 

1  ^T'5  f%TT^  ^rf^  "^^P:  fsiTT^  ^Tf%-      Sasa  ni  rakha 

Barhi  buwari  ni  rakha  dadhi. 

If  a  father-in-law  does  not  hesitate  to  pull  off  the  cloth 
of  his  daughter-in-law,  why  should  the  latter  hesitate  to 
pull  out  the  beard  of  the  former. 

A  father-in-law  is  a  most  venerable  person  to  a  daughter-in- 
law,  who  in  turn  is  also  an  object  of  careful  regard  to  him,  and 
neither  of  them  should  touch  each  other. 

Applied  to  mutual  respect. 

2  'gJI  «R^T  ^'^T  3^'     Hama  kasa  jasa  tuma. 
How  am  Tl    As  you  are  to  me. 

Mutual  treatment. 

i^t^T  I^TI  «!>(''  '^iV^-  Jo  apun  kana  ni  chawa  wi  ka  bapa 
kani  ni  chanu,  jo  apun  kana  chawa  wi  ka  gulama  kani 
chanu. 

If  a  man  dislikes  me,  I  shall  not  like  his  father,   but   of 
one  who  likes  me  I  will  like  even  his  slave. 
C.  f.    "Love  me,  love  my  dog." 


4  71  ^fT  "kifk.  ^^%  n  If  ^T^  >Tf<  ^^rs^r,      Tu  beta  bhari 

nyurhalai  ta  main  hatha  bhari  nyurhulo. 

If  you  bend  (condescend)  a  span  before  me,   I  will   bend 
{concede)  a  cubit  before  thee. 

Used  of  mutual  respect. 


(     217     ) 
NATIONAL  UNITY. 

1  Ift^t  ''^1^  ^  ^  "^T^'     Jaun.  jaun  rashi   gyun  gyun 
rashi. 

Barley  heaped  on  barley,  wheat  on  wheat. 

Applied  to  national  unity  or  the  unity  of  castes  and  racea. 
C.  f.    "Birds  «f  a  feather  flock  together." 

2  ^^TSIT  '5'^IT  ^Tlf.     Rupaya  rupaya  kamawa. 
Money  earns  money. 

This  is  a  common  phrase  shewing  that  money  draws  money 
and  wisdom  draws  wisdom.    I.  e.   Money  goes  to  money. 

NATURAL  CAPACITY  OR  GENIUS. 

1  ^  ^T  ^^  ^T^  ''^^  ^T^  ^r  ^^  ^T"»^^«    Sui  ko 

mukha  Iwara  palyunda  kanda  ko  mukha  ko  palyunda. 

The  point  of  a  needle  is  sharpened  by  a  blacksmith,  but 
who  sharpens  the  point  of  a  thorn  ? 

This  is  applied  to  a  clever  and  able  person  who  does  not 
need  to  be  tutored  for  any  occasion.  C.  /.  "Old  foxes  want 
no  tutors." 

2  1?i!T?T  ^Z%T-     Khanuwa  kutalo. 

A  digging  hoe. 

(A  sharp  and  fault-finding  person). 
A  nagging  and  inquisitive  disposition. 

NATURE  OF  WORLD  &  HUMAN  NATURE. 

1  ^m  '^^T  "frr  511  'S^T-     -^P  dubo  tau  jaga  dubo. 

The  world  is  drowned  to  him  who  is  drowned. 

I.  e.    The  affairs  of  the  world  are  of  no  interest  to  him. 

B2 


r  (  218  ) 

Slbry.  Onee  a  jackal  was  drowning  in  a  lake,  and  kept 
crying  "The  world  is  drowning,"  "the  world  is  drowning."  On 
hearing  sach  an  extraordinary  exclamation  the  by-standers  (other 

S'ackals)  wanted  to  know  the  meaning  of  this,  and  asked  their 
ying  brother  how  the  world  was  about  to  perish.  To  this  the 
crafty  jackal  said  that  he  could  only  tell  them  from  the  shore. 
This  made  the  other  jackals  all  the  more  inquisitive  and  impatient, 
and  so  by  their  united  endeavours  they  got  their  brother  ashore, 
and  then  asked  him  the  same  question  again,  to  which  he  replied 
as  in  the  proverb. 

2  ^7q  K%T  ^t  5!JI  >f^T      -A-pa  bhalo  tau  jaga  bhalo. 
A  good  man  finds  the  world  good. 

C.  f.    "Good  mind  good  find." 

3  ^T'HSFI  il«l%  oTT'O^  ^T^T  T^  f%  ^r^.       Apana  mana  le 
janani  parya  mana  ki  bata. 

One's  own  feelings   towards  others   suggest  what  others 
feel  towards  us. 

4  3TT  ^T'nt  ITT  %I'I^  'J^rfl-  %Tf^  «f%  fsi^nn)-.     Wara 
kauni  para  kauni  pakorhi  joli  kakhi  ni  pauui. 

Kauni  (a  coarse  kind  of  millet  grown  in  the  hills)  here, 
kauni  there,  but  sweetmeats  are  no  where  to  be  had. 

This  is  used  to  denote  that  there  are  many  people  in  the 
world,  but  none  who  are  willing  to  help  one. 

NEW  COMPARED  WITH  OLD. 

1  %J^1  ^m  ^T  ^  5^T   ^^.      Naula  goru  ka  hau  pula 
ghasa, 

Niiie  bundles  of  grass  for  a  new  cow. 

Great  care  taken  of  any  tkiog  newly  obtained. 


(     219     ) 

2  5|?ir  'U^TH  T^I'HT  5^«r.     Nayan.  nau  dama  purana 
cbha  dama. 

New  coins  fetch  nine-fold,  and  the  old  ones  only  six. 

E.  g.    New  things  are  more  valued  than   old   ones.     Here 
"ddma"  means  value. 

NOVELTY. 

1  f%  ^lf^r%  '»T^r  ^Tf^  ^T*T  ^f^K  <3T^r»     NI  paunlyan 
le  payo  adhi  rata  uthi  bera  khayo. 

One  gets  up  at  night  and  eats  what  was  not  procurable 
in  his  own  home. 

Eagerness  for  a  new  thing. 

2  ^fil  ^  ssrrsi  tqj^T  1*?  %  mffi  'qr^T*      P^nji  hai  byaja 

pyaro  puta  bai  nati  pyaro. 

Interest  is  valued  more  than  capital,  and  a  grandson  is 

dearer  than  a  son. 

I.  e.    Any  small  addition  to  one's  possessions  is  valued  more 
than  things  already  in  hand. 


OBSTINATE  &  STUBBORN  PEOPLE. 

1  JIT^  SI^  ^  ^^t^T  '»T  'J^  ^  ^^  siT^T^.     Gall  dhali 
rnai  ni  dindo  para  pusa  ki  poll  na  khaye. 

1  am  not  abusing  you,  but  may  you  not  live  to   eat  the 
treacle  cakes  made  in  January. 


(     220     ) 

E.  g.  Obstinate  men  pride  themselves  on  not  withdrawing 
the  language  they  have  used. 

Once  an  obstinate  beggar  addressed  a  great  man,  whose 
complexion  was  black  and  who  was  mounted  on  an  elephant,  thus: — 
"0,  Mr.  Charcoal  (referring  to  the  black  colaur  of  his  skin) 
give  me  something.  The  great  man,  being  provoked  by  this 
.Tddress,  told  him  to  hold  his  tongue.  On  this  the  beggar  rejoined 
"0  Mr.  Charcoal,  do  not  crackle."  .  This  stubborness  on  the  part 
of  the  beggar  astonished  the  great  man  and  made  him  reflect. 
He  concluded  that  the  best  thing  to  do  would  be  to  rid  himself 
of  the  nuisance  of  the  beggar's  insolence  by  giving  him  money, 
so  threw  him  two  rupees.  The  beggar,  delighted  with  the  gift, 
blessed  him  saying  "Remain  red  for  ever,"  (again  representing 
him  as  a  piece  of  live  charcoal). 

2  TT5I  ^  %!?!  %Z  f^rf^^T  iz.     Raja  hata  joga  hata  tiriya 
bata 

• 

The   firmness    of   a  king,    an   ascetic,    and  a   woman 
are  alike. 

They  will  prevail  in  the  end. 

3  gi2Tf%i^T^¥-     Lata  ki  karhatarha. 

The  indifference  (^stubbornness)  of  a  dumb  man. 

I.  e.  A  dumb  man  or  an  idiot  will,  in  spite  of  instructions 
to  the  contrary,  continue  to  do  a  thing  in  his  own  clumsy  way. 

Used  of  one  who  spoils  his  work  by  disregarding  the 
advice  of  others  who  are  his  superiors  in  knowledge  and 
experience. 

OLD  AGE. 

1  ^^7  ^57  fT^7  ^^.     Jaiko  budho  tai  ko  kurho. 

So  long  as  there  is  an  old  person  in  a  family  the  reputa- 
tion and  prosperity  of  the  house  is  sure. 


(     221    ) 

Story.  Once  a  man  went  to  espouse  a  daaghter  of  another 
who  granted  his  request  on  the  condition  that  the  bridegroom 
should  bring  no  old  man  with  him  along  with  the  marriage 
procession,  but  bring  hundred  strong  men  who  should  fulfil  or 
accomplish  all  the  conditions  he  might  require  of  them,  on  the 
marriage  day.  On  the  fulfilment  of  all  the  conditions  he  would 
give  his  daughter  in  marriage,  and  not  otherwise.  On  hearino' 
this,  the  would-be  bridegroom  came  home  and  consulted  all  the 
old  and  wise  people.  All  were  of  one  opinion  that  it  was  necessary 
for  at  least  one  old  man  to  be  present  to  give  advice  in  a  case 
of  emergency.  So  they  managed  to  take  an  old  man  to  the 
bride's  house  by  having  him  concealed  within  a  drum.  (According 
to  the  custom  the  bridegroom  accompanied  by  his  kinsmen,  and 
friends,  with  drums,  trumpets  etc  goes  to  the  bride's  house  in  order 
to  bring  her  to  his  home.  This  procession  is  called  "Barydt" 
(party  of  the  bridegroom).  This  party  is  well  fed,  and  gratified 
•with  pecuniary  presents  or  rewards  by  the  father  or  guardian 
of  the  bride).  As  soon  as  the  marriage  procession  arrived  at  the 
bride's  house,  the  bride's  father  supplied  hundred  goats,  fifty  seers  of 
rice,  and  a  hundred  seers  of  Ghi  to  the  hundred  strong  men  who  had 
gone  there  with  the  bridegroom,  and  said  that  if  they  would  eat  all  the 
food  he  had  given  they  would  obtain  his  daughter  for  the  intended 
bridegroom  in  marriage,  and  if  not,  they  should  return  to  their 
home  without  the  bride.  At  this  the  party  felt  perplexed,  but 
kept  silent  in  order  to  secretly  obtain  counsel  from  the  old  man. 
The  old  man  told  them,  Do  not  be  afraid  of  this,  say  to  the  man 
'yes  we  will  do  so.'  Then  kill  one  goat  and  divide  the  meat 
among  the  hundred  men,  and  each  of  you  must  then  eat  a  little, 
concealing  some  in  the  mouth  to  be  afterwards  spitted  out.  In  this 
■way  you  will  be  able  to  consume  the  hundred  goats,  fifty  seers  of  rice, 
and  hundred  seers  oi  glii.  They  acted  as  advised,  and  thus  consumed 
the  whole  quantity.  After  this,  when  the  marriage  had  been 
performed,  the  bride's  father  found  out  the  trick  which  had  been 
effected  t'nrough  the  ingenuity  of  the  old  man  whom  they  had 
secretly  taken  with  them.  But  he  was  helpless,  for  then  the 
marriage  could  not  bo  cancelled  on  any  account.  Hence  the 
necessity  of  old  people  as  advocated  by  the  proverb.  C.  f.  "Old 
men  for  counsel,  young  men  for  war." 

2  %^T  "STfln""^!^  fr%  ^T^T^-     Jai  ko  budho  bauli  tai- 
ko  kurho  bauli. 


(    222     ) 

When  an   elder  of   a   household   becomes  mad  all  the 
members  of  the  family  are  sure  to  become  so. 

Hence  the  necessity  that  the  head  of  a  family  should  lead 
an  exemplary  life,  as  all  his  dependents  -will  be  sure  to  imitate 
his  conduct  whether  good  or  bad. 

3  «JK^  ^?17  "^j^H"  ^m^  nt  l^*      Barasa  bhaya  asi  akala 

gai  nasi. 

When  a  man   reaches   the  age  of  eighty    his  intellect 
leaves  him. 

It  is  said  that  God  at  first  appointed  forty  years  as  the  limit 
of  life  for  men,  bullocks,  dogs,  cats,  and  owls.  In  conversation 
together,  man  expressed  to  the  other  creatures  his  dissatisfaction 
■with  the  brief  age  allotted  to  him,  saying  that  forty  years  was  too 
short  for  an  intellectual  being  who  had  such  responsibilities  to 
fulfil  both  to  God  and  man.  On  the  other  hand,  the  bullock,  dog, 
cat,  and  owl  were  discontented  because  their  age  was  too  long, 
seeing  that  their  life  was  so  full  of  toils  and  annoyances  ;  therefore 
they  desired  to  be  limited  to  twenty  years  of  existence.  God  granted 
their  wishes,  and  reduced  the  age  of  the  four  beasts  to  twenty  years 
each,  adding  the  surplus  to  man's  life,  which  thus  was  extended  to 
hundred  twenty  years.  So  it  comes  to  pass  that  during  the  first  forty 
years  of  a  man's  life  (his  own  age)  he  lives  happily  and  fortunately.. 
During  the  next  twenty  years  (the  bullock's  period  J  he  is  full  of  anxiety 
and  ambition,  toiling  like  a  bullock  for  worldly  advantages.  From 
sixty  to  eightyfthe  dog's  period)  he  is  without  sense  of  honour  or  dis- 
crimination, caring  only  to  suit  his  own  convenience.  From  eighty  to 
hundred  his  character  becomes  like  that  of  a  cat,  timid,  humble  and 
pitiable,  and  from  a  hundred  to  a  hundred  and  twenty  he  resembles  an 
owl,  being  purblind  and  stupid. 

4  ^5TT  %T  ^r^  ^T^T  ^T  ^I^-     Dana  ko  bolyun  aunla  ka 

swada. 

The  advice  of  an  old  man  is  like  the  Aunld  fruit  {the  tree 
emlia  myrobalan,  phyllanthus  emblica). 

I.  e.  Though  unpleasant  to  the  taste,  if  eaten  yields  good 
results. 


(     223     ) 

5  ^T  liT  fT^'n  ^  %f  ^r^  W^^-    Budbo  kau  taruna  ni 
Bau  budha  ki  lakh  a  rau. 

Whatever  an  old  man  says  is  unhearahle  by  a  young 
man,  hut  the  saying  of  the  former  turns  out  to  he  true  in  a 
lac  of  instances. 

Youncr  people  ought  to  mind  what  old  people  tell  them. 

6  ^T^T  ^T^«g  W  "T^TI  ^I^  ?[^T-      Dano  dushmana 
bhalo  nadana  dosta  buro. 

An  enemy  in  an  old  person  is  better  than  a  friend 
in   a   child. 

It  is  better  to  have  an  old  (or  wise)  man  for  an  enemy   than 
a  young  (or  foolish)  person  for  a  friend. 

ONE  IN  DISTRESS  WISHES  ANOTHER  TO  BE  SO. 

(a),  smx.  f%  tT%T  ^  «lf%^n'    Nagara  ki  randau  mai  jasi 
hovva. 

Oh  cursed  women  of  the  town,  be  like  me. 

ChJ.  %5rr  '»%'l)"  t^  5)%r-     Haija  parhosi  mai  jaso. 

Oh,  neighbour  he  like  me. 

A  bad  character  or   deformed  person   wishes    others   to   be 
like  himself. 

The  story  narrated  below  will  illustrate  the  proverb  : 
Once  a  man  who  had  his  nose  cut  off  for  some  offence 
happened  to  come  in  a  city,  where  he  was  teased  by  being  given 
the  nickname  "Nakata"  (noseless).  For  some  time  he  patiently 
endured  the  disgrace  but  eventually  invented  a  plan  of  revenging 
himself  upon  the  residents  of  the  town.  So  he  sat  down  like  a 
saint  in  a  conspicuous  place  of  the  city,  and  acted  as  if  he  was 
absorbed  in  the  contemplation  of  God.  Now  and  then  he  used 
to  address  the  gods  thus.  "0  Vishanu,  you  are  welcome, 
0  Mahadeva,  you  are  welcome,  O  Brahma,  yon  are  welcome, 
0  Lakshmi,  (wife  of  Vishanu),  0  Parbati,  (wife  of  Mahadeva^, 
O  Brahmani,  (wife  of  Brahma),  (in  this  way  addressing  many 
important  deities)  "You  are  welcome,  come  and  sit  down  here" 
(pointing  out  a  particular  place  for  each   with   his  two  hands   as 


(  m  ) 

a   total    of    respect,    and    thanking    them    for   their   trouble   and 
condescension  in   manifesting    themselves    to    him.       He   did    this 
constantly  every    day.     This    conduct   attracted    the  attention  of 
the  passers-by,  and    gradually    the  news   spread    throughout   the 
city  and  the  country.     At   first  the    people   did    not   believe   him, 
but  seeing  him  so  firm  in  his  faith,   piety,    and    adoration,    at    last 
some  people  began  to  pay  some  attention  and  feel  eager    about  the 
matter,  and  so  they  enquired  from  the  feigned  saint  into  the  cause, 
and  said  that  they  did  not  see  the  deities  while  he   was    addressing 
them  as  if  present.     To  this  he  said   that  no   one    could    see   the 
gods  with  the  bodily  eye  until   he  got   heavenly   eyes    by   having 
become   a    devotee.      This    naturally    induced    some    to    become 
devotees  of  God  in  order  to  have  a  constant   vision    of  Him    like 
the  man,  and  so  many  of  them  besought  him    that  he    would  have 
mercy  on  them  also.     The  man  said  that  they  should    become    his 
disciples    by   learning  the  religious  enchantments   (fascination   of 
deities}  from  him.     On  this  many  of  them    volunteered  to   be   his 
converts,  but  the  noseless  man  said  to  them,   "0  my  dear  brothers, 
it  is   very   diiHcult   for   one    to   become    a   truly    religious    man 
amidst  the  luxuries  and  endearments  of  worldly  things.     No    one 
can  ever  see  the   deities   unless   he   divests  himself  of  all  worldly 
ambition  and  desire  for  the  sake  of  his   god.     The  chief   source  of 
pride  of  these  worldly  honors  is  the  nose  (the    root   of  haughtiness 
and  vanities)  which  ought  to  be  got  rid  of  first  of  all  in   order   to 
render  man  an  humble  and  worthy  being  in  the  sight  of  the  deities. 
This  is  the  first  (most  important)  preliminary  ordeal  one  has  to   go 
through   in   order   to    deserve    and    merit    personal    conversation 
with  the  deities.     For  as  soon  as  one's  nose  is  removed    or   cut  ofi^ 
he  becomes  absolved  of  all  sins    and    sinful  sensations."     One  man 
at  first  fell  a  victim  to  this  plot,  (i.  e.  became  a  convert   by  having 
his  nose  cut),  and  to  his  utter  grief  found  his  hopes   of  seeing  the 
deities  to  be  utterly  false.   On  enquiry  from  his  Guru  (spiritual  guide) 
the  new  disciple  was  told  by  the  man,  "0  my  dear  son,   (disciple) 
do  you  not  know  that   a  leper   wishes    to    have   the    whole    world 
become   like    himself,  and    so    a  sinner  ?     Since   you   have   been 
unfortunately   imposed   upon,    now   you  should     also    make    the 
same  profession,    so   that  more  men   may  become   like   ourselves, 
and  that  then  no  one  will  have  to  cast   a   slur   on   any    one    of  us 
singly,  for  then  there  will  be  more  men  like  ourselves  in  the  world." 
After  this  both    of  the    men    [Nakatas)   began   to  play    the    trick 
conjointly,  and  thus  entrap  a  good  many  men    in   their   clutches, 
until  the  news  reached  the  King  and  his   wise   statesmen,    who    at 
once  put  a  stop  to  this  misbehaviour  of  the  noseless  sect  by  driving 
them  out  of  thoir  city  and  country. 


(      225     ) 

2  S^f  -Sim  51  ^T1  «I»I  5|  V':'!  *f^  ^HiH^.      Budho  baila 

na  apa  laga  na  aurana  kani  lagana  de. 

An  old  bullock  being  unable  himself  to  woo  prevents 
others  from  doing  so. 

A  dog  in  the  manger. 

3  •!  ^r"*  *T2  51  «RT^  %T-     Na  apa  kata  na  kati  sau. 

Se  neither  cuts  himself  nor  suffers  others  to  cut. 

Used  of  a  presumptuous  and  envious  man    who  will   neither 
do  a  thing  himself,  nor  allow  it  to  be  done  by  others. 
C.  f.    "A  dog  in  the  manger." 

4  fi\fx.  W^  ^  ^31  ^"I^*     Griri  parhachhyun  saja  aigechha. 

I  fell  down,  but  found  the  place  I  fell  on  comfortable. 

Once  a  jackal  while  walking  along  the  top  of  a 
mountain  accidentally  fell  down  a  precipice  and  was  caught  in 
the  wild  creepers  below.  In  the  attempt  to  get  np,  be  got  mora 
and  more  entangled  in  the  plants.  At  last^  being  quite  exhausted 
in  his  efforts  to  get  out,  he  was  obliged  to  remain  there.  Other 
jackals  who  came  by,  on  seeing  their  brother  thus  seated  below, 
called  out  to  him  to  come  up  and  join  their  company.  To  this 
call  of  theirs,  he  said  that  he  would  not  find  a  more  comfortable 
place  in  the  world,  and  so  he  would  not  quit  it.  This  statement 
of  his  tempted  the  other  jackals  to  fall  down  the  precipice  and  be 
thus  entangled  like  their  brother  who  was  greatly  pleased  at  the 
eticcess  of  his  trick. 

Applies  to  one  who  himself  being  in  trouble  desires  that 
others  should  share  it  with  him,  or  tries  to  get  others  into  the 
same  plight. 

C.  /..  The  fable  of  the  Tailless  Fox. 


5  *^m!lT  5WT  ^  ^^^r  ^I^'^T  ^hf*     Apana  jayan  ki  ni 
kaka  ka  rayan  ki  cbha. 

I  do  not  complain  of  my  own  ruin,   but  why   in  the 
world  has  my  imcle  escaped  ? 

The  regret  of  one  fallen  into  misfortune  that  others  do  not 
share  it  with  him. 

C  2 


<     22«     ) 

ONE'S  OWN  DEEDS  ETC.  NEVER  BAt). 

1  ^Itrrr  e  ^f^  <a$r  ^  f^^WT.      Apana  dai  kani  kbato 

kwe  ni  batunu. 

No  one  calls  his  own  curds  sour. 

E.  g.  A  merchant  never  says  his  commodities  are  bad.  i.  e. 
no  one  exposes  his  own  faults  and  defects.  C.  f.  "Every  cook 
praises  his  own  stow"    "No  fishwife  calls  out  stinking  fish." 

ONE'S  OWN  FAULTS  &  FAILINGS. 

1  ^TI'^T  ^^T  ^^T  l''C«3^^^  ^1^.      Apano  Buno  khoto 
parkbanera  ke  dosba. 

It  is  no  fault   of  the  assayer  when  one's  own  gold 
is  counterfeit. 

This  proverb  is  generally  used  of  one  who  rightly  loses  bis 
case,  or  gets  punished  for  his  real  guilt  by  a  court  of  justice. 

OPPORTUNE  ACTS. 

1  "^^t  s^T  ^fr^  ^^T  \\  ij^a  Qt^-   Bapa  ko  bya  karyun 
subera  ko  mukba  dhoyun. 

A  marriage  arranged  by  one's  father,  and  ablutions 
performed  in  the  morning. 

No  Hindu  according  to  custom  can  eat  anything  until  be 
has  washed  his  mouth,  hands,  and  feet,  after  having  got  up  in  the 
morning  ;  but  if  he  has  performed  these  ablutions  in  the  morning 
he  can  eat  anything  at  any  time  during  the  day  ;  and  in  the 
same  way,  if  one  is  provided  with  a  wife  by  his  father,  he  can 
utilize  her  services  at  any  time  and  is  also  saved  the  trouble  of 
providing  hiuiself  with  one  afterwards. 

OPPORTUNITY, 
i  -sr^Si  f^gjqrT  ^r»     Bunda  ge  bilayata  so. 
The  drop  has  gone  to  a  foreign  couxdry. 


f    227     ) 

This  proverb  arose  froQi  the  story  noted  below  : 
Once  some  perfumers  brought  perfume  for  sale  to  a  king, 
•who  bought  some,  but  out  of  what  he  had  pur(;hased  one  drop 
fell  on  the  ground,  and  the  king  at  once  tried  to  take  it  up  with 
his  own  fingers  from  the  floor.  This  act  on  the  part  of  the  king 
was  considered  very  mean  by  his  ministers  and  all  others  including 
the  perfume-sellers.  In  order  to-  remove  the  impression,  the 
ministers  afterwards  purchased  many  thousand  Rupees'  worth 
of  perfume  from  the  same  strangers,  and  got  it  sprinkled  all  over  the 
royal  stables  in  order  to  augment  their  master's  fame  for 
munificence  and  liberality.  Nevertheless  the  news  of  the  drop 
had  already  gone  to  foreign  countries  through  those  foreigners. 
Hence  this  proverb  suggests  a  careful,  reserved  and  wise  dealing 
with  a  stranger,  and  sbows  that  an  opportunity  once  lost  cannot  be 
regained.    E.  g.     Ill  news  travels  fast. 

2  'U'nilT  ^T^  5TJ15JT^.     Apano  hatha  jagannatha. 

One's  own  hand  is   as  that  of  Jagannath,   (^the  Lord 
of  the  world) . 

The  word  Jagannath  means  God.  "When  God  is  pleased 
with  a  man,  He  showers  wealth  and  blessings  on  him  ;  so  when  a 
man  has  permission  to  help  himself  he  will  do  so  to  the  utmost. 
A  man  will  bestow  on  himself  benefits  when  he  has  the  opportunity, 
as  bountifully  as  God  does. 

Self-help.. 

3  ^TT  ^9;K^  f^i%[  if  T^r  VT^  *fit  \v     Bava  barasa  dilli 

men  rayo  bharha  jhaunko. 

Se  lived  in  Dehli  for   twelve  years,  only  to  heat  the 
oven  of  a  grain  parcher. 

1.  e.  He  accomplished  nothing  for  himself.  Dehli  being 
the  capitiil  of  the  Moghal  Kings,  people  thought  that  by  going 
to  Dehli  they  could  make  their  fortunes.  This  is  applied  to  one 
who  has  not  availed  himself  of  a  very  good  opportunity  of  better- 
ing his  circumstances. 

4  ^^«r»T  ^%T  5W^T  **r^-     Bakhata  chuko  juga  ko  phera. 

One    who    loses    an    opportunity    may    be    delayed 
for  ages^ 


(     228    ) 
5  51^  5^T  ^"at  TT^  TT  f7|  ^\  %^J-    Jaba  chhayo  raintho 


taba  tu  ni  ai  baitho. 


When  I  had  Rainthd   (a  kind  of  savoury  dish)  you 
did  not  come.. 

You  did  not  come  to  me   when  I    was   in   prosperity,    and 
could  benefit  you. 


6  ^vm\  1T^  ^rt  3111^  •?  ^"n.  Apana  pasa  ai  ganga  men 

nai  linu. 

One  ought   to   bathe  in   the    Ganges  ichen  it  comes 
to   him. 

Seize  every  opportunity  (of  gaining  merit  etc), 

7  ^f%  '^^TT  ^^T  '5[%.      Gharhi  bacbi  ta  gbarbo  bacbo. 

If  a  small  pot  escapes  the  large  jar  may  escape. 

I.  e.  If  the  critical  or  dangerous  moment  is  passed  then 
there  is  no  danger  thereafter  for  years. 

(A  gharhi  is  equal  to  twenty-four  minutes). 

This  is  a  play  on  the  words  gharai  a  small  po^,  and  gharho  a 
jar,  gharhi  a  small  and  light  copper  cup  with  a  hole  at  its  bottom 
■which  is  placed  in  a  tubful  of  water  in  order  to  measure  time.  It 
■will  fill  with  water  in  twenty-four  minutes  and  then  sink  down. 


PARAMOURS. 

1  s^if)"  ^T  ^n^  ^*TT  ^T  1T^-      Syaini  ko  jar  a  juta  ko 

gara. 

One^s  wife's  par  am,ours  and  pebbles  in  the  shoe   (are 
very  troublesome  and  embittering  to  the  heart  J. 

2  -^^^  ^g  It  WT  ^^T5R  5T3r  ^  ^  ^tH"  VltT^.  Badal- 
yan   dewa    ki  gbama  cbarhaka    dhanta   maisa  ki    latbf 

dharhakn. 


(     229     ) 

.    Sunstroke  on  a  cloudy  d.ay  is  -like  the  stroke  given 
by  a  paramour. 

A  ■woman  can  willingly  bear  the  ill  treatment  of  her  husband, 
on  the  consideration  that  she  is  married  to  him,  but  a  stroke  from 
her  paramour,  (or  one  with  whom  she  lives  without  marriage  bond) 
is  unbearable,  as  sunstroke  on  a  cloudy  day  causes  more  harm 
than  on  a  bright  day. 

PATIENCE. 

1  V^^T^a^»I^^^^T^I^^'j€t5l^^«    Bhukhoboda 
wall  gadani  aghano  boda  pali  gadani. 

The  hungry  traveller  wishes  to  eat  his  food  at  the 
first  spring  he  meets,  hut  the  one  who  is  not  hungry 
wishes  to  eat  at  the  next. 

The  needy  man  has  no  patience. 

PATRONAGE. 

1  V^'^  ^  ^T2  ^<B»    Paharha  ki  ota  sika. 

A  small  stick  hides  a  mountain  from  one^s  eye. 

E.  g.  A  small  stick  if  placed  close  to  one's  eye  will  conceal 
a  mountain  from  his  sight. 

Used  as  an  appreciation  of  patronage,  however  small  it 
may  be,  which  works  miracles  and  gives  one  encouragement  and 
consolation. 

C.  f.  "A  drowning  man  will  catch  at  a  straw."  "Little 
strokes  fell  great  oaks." 

Used  also  in  the  same  sense  as,  "To  make  a  mountain  of  a 
mole  hill." 

2  ^^1  ^  W^  f^fl^T  W^'     Kukurha  ki  phala  sina  ka 


The  flight  of   a  cock  is  only  into   the  next  hush 
of  Sina. 

The  cock  when  alarmed  takes  shelter  in  the  next  bush,  i.  e. 
a  poor  man  or  any  person  in  distress  seeks  the  help  of  his 
immediate  patron,  whosoever  he  may  be. 


(     230     ) 

3  mjf^  flR  \t^  H^fil^TT^.      Kaji  ki  daurha  masajida 
taka. 

The  flight  of  a  Cadi  is  as  far  as  the  Mosque  fno  further) .. 

I.  e.   The  Cadi's  course  ends  at  the  Mosque. 
That  is,  one  in  need   or  distress  resorts  only  to  his  patron 
for   help. 

4  J^^T  «lir  ^T"^  "m^  '^T^-     Kila  ka  jora  bachhi  buraka. 

The  calf  jumps  with  all  his  might  because  he  knows 
the  peg  to  which  he  is  tied  will  keep  him  from  falling^ 

Applied  to  one's  firmness  or  zeal  in  a  certain  business,  which 
he  shows  on  account  of  the  patronage  or  help  of  another  greater 
than  himself. 

PECULIARITIES  OF  LOW  HILLPEOPLE. 

1  mj  ^r^^T^  ^^  *^T  f^'':  ^^  ^f%  (SiHTSl^r.     Jan  khasl- 
ya  le  da  pai  kayo  pbira  eka  gbarhi  ni  manano. 

When  a  Khasiya  says   ^'Da  Pai"    then  nothing  vnll 
stop  his  rage. 

A  Khasiya  is  an  illiterate  hill  villager  who  when  ill-treated 
will  forbear  for  a  long  time,  but  when  he  is  unable  to  control  his 
anger  any  longer  he  will  say  "Da  Pai"  ("very  good,  see  now"^) 
and  then  nothing  in  the  world  will  stop  him  from  assaulting 
the  offender. 

Used  as  a  caution  against  enraging  him. 
(For  Khasiya,  see  Introduction^. 

2  ^f%^T  ^  "^^  ^^  f^  'fit'J.      Kbasiya  ki  risa  bbainsa  ki 
tlsa. 

The  anger  of  a  Khasiya  (a  rustic  villager)  is   like  the 
thirst  of  a  huffalo. 

A  hhasiyd  when  in  rage  will  not  spare  any  one,  just  as  a 
buffalo  drinks  up  all  the  water  of  a  pool  from  which  he  drinks. 


(     231     ) 

3  ^fnfj"  IT"?!  *^r  ^NI^-     Ochhi  jata  karau  utpata. 

A  mean  man  raises  quarrels,    {and  a  noble  person 
does  what  is  noble). 

Low  birtli  will  show  itself  in  vile  deeds. 

4  q^Tfr  f^  ^  %r  ^I'lT  f%»     Paharhi  ki  nai  sau  rupaya 
ki. 

A  hill-man's  "No"  is  worth  a  hundred  rupees. 

E-  ^.  If  a  hill  man  once  refuse  to  do  a  certain  thinor,  he 
will  not  do  it,  even  if  one  tries  one's  utmost  to  pursuade  him 
to  do  it. 

5  «l^T^  ^»ri5»  ^T*TT  ^ f^s^I^lt  f^^x:  5T.     Paharha  samana 

data  nai  bina  lathi  dinera  nai 

No  country  so  liberal  as  the  hills  {hill-men),  but  they 
will  not  give  any  thing  without  a  stick. 

This  is  used  to  describe  the  nature  of  the  hill-people, 
who  will  give  a  thing  when  they  are  forced  to  give  it,  but  not 
otherwise. 

6  ^i\Xj  m[  ^ifll^T  IfTTT  ffi  "^Iiil       Sungara  ka  pothila 
cbbara  ki  bana. 

Young  pigs  are  accustomed  to  ashes. 

Applied  to  people  of  low  and  mean  families,  by  way  of 
criticism  of  their  bad  conduct  and  evil  habits.  For  the  evil  and 
filthy  habits  to  which  they  have  become  accustomed  for  a  long 
time  become  a  second  nature  which  they  are  quite  unable  to 
forsake  afterwards. 

7  ^Z  ^  '^^^V[l  f^^W  ^N  ITW-      Bhata  ka  barbya 

bbitanai  linda  garbya. 

If  a  beggar's  {or  bard's)  family  increases  they  ease 
themselves  inside  their  houses. 


(     232     ) 

7.  e.  People  from  a  mean  family  are  accustomed  to  live 
mean  Uvea.  A  bh.S.ta  is  a  particular  caste  of  Khassia  Brahmans 
■who  beg  from  any  ani  everyone,  by  singing  their  praises,  and 
will  even  take  money  out  of  a  dead  man's  hands,  a  practice 
abhorrent  to  other  Brahmanas. 

8  ^|%^T  ^TT^  *!iT?  ^*T^  ^T^IIIT  clfH  ^I^.      Bhujelo 
badbata  badha  nitara  kharsyana  tabhi  howa. 

Let  a  pumpkin  swell  as  much  as  it  will,    whether  it   he 
large  or  small  it  will  shrivel  t(,p  all  the  same. 

The  nature  of  a  thing  cannot  be  changed.  The  evil  nature 
of  a  man  will  not  change  in  spite  of  all  appearances  to  the 
contrary. 

9  ;g«T  ^  'SJ^m  ^SRTT  f%  %T5(qTW  ^f^  'tf^ff^.    Duma  ki 
dumyana  bokya  ki  bokyana  kakhi  ni  jandi. 

The  peculiar  smell  of  a  JDum  and  a  he-goat  never 
dies  out. 

The  evil  propensities  of  people  of  low  families. 

10  ^»?lt  ^^'t  ^rf  f%  f^S\m  ^"^ITf^  %f  •      Duma  ki  tauli 
boda  ki  bithana  kabari  jaun. 

The  JDmn's  vessel  says,  "  When  shall  I  go  to  the  dwellings 
of  the  Bithas  ?" 

A  Dura  is  always  anxious  to  mix  with  the  Bithas  (Patricians) 
in  any  way  possible.  Applied  to  low  caste  people  who  are  anxious 
to  be  allied  with  the  higher  castes.  Even  an  injury  done  by  a 
Bitha.  to  a  Dam  is  welcomed  by  him  so  long  as  it  also  disgraces 
the  Bitha  caste. 

11  ^j  -Ti^  HT  $t  efirj  %j^  epif  qi^.      Mero  nau  cbha 

Bbadu  mai  kya  bodun  kya  kadun. 

Ml/  name  is  Bhadu,  what  I  say  or  do  no  one  knows. 

Applied  to  people  of  low  family  who  cannot  be  trusted. 
For  they  have  no  sense  of  shame  in  them. 


(     233     ) 

12  ^^  ^T^  ^T  'Srar  ^'»T  'ill  "^m  fk  Sllfi:.     Ekal  banaa 

ka  dala  supa  ekai  bansa  ki  topari. 

£ig  and  small   baskets^   and  fans,   are  made  of  the 
same  bamboo. 

Similarity  of  members  of  the  same  family.    C.  f.   "A  chip 
of  the  old  block." 

13  ^^  -^^^J  -^T*    Ekai  tbaili  ka  batta. 
Tf eights  of  the  same  bag. 

Same   meaning   as   above.     C.  f.    "Tarred    with   the   sam«s 
brush." 

14  "^^  gjT  -^z  '^T'J.     Bansa  ka  kbunta  bansa. 

^  - .         - 

A  bamboo  grows  out  of  the  stump  of  a  bamboo- 
As  father  so  is  son. 

15  ^^T  51%T   rT^T  «T%T»      Jaiko  jaso  taiko  taso^ 

Such  as  his  { father  \ 
Same  meaning  as  above. 

16  5it  ■^^'5  <Tf  'a'ym  5itT3Tirr  n7»T3i'a'«T.     Jan  bammana 

tan  langbana  jan  rajputa  tan  majabuta. 

Starving  where  Brahmans  (reside),  everything   to  be 
had  where  Ha j puts  {reside). 

J^  g.  Brahm;ins  are  very  Inzj',  and  therefore  live  on  begging 
fpriesthood)  whereas  Rajputs  are  very  industrious  and  have  every 
necessary  in  their  hom«s  available  at  any  time.  If  .i  traveller 
happens  to  be  in  a  village  settlt>d  by  Brahmans  alone  he  is  sure 
to  starve  there,  but  if  be  settles  in  one  of  Rajputs  fnow  also 
called  Khassias,  i.  ,e.  coolie  race)  he  will  get  all  kinds 
of  food, 

D  2 


(     234     ) 

This  is  also  used  by  Rajputs  in  regard  to  Brahmans,  in- 
nsmuch  as  the  latter  being  engaged  iu  their  religious  duties  take 
their  meal  late,  while  the  former  who  have  nothing  of  the  kind 
to  do  take  their  meal  in  good  time. 

17  ^f%m  ^T^T  ^^T  ar/q  ailJI^r  ^r^T-      Khasiya  bbola 

delo  topi  mangalo  chola. 

The  Khasiya  (coolie  or  rustic)  is  so  simple  that  he   will 
demand  a  long  coat  in  exchange  for  a  cap. 

An  ironical  expression  meaning  that  rogues  combine  great 
cunning  with  apparent  simplicity. 

18  q'ST^  ^T  ■'^T'JT  "SlfH  TTT^  \l  TT31T  llf^-     Paharha  ko 
Raja  kliati  mala  ko  Kaja  liathi. 

A  Khdti  king  in  the  hills,  and  a  loild  elephant   in  the 
Bhdbara  {vlains  commencing  from  the  foot  of  the  hills). 

E.  p.  Before  the  amalg;imation  of  the  kingdom  of  Kumaun 
by  Raja  Kalyan  Ohand  of  the  Ohnnd  dynasty  into  one  state,  Khati, 
a  race  of  Kajpnt  origin  held  sway  for  a  time  in  the  hills, 
while  the  plains  below  the  hill  ranges  were  full  of  wild  elephants, 
and  so  people  dreaded  to  j)ass  through  them.  Hence  the  Khati 
tribe  of  the  hills  was  appropriately  compared  to  the  wild  elephant 
of  the  Bhabar. 

19  ^^m  f%^  «l  J1T«!I  1^^^■^  si.      Khasiya  mitra  nai  gana 

pawitra  nai. 

The  Khasiya  will  never  prove  to  be   a  friend,   nor  a 
croton  holy. 

20  ofiTfTJl  ^  '^f%1T  ^T'i'I  ^5lf%^T«     Jatana  me  Barhiya 
sagana  me  jarhiya. 

Of  all  castes  the   barhiya   (gardener')    (is    the  worst) 
and  of  all  vegetables  the  jarhiyd  \^roxburgh). 

The  gardener  or  Mali  caste  is  very  selfish  and  unworthy  of 
confidence,  and  so  is  the  vegetable  Jarhiyd  which  is  bitterish  in 
taste  and  unwholesome  owing  to  its  generating  catarrh,  colic, 
etc  when  eaten, 


(  235   ; 

21  I3f%?i7  »T«1I^r  ^T  j»ir«      Khasiya  manayo  thanga 
thancro. 

A.  Khasiya  (villager')  ichen  entreated  becom.es  ungracious. 

I.e.  Polite  requests  are  lost  on  tho  villager  who  will  only 
serve  you  after  being  threatened, 

PERSEVERENCE  &  DETERMINATION. 

1  ^I^TT  ^fTT«!  «I'l  vf-     Saka  rau  santana  jana  rau. 

Let  fame   or  reputation  be  established,   thoiigh  sons 
should  perish. 

Applied  by  one  who  is  determined  to  fight  out  his  case  to 
the  end  even  at  the  risk  of  losing  his  own  sons  or  property,  for 
he  wishes  his  own  name  to  live  after  him  on  account  of  the 
affi>ir» 

2  flr'T  5^T^  l^"^^  f^3iT^■     Shlra  jawa  sbirarLi  ni  jawa. 
Let  one's  head  perish,  but  not  his  determination., 

C.  f.    "Try,  try,  and  try  again." 

Illustration.  Once  a  bird  known  as  "SitoW"  had  seven 
young  ones  in  a  nest  built  in  one  of  the  branches  of  a  tree.  She 
brought  seven  grains  of  millet  to  feed  them  with.  Six  of  tho 
j'ourig  ones  ate  each  its  share,  but  the  seventh  grain  fell  into  a 
crack  of  the  tree  from  which  the  bird  could  not  extract  it.  She 
went  to  a  blacksmith  and  requested  him  to  cut  the  tree,  but  he 
refused  to  do  so.  Then  she  appealed  to  the  king  of  the  realm 
to  fine  the  blacksmith  for  his  non-compliance  with  her  request. 
But  the  king  refused  to  do  so.  Then  she  went  to  a  mouse  and 
requested  him  to  gnaw  the  bed  of  the  king.  The  mouse  also 
refused  to  grant  her  request.  Then  she  went  to  a  cat  and  requested 
her  to  kill  the  mouse,  she  also  declined  to  do  so.  After  this  she 
entreated  a  crow  to  take  out  the  cat's  eyes,  but  the  crow  also 
refused  to  comply  with  her  request.  Then  she  went  and  requested 
the  fire  to  scorch  the  feathers  of  the  crow  ;  tho  fire  also  refused. 
On  this  she  went  to  the  waterspring  entreating  it  to  quench  the 
fire,  and  on  its  refusal  she  requested  a  ram  to  destroy  the  spring, 
on  the  refusal  of  the  ram  she  requested  to  a  leopard  to  kill  the 
ram,  the  leopard,  on  this,  said     "Very   good,   shew  me   the   ram, 


(     236    ) 

1  will  do  so."  Then  she  brought  the  leopard  to  the  ram,  -who 
being  frightened  at  the  presence  of  the  leopard  agreed  to  destroy 
the  spring,  which  in  its  turn  to  save  itself  from  being  injured 
promised  to  quench  the  fire.  Then  the  fire  promised  to  scorch 
the  feathers  of  the  crow,  the  crow,  to  pull  out  the  eyes  of  the  cat, 
the  cat  to  kill  the  mouse,  the  mouse  to  gnaw  the  bed  of  the  kin tr, 
and  the  king  to  punish  the  blacksmith,  and  the  blacksmith  to  cut 
the  tree  and  take  out  the  grain  of  millet  from  its  crevice.  So  the 
bird  succeeded  in  her  determination. 


PETTY  TRANSACTIONS 

1  "^ST^  ^T'OT  ^I'n'^T'^'      Tina  tepauria  paune  chara 

Three  Tepauna  if  added   to   Us.    3/   amount  to   Ms. 
3 — 13 — 0  (three  Rupees  and  twelve  annas )  only. 

E.  g.  A  Tepauna  is  ^  of  twelve  nnnas  (or  f  of  a  Rupee). 
Rupees  '6j  is  a  very  small  cnpitiil.  If  one  ]{upee  brings  four 
annas  profit  (the  highest)  the  whole  will  not  amount  in  any  way 
to  more  than  Bs-  3—12—0. 

Applied  to  a  small  business  in  derision.  C.f.  "Six  of  the  one 
and  half  a  dozen,  of  the  other." 


POLYGAMY. 

1  ItaE  aiT  "^sfi  "^T-a^  ^?:  sqi  ^5'':  iw)"-       Eka  bya  chakra 
barati  dui  bya  kuknragati 

Se  who  has  one  wife  is  as  an  emperor,  but  he  who  has' 
two  wives  is  treated  like  a  dog. 

Once  a  thief  entered  the  house  of  a  man  who  had  two  wives.- 
One  occupied  the  lower  story  of  the  house  and  the  other  the  upper 
one.  When  the  husband  after  taking  his  evening  meal  began 
to  ascend  the  steps  to  the  upper  story  (intending  to  go  to  his  other 
wife)  the  one  who  lived  below  began  to  drag  him  down.  Seeing 
this,  the  other  wife,  who  lived  in  the  upper  story,  came  and  began 
to  pull  him  upwards.  Witnessing  this  amusing  scene  for  some 
minutes  the  thief  left  the  house,  and  proclaimed  the  proverb  tO' 
the  people  at  large. 


(     237    ) 
POOR  PEOPLE. 

1  ^rfJl  «fli^  '^^T  ''Tl^  '^Tl^  ^fiZT-     Jogi  jogi  larha  pattara 
pattara  phuta. 

When    Jogis  (ascetics)  fight  with   each  other  their 
vessels  iin  which   they  collect   their  alms)   are  broken, 
and  being  of  little  value  no  great  damage  is  done. 
Applied  to  quarrels  or  law  suits  between  poor  persons. 

2  ifi^r  Jfir  f%^T^I  ^mxj  ^l^J.      Panda  ka  sikbaya 
wobara  ka  satha^ 

Those  of  the  upper  story  were  taught,  but  those  of  the 
lower  story  became  clever. 

Sods  of  rich  and  well-to-do  men  notwithstanding  the  care 
and  exfiense  bestowed  on  their  education  do  not  jirofit  by  it,  where- 
as the  sons  of  poor  men  who  listen  attentively  to  the  instruction  of 
the  former  become  learned. 

3  qrlf%  515  ^liB^I"  f^^If*      Patali  clibanchba   pani    ni 
swawa. 

Tliin  butter  milk  does  not  admit  of  more  water  being- 
mixed  icith  it. 

A  very  poor  man  cannot  afford  to  support  anyone  but  himself. 

4  %f%?IT  ^  ^■^'^  ^T^T  ^»    Lestiya  ki  charbi  gbercba 
men. 

The  fat  of  the  Lestiyd  (a  very  small  bird)  is  in  its: 
Gherchd,  i.  e.  a  small  sac  in  the  intestines. 

Poor  people  need  to  hide  away  very  carefully  the  little  money 
they  may  have. 

5  »IT^T  ^^(^  %^r  f^  ^1^1  ^r-      ^Jaro  wesani  jai  ko  nl 
rodaro* 


(     238     ) 

Kill  or  beat  one  who  has  none  to  cry  for  him,  i.  e.  who 
has  no  one  to  support  or  protect  him. 

This  phrase  is  ironically  used  when  a  helpless  poor  person 
is  injured. 

6  T^'^zj  \j  vjg  %f  v^      I\laduwa  ko  bLawa  ko  pucliba. 

Tf^ho   will    enquire   the  rate   of   Maduwa    {millet)  ? 

This  means,  who  cares  for  a  poor  person  ?  Maduwa  is  a  very 
cheap  coarse  grain  eaten  only  by  the  poor. 

C.  f.  "Rattle  his  bones  over  the  stones, 
"He's  only  a  pauper  whom  nobody  owns." 

7  ^tt[^  ^^  ^^  ^^^^  HcT  ^^5  :^  ^  ^q^.     Arasi  mukha 
saba  dekliani  tawa  mukha  kwe  ni  dekhanu. 

No  one  need  look  into   an  iron  oven   {which  is  sooty), 
instead  of  a  looking  glass. 

E.  g.  No  one  sides  with  or  helps  a  poor  and  distressed  person, 
but  every  one  naturally  wishes  to  please  a  party  in  position  and 
power, 

Gariba  le  bbir'ua  men  chadiinu  bhirho  udbari  gaj^o  ta  pali 

pali  baitbi  janu. 

A  poor  man  may  mount  on  a   loall ;    hut  if  the  wall 
becomes  insecure  he  should  put  himself  in  a  safe  place. 

A  poor  man  should  not  fight  for  a  thing  of  which  he  has  been 
deprived  by  force  though  it  was  his  by  right. 

9  l\^^^^  ^T  ^31  SRT^-     Gariba  ka  dasha  kala. 
A  poor  person  has  ten  deaths  or  oppressors. 

I.  e.  Every  man  oppresses  poor  people. 

10  Jirt"^   «PT  «qi^  %T  ^^^T'      Gariba  ka  bya  men  nau 

khechala. 


(     239     ) 

There  are  nine  obstacles  in  the  way  of  the  marriage 
of  a  poor  man. 

In  arranging  for  a  marriage  many  persons  or  relatives  are 
concerned  and  have  to  be  consulted.  A  poor  man,  not  having  the 
means  to  please  all,  cannot  expect  them  to  be  in  his  favor,  and  conse- 
quently many  obstacles  are  thrown  in  his  way. 

11  ^riT  f%  ^TfT  W%  ^IT"^-       Ghorlia  ki  lata  gTiorhai 
saharanchha. 

A  horse's  hick  can  he  borne  by  a  horse  only. 
A  poor  person  cannot  fight  with  a  stronger  one, 

Gbarha  ma  dhungo  ta  gbarba  ki  landa  dhunga  ma  gharho 
ta  gbarha  ki  ran  da. 

If  an  earthen  jar  is  struck  by  a  stone  it  will  break, 
and  if  the  jar  strikes  the  stone,  it  will  suffer  the 
same  fate. 

Poor  people  have  no  chance  against  the  rich.  C.  f.  "It  is 
useless  striking  your  head  against  a  stone  wall." 

13  ^T  f^'TJ^  ^^^JT"?  ^       Nanga  sitani  ujyarha  men. 
Naked  men  sleep  in  the  jungle. 

E.  g-  They  have  no  fear  of  being  robbed  of  any  thing- 
Applied  to  one  who  has  nothing  to  lose. 

C.f.  "You  cannot  take  the  breeks  off  a  highlander."  (Scotch 
proverb.) 

14  f^JT^rel"  ^T  T^^l  f%^-      Nimanasi  ko  madana  singha. 
Madan  Singha  {is  called  for)  ichen  no  other  is  to  be  had. 

Madan  Sing  is  an  inferior  man. 

15  ^^^T  ^t  '^%'^J  ^T  ^T*!-      Kukurba  son  takuwa  ko 
dama. 


(    240     ) 

The  prick  of  a  thin  hot  iron  bar  is  enough  for   a  hen 
to  bear. 

A  Talclwd  is  a  thin  iron  bar  which  is  attached  to  the  hand 
of  a  spindle.  '■'■Ddma"  is  a  slio;ht  burn  with  a  hot  iron  as  a  reme- 
dy for  pain  in  different  parts  of  the  body.  If  a  hen  is  burned  even 
with  the  thin  iron  of  the  spindle  it  is  enough  for  her.  The  meanino- 
is  that  even  a  little  loss  is  enough  for  a  poor  man. 

16  ^  3!?ig  ^  ^  ^  ^T'?  ^^'3  ^^5151  "^T^  ^1^-  Ye  jangala 

men  mai  na  bapa  alakha  niranjana  api  apa. 

Orphaned  in  this  jungle,  unnoticed,  alone,   entirely 
by  himself. 

This  is  said  by  one  who  thinks  himself  helpless  in  this 
world,  which  he  considers  as  a  desert. 

17  ^^T  ^  ^  f^  'rr^T  '^T^'gx:  ^j  %\^.      Andha  ki  jwe  ki 
pati  parmeshwara  ka  hatha. 

God  alone  is  the  protector  of  a  blind  man's  wife. 
Said  of  poor  people  when  oppressed  by  the  rich, 

18  ^17  %  aF^T  1'?TT^  ^T  ^^X-     Swarga  ko  chhuto  patala 
ko  phuto. 

Let  fall  from  the  slcy,  and  broken  on  the  earth. 

Used  of  one  who  is  extremely  poor  and  has  no  one  to  support 
or  help  him.  One  who  does  not  even  know  his  own  parentage  or 
is  ashamed  of  it,  and  is  also  in  very  poor  circumstances. 

19  ^TT  5115  lf^  T^  SR^  ^g^'n  Rri  %t^  ■^ft-     Mero  nau 

chha  padi  iche  kadun  ahikhana  bhinde  lionda  badi. 

My  name  is  only  Padi,  but  for  my  slight  faults  I  am 
greatly  defamed. 

Said  by  one  bemonning  himself  as  a  poor  and  humble  man 
■who  is  constantly  blamed  for  slight  faults,  while  great  men  do 
much  worse  things  with  impunity. 

One  law  for  the  rich  and  another  for  the  poor. 


C     241     ) 

20  jTct^  sfiT  ^^T  ^^  ^]  ^r^.     Gariba  ka  chela  ninda  ko 
posba. 

For  the  children  of  the  poor,  sleep  is  the  only  nourishment. 

Poor  people  should  not  disturb  their  peace  of  mind  by 
nndertnkinor  such  works  as  lead  to  quarrels  and  risks  which  they 
are  unable  to  cope  with. 

21  ^fr^T  %r  sg  g3Tf%  liT  vr.      Chbora  ko  jlu  tumrhi  ko 
gliyu. 

Tlie  pluck   of  an   orphan   is   only   equal  to   the  ghi 

contained  in  a  tumrhi,  i.  e.  very  little 

A  Tumrhi  is  a  very  smajl  vessel  cut  out  of  a  long  pumpkin. 
A  poor  man  has  very  little  courage  to  undertake  any  thine. 

22  zi^  ^"TT  TT  ^^^\  %T  XJTl.      Phola  damaun  ma 
kamcb\'or,  ko  raira. 

The  soft  song  of  the  Kimcha  (fiddlers  and  minstrels) 
amidst  the  be  iting  of  big  drums. 

In  other  words  the  voice  of  a  Tuti  (a  small  bird)  in  a  house 
full  of  sounding  drums. 

A[i])lied  by  one  who  thinks  himself  too  poor  to  have  his 
prayers  and  petitions  heard  b_v  a  groat  man  or  officer,  who  is 
inaccessible  to  iiiui;  Khimcha  means  the  players  of  musical 
instruments  v;ho  accompany  singing  and  dancing  girls. 

23  ^"^^Tl^  ^  f'^  f^  >Tlf%.      Dubala  ki  jwe  panchun  ki 

bbabi. 

The  wife  of  a  poor  wan  is  addressed  hy  all  as   ''Bhdbi" 
or  '"'■JBahu''  (^.  e.  elder  brother's  wife). 

Every  one  looks  on  her  with  bad  intentions,  and  amuses 
himself  by  chaffing  her,  which  he  would  not  dare  to  do  in 
the  case  of  a  rich  man's  wife. 

E  2 


(     2U    ) 

24:  sfSir  ^^  TSirr^^-    Nan<To  kuda  ujyarha  men. 
One  naked  does  not  hesitate  to  trespass. 

E.  p.  OiiP  who  is  very  poor  and  has  neither  property  nor 
family  will  rot  hesitate  to  commit  a  wrongful  act,  for  he  has 
nothing  to  lose. 

25  ^  f5ff  ^  (5f  ^T  'W^.     Ke  piddi  ke  piddi  ko  jhola. 
What  is  a  piddi,   and  how  much   soup   can   he  made 

from  it  ? 

PidHi  is  a  very  small  bird. 

Used  as  ridicule  when  comparing  small  things  with  greater. 

26  f^Tl^l^T  ^t  ^  f*  ^TT^-      Kirmola  son    muta  ki 
rewarha. 

A  stream  of  urine  is  an  unfordable  river  to  an  ant. 

Used  by  poor  people  to  express  their  helplessness  to  do  even 
a  small  thing. 

27  ^»?T  *IT  f^^I^  ^.     Nanga  nau  nichorha  ke. 

"What  cloth  icill  a  naked  man  wring  dry  if  he  bathes  ? 

Applied  to  one  who,  having  no  property  whatever,  incurs 
debt.      He  will  have  nothing  to  pay  back. 

Illustration.  Once  a  washerman  in  hope  of  finding  employ  and 
live^hood  repaired  to  a  certain  colony  inhabited  by  naked  people, 
called  '"Digambars,"  having  nothing  else  but  the  eight  directions 
(East,  west,  north,  south,  northeast,  southeast,  northwest,  and 
southwest)  for  their  clothes.  The  man  finding  the  inhabitants 
in  such  a  condition  lost  no  time  in  quitting  the  place. 

POVERTY. 

1  ^Tl  («r?rt  'RHI^f^T  ^  ^%T  ?T^^«     Apa  miyan  ma 

ganu  pTiIra  bhaira  kharho  darwaisha. 


(    243    ; 

A  beggar  is  standing  at  the  door  of  a  man  who  himself 
lives  by  begging. 

C.  f.    "Begwarj  nannot  help  boggars." 
'•Can  the  blind  lead  the  blind  Y' 

2  ^m  ^  ^I^T  \^\  ^  ^^T^r-     PJiunga  men  dbojo  poka 
men  ubayo. 

Washed  on  a  stone  and  dried  on  his  loins. 

E.  g.  A  man  is  so  poor  as  to  have  only  one  dhoti  (cloth  to 
cover  the  loinsj  which  he  is  obliged  to  wash  when  bathing,  but 
having  only  one  he  has  to  put  it  on  again  as  soon  as  washed,  before 
it  is  dry. 

Extreme  indigence. 

3  ^  %^  ^ZlWKff  %»?$  hjZl-  Peta  haigain  tota  karama 
haigain  khota, 

A  hole  in  the  stomach  (always  hungry),  deeds  bad. 

One  in  poverty  always  feels  hungry,  and  is  therefore  apt  to 
resort  to  illegal  or  dishonest  means  of  livelihood  which  are  sure 
and  certain  signs  of  his  total  ruin. 

Used  as  a  caution  against  falling  into  such  errors  as  will 
lead  to  destruction. 

POWER  &  POSITION. 

1  »Jtot  1511  ^T'tt  ^"^h     Griini  puja  dokhi  saja. 

A  worthy  man  is  respected  and  an  offender  is  punished. 
Used  to  pursuade  boys  to  become  skilled  and  learned  men. 

2  ^r  ^T  ^«^T  ^tH"  liT  TTf%5|i  ^^^T*      Kutta  kya 
dekhano  kutta  ko  malika  dekhano. 

It  is  not  the  filthy  dog  we  respect  but  the  position  of  the 
person  to  whom  it  belongs. 

Used  of  a  great  man's  unworthy  relations  and  servants  who 
are  dreaded  only  owing  to  their  family  connections,  or  to  their 
position  in  a  great  man's  house. 


(    2U     ) 

3  •TK^f  ^^5[.     Nura  son  adesha. 

Sending  (making  obeisance)  before  a   light  or   splendour 

(great  man). 

I.  e.  Every  ono  respects  or  tries  to  please'  a  prosperous 
person. 

4  ^<ircji?TT  »It^  ^  ^^TfTiTT  «II1T  sf)"-  Mulaka  ma  ganwa  ni 

dafutara  ma  nama  ni. 

I  have  no  village  in  the  country  and  my  name  is  nowhere 
in  the  office. 

H.  g.  Every  ono  who  possesses  an  entire  villncre  or  a 
])ortion  ot  one  has  his  mine  recorded  in  the  public  office.  He 
who  Lts  no  land  has  no  name  in  the  office. 

Used  by  one  who  laments  his  humble  position  in  the  world;. 

5  si'^  "^^.  <TT  ^^  'r"5ITf';>     Jasai  dewata  usai  pujari. 

As  is  the  god,  so  is  the  worshipper. 

1.  €.     As  is  the  head,  so  are  his  attenrlent.=. 
Used  to  denote  a  man's  ])osition  as  wrii   as   character  (either 
good  or  badj  judged  from  his  servants  and  comrades  &c. 

6  ^^f%  ^f^^  ^^%*     Miikliavbi  dekbika  tukarbi. 
To  give  one  bread  after  seeing  his  face. 

K.  g.  A  man  g;ets  re<rard  or  disre^iard  from  other  people 
according  to  his  position.  To  the  great  we  give  much,  to  the 
poor  little. 

7  51^  1?  nm  ^f*  ^-    Jasi  ru  tasa  pbarista. 

As  is  the  soul  {of  man^  so  will  he  the  angel  {of  death.) 

JC-  g.  It  is  said  that  when  a  man  dies  angels  come  to  take 
his  soul,  [f  he  is  a  sinner  the  angels  of  iiell  will  come  and  take 
liim  to  hell,  and  if  he  is  a  righteous  man  an  angel  from  paradise 
will  descend  from  heaven  to  take  him  there. 

This  is  used  by  one  bemoaning  that  he  is  visited  by  sickne.«sea 
one  after  the  other,  or  by  distresses  (or  of  another  in  such  a 
condition)  in  consequence  of  former  bad  deeds. 


(    2U    ) 

8  IT^  ^Hf^  iiTfay.     Gurha  dagarhi  makha. 
Files  will  flock  round  treacle. 

Applied  to  one  who  while  in  power  is  crowded   by  followers. 

9  ^iJT  ^  TTT^  ^^  ^Z^.    Giiama  ki  tarafa  saba  baithani. 
All  sit  on  the  side  where  the  sun  shines. 

This  is  to  the  same  purport  as  the  preceding  one. 

10  '«'^U  ^  ^^  ^IIT-      PbecLuwa  ki  kbeba  kurba 
ma, 

Fhechuwd's  flight  is  up  to  the  roof. 

E.g.  A  small  bird  called  " P/iec/ntwa'  can  fly  only  as  high 
as  the  roof  of  a  house,  hence  the  point  of  the  [iroverb.  It  is 
applied  to  a  poor  man  whose  powers  of  action  -are  limited. 

11  ^'^  %f^^  l«f?  ^fi^J  \{^^  aTr^TT.      Mukharhi 
dekhi  ka  tukarhi  cbetana  dekhi  ka  byohara. 

Alms  according   to   appearance,    and  business   dealings 
according  to  intelligence. 

E.  g.  One  gives  alms  or  gifts  to  another  according  to  the 
position  of  the  receiver,  and  deals  with  him  according  to  his 
skill  or  wit. 

12  51^  SllJl^Tfl^  ^^f*  ^'sT^.      Jasai  jagadyo   tasai 

bbata  ki  pakbola. 

As  is  the  deity  Jdgdyo,  such  is  the  food  made  of  JBhatcs 

(a  kind  of  inferior  pulse)  offered  to  him. 

A  man  is  honored  or  dishonored    according   to    his    position- 
er qualification.     C.  f-    "As  is  the  garden,  such  is  the  gardener."^ 


(    246    J 

13  si^t  tH  fT%  f^^*!!.     Jaai  randa  tasai  disana. 
As  the  woman  {dancing  girl)  so  her  carpet. 

As    a    man    is   in    character,    position    &c,    so    will    be   his 
circumstances. 

14  ^T(*%  'Sf^^r  af-^  'JT'TT.     Khali  kbasiya  bud'ai  patara. 

A  Khasiyd  (a  hill  rustic  or  a  man  of  coolie  race  without 
employ  ),  and  an  old  prostitute  ( do  not  meet  with 
regard ). 

Used  of  those  who  are  out  of  power. 

15  xfW^  *5ff l^r  ^\  %\(k^\  ^^r-     Puchbarha  jharhi- 

gayo  nau  chauriya  raigayo. 

Though  the  ox  has  lost  his  coloured  tail  lie  is  still  called 
"Chauriya." 

This  is  applied  to  one  who  is  nominally  called  after  his  former 
post  or  position,  of  which  he  has  been  deprived  now. 

PRECEPT  &  PRACTISE. 

1  *rT^  'aiT^  H^^TT-     Masu  khaika  masakhara. 

One  who  eats  animal  food  condemns  it  in  others. 

Instead  of  this   having  any    effect    on   the    minds  of  people 
they  laugh  at  the  man. 

The  eating  of  animal  food  is  considered  sinful. 

2  ^^^X^  ^T<\^\%r{  ^T'?  'fi'^^fT.     Aurana  bo  nasbihata 

apa  phajihata. 

One  who  is  himself  of  a  loose  character  gives  instructions 
to  others  (  to  no  purpose  J . 

I.  e.   No  one  will   attend   to   him,   knowing   his   character. 
"Practise  what  you  preach." 


(     247     ) 

rana  denda  hako  ddko  apa  randa  na  hurhakiya  raklio. 

A  female  who  lectures  others  {on  chastity)  is  hersdf  in 
love  with  a  drummer,  ( JSurhakiyd  is  a  man  of  the  loicest 
caste  even  among  the  JDumas  ). 

PRIDE  &  HAUGHTINESS. 

1  ^fn  ^gT^I  SIT  ZIX  JJ.    Ati  chatura  ka  nau  thaura  gu. 

Se  who  thinJcs  him,self  very   clever,   loill  find  filth  in 

nine  places  on  his  own  person. 

E.  g.  A  clever  and  proud  man  has  many  great  defects  in 
him,  of  which  he  is  not  conscious. 

2  ^Zof5jTTT  v^  MXsy  ^^wi^r  ^^  ^T21-       Batakj^ara 

bbukba  marana  cherhwalyo  bhela  lotana. 

One  who  is  very  fastidious   about  his   food  will  starve, 

and  he  who  thinks  too   much   of  himself  {always  looks  up 

at  the    ky  )  will  fall  down  a  precipice. 

This  proverb  advises  one  to  be  content  with  what  he  gets, 
and  not  to  boast  of  any  thing  that  he  has  in  this  world.  C.  f. 
"Fride  cometh  before  destruction,  and  a  haughty  spirit  before 
a  full." 

3  f^ira^^  "SH^frilT  ^"H-       Bigachyun   duma  khiri  ma 

luna. 

A  very  proud  JDtima  {low  caste)  who  goes  beyond  the 
limits  of  his  caste  puts  salt  in  the  rice-milk  {instead 
of  sugar). 


(     2i8     ) 

/.  e.  One  who  is  puffed  up  or  proud,  does  a  thing  beyond 
his  power  or  jiosition.  A  miin  who  places  himself  out  of  his 
natural  and  proper  station  in  life,  does  odd  things. 

4  vf  ^  ^T<3T  lirHif.     Bhin  men  ankha  nahatana. 
One  never  looking  towards  the  earth 

Applied  to  a  very  proud  person. 

5  ^^]^  ^  '^ff  ^T-     Bansa  men  charbiyo. 
One  mounted  on  a  bamboo. 

Denoting  a  very  haughty  person. 


6  ^7T"5  ifr^I^r  ^^  ^"^TTr-      Chutarha  cbbarama  sbe- 
kbi  jihorbama. 

Saunches  in  ashes,  but  pride  as  if  on  a  horse. 

Applied  to  one  in  poor  circumstances  who  becomes  very 
proud.  One  who  sits  in  nshes  ,'i.  e.  who  is  extremely  poor)  is  as 
proud  as  a  man  who  rides  on  a  horse.     A  beggar  on  horseback. 

7  V^T  f?B  'Sirf^  Z^I^  f%^r5I'     Dbela  ki  dumani  taka  ko 
mijaja. 

A  Dumani  { feinale  Dom)  worth  a  quarter  of  a  pice  has 

the  pride  of  two  pice. 

E  ff.  A  poor  man  leading  a  life  beyond  bis  position  or 
circumstances. 

8  ^'RTT^  T^T  ^'l^l  ^^ffT^T  WiT^  ^rfl-  Utarayan 
undo  lamadana  cbarbawalya  kapala  pborbana. 

Persons  going  out  of  their  proper  limits  shall  fall,  and 

persons  proud  and  haughty  will  come  to  grief. 

Applied  to  those  who  lead  extravagant  lives  as  well  as 
to  those  who  are  haughty- 


(     249     ) 

9  ^^  f%i}t  ^T^^I  ^  1^  'ajT  VW*    I'aili  miyan  bawalo 
tai  para  kbai  bhanga. 

t)ne  who  is  already  insane  eats   bhanga   {hemp)  for 
intoxication. 

This  is  used  when  one  noted  for  pride  becomes  much 
haughtier  on  account  of  increase  of  fortune.  To  add  crime  to 
crime,  to  act  in  a  very  senseless  manner. 

10  ^gf  ^^fk^\  fjJTrpTf^  "sq^  ^jfir  ^  \^1W-     Paili  budbiya 

gitanga  cbbi  aba  nati  jai  baigocbba. 

The  old  woman  who  always  sang  for  gladness  of  heart 
has  her  joys  increased  by  the  birth  of  a  grandson. 

I.  e.    Excessive  pride  at  one's  good  fortune. 

11  "^"i  ^f%^T  ^f  J   ^  "^f^^T-      Apun  sarbiyo  gborba 

men  cbarhiyo, 

Simself   rotten    ( utterly    destitute )    but  riding    a 
horse. 

This  phrase  is  used    of  a   poor    person   who    is    haughty,   or 
assumes  the  airs  of  a  rich  man. 

12  ^Ttjmj   T«1W   JI«!T    ^T'^^T"!-       Apana   mana   le   guna 
baurana. 

Gund  thinks  herself  the  beloved  loife  of  her  husband 
(who,  however,  does  not  like  her  J, 

Self-praise  is  no  recommendation.  This  is  used  of  one  who 
thinks  too  much  of  himself.  0.  f.  "It  is  not  good  to  eat  much 
honey  :  so  far  even  to  search  their  own  glory  is  not  glory."  "Let 
another  man  praise  thee,  and  not  thine  own  mouth,  a  stranger, 
and  not  thine  own  lips." 

13  TT^  5131^15  ft'^  'inr^l^T'^^    Ransi  nazaracbba 
bicba  ganga  dekhado  nicbba. 

F  2 


(     250     ) 

Sis  eye  is  turned  upwards  and  he  does  not  see   the 

deep  river  that  is  below  him. 

This  is  applicable  to  one  who  does  not  see  how  he  is  being 
ruined.  C  f.  Let  thine  eyes  look  right  on  and  let  thine  eye-lids 
look  straight  before  thee. 

14  f?!^^  ^^'g  f^  (tI5!T5^  ift^T*      Shikala    churerhaki 
mijaja  pari  ko. 

Face  of  a  hag  and  the  pride  of  a  fairy. 

Ironically  used  in  regard  to  one  who  being  destitute  of 
any  qualification  or  worth  assumes  an  air  of  superiority  and 
haughtiness. 

15  \  TT^JT  ^  ^f?l  ^  ^f^.     Raja  ke  dhani  mai  dhani. 

^  TTjsij  ^TT  ^ivh\  ^f%.     Kaja  mera  dhana  ko  dhani. 

^  ^f%^T«T  ^T^I^*^.     Lecbhioyo  ta  kbayo  kana. 
1    What  is  the  king's  wealth  compared  to  mine. 
8  The  king  is  wealthy  by  my  wealth. 

3  If  he  took  my  wealth  why  could  he  not  enjoy  it  ? 

The  above  are  the  three  notes  supposed  to  be  sung  by  a 
small  active  bird  known  as  '■'■FyurarliV  which  dances  about 
singing  on  the  branches  and  twigs  of  trees. 

Once  while  catching  insects  and  worms  on  the  ground  she 
found  a  very  small  copper  coin  which  she  took  in  her  bill  and 
danced  about  singing  note  1.  The  story  reached  the  king,  who 
being  angry  on  account  of  her  pride  had  the  coin  snatched  away 
from  her.  After  this  the  bird  began  to  sing  the  second  note.  On 
hearing  this,  the  king  for  fear  of  disgrace  thought  it  advisable 
to  return  her  the  said  coin.  As  soon  as  she  got  her  wealth  back 
she  began  to  sing  the  third  song.  Whereupon  the  good  king 
came  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  no  use  fighting  with  such  a 
smsU  creature  as  she  was.  Hence  the  proverb,  teaching  that  no 
one  can  stop  the  mouth  of  the  world,  and  that  it  is  beneath  the 
dignity  of  a  great  man  to  quarrel  with,  or  tease,  or  oppress,  poor 
people,  for  they  have  no  strength  or  courage  to  face  him,  but  will 
open  their  mouth  to  defame  or  revile  him.      They  are  puffed  up 


(     251     ) 

■with  the  little  they  have,  and  so  the  proverb   is   also   used   of  poor 
people  who  become  haughty. 

16  *f5i  tfsi^fV  ^^T  >TI»]  (^\^  ^%^  ^^.     Dhana  dhana 

kirhi  tero  bhaga  twipa  lidecbha  bheli. 

O  Kirhi,  you  are  the  more  fortunate  of  the  tico 
that  your  husband  gave  you  alone  a  Bheli  ( treacle  or 
gagry  cake  J.. 

A  man  had  twd  wives,  one  of  whom  was  Kirhi.  The  man, 
who  had  gone  to  a  foreign  country,  returned  home  with  money 
and  jewellery.  He  made  over  all  the  valuables  to  his  younger 
wife,  but  in  order  to  prevent  Kirhi  from  quarrelling  he  gave  her  a 
cake  of  gagry  (Bheli).  She  in  consequence  became  puffed  up  and 
shewed  her  pride  to  her  kinsmen  and  neighbours,  who  knowing 
what  had  taken  place  in  the  household  ironically  uttered  the 
phrase  which  afterwards  became  as  a  proverb.  Applied  to  those 
who  become  proud  by  having  a  little  property. 

17  ^  •!  >TI!1T  'g»I^T  %J^T'      Bbin  na  bbana  duma  ka 
bdna. 

Neither  on  the  ground,  nor  in  a  vessel,  hut  in  the  head 
of  a  JDu/ma  {a  low  caste  man). 

This  is  made  use  of  to  represent  a  very  haughty  person  who 
has  no  more  reason  to  be  proud  than  a  Duma  has.  A  haughty 
person  is  represented  by  a  Duma. 

Story :  Once  a  low-caste  man  was  spoken  to  by  a  king. 
The  man  after  having  been  thus  honored  came  to  his  house,  and 
contrary  to  his  usual  demeanor  sat  down  silent.  His  wife,  brother, 
and  sons  addressed  him  as  usual,  but  he  did  not  speak  or  reply 
to  them.  They  then  thought  him  to  be  possessed  by  a  demon, 
and  his  wife  eagerly  entreated  him  to  speak  to  her,  and  asked  the 
reason  of  his  having  become  angry  with  her.  On  this  he  beat 
her  with  a  stick  and  said,  "0,  cursed  woman  you  are  a  foolish  one, 
how  can  I  speak  with  you,  a  poor  woman,  with  the  mouth  with 
which  I  have  spoken  with  the  King  ?"  Hence  it  is  said  that  pride 
does  not  find  a  place  for  itself  anywhere  except  in  the  head  of  a 
low  person. 

18  ^TT  ^X  %  ^T1  ^'i  1T*I  "^^TIT  >i^T-      Mera  gbara 
hai  asra  lige  naraa  baisbwanara  dharo. 


(     252     ) 

You  took  fire  from  my  house  and  then  named  it 
'  'Saishwdnara. ' ' 

f  As  it  is  called  in  Sanserif). 

Used  of  one  who  ungratetnlly  shows  arrogance  to  another 
on  account  of  the  very  thing  which  he  had  received  from  him. 
.For  instance  a  student  will  act  proudly  towards  his  teacher  on 
account  of  the  learning  which  he  received  from  him. 

19  ^qT  511^  3^^  UTT^  -^^  "^IVT  WrflT-     ^1J^  'ITT^ 

■fTT  *ilT^T  ePTT  llT'ffT*  Upara  jali  nisa  parali  munha  men 
bandha  dbota.  Ye  hala  hamare  to  nangon  ka  kya 
nahota. 

I  have  a  net  over  me  and  straw  under  me,  and  my 
mouth  is  covered  with  a  Dhoti  fa  loin  cloth  J.  These 
are  my  conditions,  but  how  do  the  naked  live  ? 

The  speaker  is  really  naked,  but  he  thinks  much  of  himself, 
and  others  to  be  naked.  Applies  to  those  who  are  puffed  up  at  a 
little  property  they  have,  looking  down  upon  others  as  their 
inferiors  ;  as  elsewhere  it  is  said  that  the  man  of  low  descent  when 
made  a  king,  the  son  of  an  illiterate  man,  who  becomes  a  Pandita 
by  learning,  and  a  poor  man  who  gets  money,  consider  the  world 
to  be  like  a  piece  of  grass  (nothing). 


20  ^  ^T^r  "^^^  ^  V[\^J  '^t      "U  gborha  chadhanchha 
mai  pakha  cbadhun. 

If  he  rides  a  horse  I  shall  mount  a  roof. 
Applied  to  pride  and  haughtiness. 

PROSPERITY. 

1  %im  ^TT^  '^^T  W^  "^Tl"!  i;^T  ^r  ^rr  ■^I^-     Aya  sar£- 

dha  phula  kansa  bamana  kuda  nau  nau  bansa. 

At  the  approach  of  kanydgata  {fifteen  days  of  the 
Shrdddha  fortnight  lohich  according  to  astrological 
calctdations    occitrs   in   the   months   of    September   and 


(  253   ; 

October)  when  the  kdnsa  grass  used  in  sacrifices  and 

religiously/   (  JPod.   cynosuroides  )    begins  to  flower,    the 

JBrahmans  leap  with  joy,  nine  bamboos    ( a  bamboo=fen 

cubits  J  high. 

This  is  an  ironical  phrase  applied  to  the  Brahmans  by  other 
castes  who  have  to  feed  them  during  this  period. 

Out  of  the  four  months  of  the  rainy  season  called  "CTiaumdsa" 
sixteen  days  are  set  aside  for  the  worship  of  one's  deceased  ancestors 
for  three  generations  back  :  these  are  called  "the  sixteen  Shradhas," 
Shradha  means  a  religious  ceremony  performed  in  the  name  of 
one's  forefathers,  the  principal  part  of  which  consists  in  feastirrg 
as  many  Brahmans,  kinsmen  and  relatives  with  dainties  as  possible, 
and  giving  as  much  alms  as  one's  circumstances  permit  to  the 
Brahmanas.  This  is  performed  annually  on  the  anniversary  of  th« 
date  on  which  one's  father  or  mother  died.  It  has  also  to  be 
performed  on  the  corresponding  dates  of  the  Shradha  period. 
According  to  the  doctrine  of  transmigration  every  one  that  dies 
is  said  to  enter  into  another  body,  and  anything  given  to  God 
in  his  (deceased's^  name  is  enjoyed  by  him,  and  so  every  one 
wishing  bliss  and  prosperity  to  bis  forefathers  feeds  Brahmanas 
with  expensive  food  and  gives  them  as  much  alms  as  he  can. 

In  proportion  to  the  number  of  Brahmins  fed  and  the  value 
of  the  offerings  made  to  them  will  be  the  satisfaction  and  welfare 
of  the  forefathers,  who  in  return  will  bring  blessings  on  their 
descendants. 

The  proverb  is  also  sometimes  used  to  describe  a  piece  of 
good  lack. 

2  ^g'fl^  ^7  !lT»I»lTf%*     Chalati  ko  nama  garhi. 
As  long  as  the  vehicle  moves  it  is  called  Ihe  "gdrhi." 

A  man  is  considered  wise  and  good  as  long  as  he  is 
prosperous. 

.  .3 .  TTT^T  'Tf^  %^T  %T^^-      Tato  pani  selo  cboparha. 
•  TFarm,- water  and  cool  oil. 

This  is  quoted  in  regard  to  one  vi'ho  is  in  very  prosperotis 
circumstances,  as  only  well-to-do  persons  can  afford  to  have  warm 
water  to  bathe  in  and  oil  to  rub  over  their  bodies.  The  oil  is 
ynbbed  oyer  the  bodv  before  they  bathe  in  warm  water. 


(     254     ) 

4  'i^   ^T^  '^^  Tr^  ^"^  ?Tf5a^.      Pusu  koli  pusa  ten 

rancha  kucha  takhi  ten. 

The  weaver  "Ftlsu"  gets  employment  with  his   weaving 

instruments  up  to  the  month  of  Pusa  f  January  J. 

After  this  the  work  of  weaving  is  stopped. 
"Make  hay  while  the  sua  shines." 

5  5HTI>*  ^^I  ^TTin  ^H^T-     Sbaradha  sukha,  bamana  bhu- 
kha. 

When     Shrddhas    are    ended    the    JBrahmans    are 

hungry. 

Vide  above  for  a  description  of  the  religioiis  ceremony  called 
''Sharadhar 

6  T^  ^ZM  5  Vlfl  ^^»D   ^.     Dudha  ghutana  ku  bhata 
thukana  ku. 

To  drink  the  milk  and  to  spit  out  the  rice. 

Well-to-do  persons  generally  mix  rice  and  milk  together  for 
eating.  But  after  they  have  eaten  enough  rice  they  drink  the 
milk  only. 

Applied  to  one  who  has  enough  and  to  spare. 

7  ^gi?^  mi  ^^  ^.      Chalati  ka  saba  kwe. 

All  are  aJcin   to   the  prosperous  man,  i.  e.   everyone 
seeks  his  friendship. 

Story:  Rama  Chandra  king  of  Ajyodhya  (now  known  a& 
Fyzabad)  during  twelve  years'  banishment  once  happened  to  visit 
the  hut  of  the  saint  known  as  "Agasti."  The  saint  paid  no 
attention  to  him  and  did  not  receive  him  with  the  respect  due 
to  a  king.  But  when  after  having  killed  Rawana  he  was  on  his 
■way  to  his  capital  Ajodbya  io  ascend  his  father's  throne,  then  the 
same  saint  Agasti,  along  with  the  other  saints  also,  came  to  pay  his 
respects  to  the  king  (Rama  Chandra).  At  this  time  Rama  Chandra 
asked  Agasti  what  was  the  cause  of  his  being  so  courteous   at  this 


(     2'55    ) 

time,  since  both  of  them  knew  each  other  from  the  beginning  ;  to 
■which  the  saint  replied  "0  King,  one's  circumstances  are  worshipped 
or  respected,  but  not  his  body." 

8  ^TT>^  ^T^T  mTVn  5!T5nT  ^^T^f  fS^T^I  m^^  (^H^T. 
Saradha  laga  bamana  jaga  saradha  nimarha  bamana  chi- 
marha. 

The   Saradha  commenced,   the  JBrahmans  awoke,  the 
Sarddhas  ended,  the  Brahmans  became  lean. 

I.  e.  The  Brahmans  who  live  on  invitations  to  Saradhas  or 
religious  feasts  rejoice  and  grow  fat,  while  the  festivals  last,  but  they 
starve  when  the  religious  ceremonies  come  to  an  end. 

A  satire  on  Brahmans,  and  ^Iso  applied  to  one's  prosperous 
and  adverse  daj-s. 

9  ^"»^T  "^f%  "^^^      Kaparha  barhi  bastu. 

Clothes  are  the  chief  thing  (  for  respect  ), 

Once  a  man  of  some  note  -went  to  a  certain  town  in  his 
ordinary  dress,  but  was  not  saluted  nor  shown  any  respect  by 
any  person  he  met  with-  After  some  daj's  he  visited  the  same 
town  dressed  in  sumptuous  clothes,  when  he  was  greeted  and 
saluted  by  every  person  he  met.  In  reply  to  every  salutation 
the  man  instead  of  uttering  "Udma  Sdma"  (the  name  of  God), 
"jLshirldda'^  (blessing',  "Live  long''  "Be  happy"  <fec  (forms  of 
salutation),  said  as  above,  to  show  the  people  that  no  one  regards 
man  or  God  but  every  one  has  an  eye  to  the  apparent  signs  of  one's 
prosperity  which  command  the  respect  of  mankind  without  any 
regard  to  his  internal  defects  and  failings. 

10  ^T'^^lfT  ^^^  ^^^T^r»     Harabakhata  kukura  gbyu 
ni  kbano. 

Dogs  do  not  eat  ghi  every  day. 

One  must  not  look  for  continual  prosperity  without  a 
single  cloud. 

11  fij^T^gr  ^r  'TT'Sr-     Bida  dyo  ka  mapda. 
A  shed  for  bright  days. 


(     25G     ) 

Houses  in  which  one  can  find  shelter  orly  during  fine 
weather  and  not  on  a  rainy  day  when  they  leak  badly.  Summer 
friends,  who  fail  in  time  of  trouble. 


PROSTITUTES. 

f%^Z%7.     Patara  ko  yo  kama  khai  pi  satakau  chatura  ko 

yo  kama  patara  so  ni  atakau. 

Ti  is  ihe  harloVs   business   lo   entice   and  roh   a  man 

and  then  discard  him ;    but  the   toise   man    wilt   not   be 

tempted  by  her  seductions. 

Applied  to  all  who  selfishly  wish  to  profit  themselves  at  the 
«xpense  of  others. 

2  qj^^  %T  ^^  'l^T  ^  1^  ^T-     Patara  ko  yara  maro 
kai  gall  ko. 

Who  hnows  in  ichat   street    a  friend   of  a  prostitute 

died  ? 

This  is  nsed  to  sTiow  that  prostitutes  have  no  real  friends 
as  they  themselves  are  not  such  to  others.  As  they  have  a  great 
many  customers,  no  one  knows  the  whereabouts  of  the  one  who 
died.  This  is  used  by  one  who  having  a  certain  interest  in  a  joint 
matter  thinks  himself  too  poor   to    do   any    thing   in  the    matter. 

3  '^€t  ^■<:'Tl€t  'lf?r  m{Tk[  W^\^^^      Randi  gbara  mandi 

patibrata  ko  karhaka. 

.     It  is  strange  that  a  harlot   has   an   abu7idance  of  every 

thing,  and  a  chaste  woman  starves. 

This  is  used  to  console  one  on  account  of  the  transient  nature 
of  worldly  pleasures,  and  to  base  hopes  on  good  deeds,  which 
secure  everlasting  bliss. 


(     257     ) 

Story :  Once  a  servant  of  Mahadeva  (called  "Nandi)"  was 
rubbing  the  body  of  the  god  with  oil.  On  hearing  a  cannon-shot 
he  enquired  from  the  deity  as  to  its  cause.  The  latter  said  that 
Kawana  was  born.  While  continuing  to  serve  him  the  servant 
again  heard  another  shot.  On  enquiry  he  was  informed  that 
Rawana  was  made  king  of  Lanka  (Ceylon).  This  news  grieved 
Jiim  and  caused  him  to  repent  of  his  long  service  rendered  to 
Mahadeva,  being  envious  of  Rawana,  who  was  anointed  king  of 
Lanka,  so  soon  after  his  birth.  While  the  servant  was  thus 
brooding  over  and  lamenting  his  luck,  he  heard  a  third  shot.  He 
again  asked  of  the  deity  the  cause  of  it,  and  Mahadeva  replied 
that  Rawana  was  killed,  and  his  death  was  being  announced. 
This  pacified  the  man  and  brought  him  to  his  senses.  Then 
he  began  to  appreciate  the  immortal  life  he  had  gained  in 
ihe  -divine  service,  and  to  despise  the  transient  nature  of 
worldly  glory. 

4  %T  ^TWT  ^^S  ^  f  T^5i  ^jmn  'g^  ^  W^T^-     Jo  khano 
hansiki  dari  na  so  khawa  ghara  ki  buwari. 

Whatever  money  is   spent  on   a   harlot  ought  to  go   to 
on^s  wife. 

Used  as  a  caution  against  vicious  folly. 

PIRUDENCE  &  PRECAUTION. 

1  ^I'nt^^^  ^fz'^T^T.     Jogi  haganai  bati  bhaja. 

The  ascetic   runs   away   from    the  place   where   he   has 

eased  himself. 

Applied  to  one  who  has  no  family  or  property  to  bind 
him  to  one  place,'  and  so  cannot  be  entrusted  with  a  loan  or 
anything. 

2  ^J57  ^T  ^5?  "af^^T  ^T  I'''  Ochha  ko  dhana  chukila  ko 
gana. 


(     258     ) 

The  wealth  of  a  poor  person  and  the  eructation  from 
acid  food. 

C.  f.    "Great  cry  and  little  wool." 

3  HI»1^^  >f  fT^  ^jft  ^TT.     Bhaganera  bbuta  ki  langot£ 
labha. 

Even  the  rag  of  a  flying  goblin  is  a  gain. 

I.  e.    The    smallest  thing   received    from    a    person   who    is 
leaving  for  good,  may  be  regarded  as  a  gain. 

4  |^^f%?lT  %  I^Hf%^T  *T%T'      Nimarliiya  bai  cbimarbiyo 
bbalo. 

{Any  thing)  even  in  a  rotten  and  bad  state  is  better  than 
its  non-existence. 

C.  f.    "Something  is  better  than  nothing." 

5  ^%  "SiJX  »lTi%  ^IT  H>  5«TTf^-      Le  kai  bar  a  nali  lyau  kai 

cbba  nali. 

If  one  is  asked  to  take  (purchase)  he  demands  at  the  rate 
of  twelve  rtdlis  {twenty-four  seers  of  grain) :  if  he  is  asked 
to  sell  he  will. do  so  at  six  ndlis  for  the  Rupee. 


6  ^I»l  ^T%  SEflV  ^^  tjT  <iT^T  '^f't  ^^-      Saga  kbano 

byuni  bera  gaun  kbano  nyurbi  bera. 

The  crop  of  vegetables  is  to  be  gathered  by  thinning,   and 
life  in  the  village  must  be  passed  with  meekness. 
Counselling  thrift  and  caution. 

-T  >T^  (%f^  5!!^  5l(%  H5g(5|  i?.      Bbali  cbbipi  jancbbya 
uaki  pbailani  cbba. 


(    259    ) 

The  goodness  is  concealed  and  the  wickedness  spread 
abroad. 

E.  g.  Anything  good  done  to  one  is  confined  to  him, 
but  any  wrong  done  to  him  he  will  spread  by  informing 
every   body. 

Used  to  deter  persons  against  doing  an  evil  act. 

"The  evil  that  men  do  lives  after  them." 

'The  good  is  oft  interred  with  their  bones."    (ShakspearJ. 


"1 


S  ^9  ^T  ^T^  V(^  cGTcbTT^      Bbainsa  ko  mola  bbainsa  ka 

dbamana. 

The  large  quantity  of  a  buffalo's  dung  {used  for  manure) 
repays  one  for  feeding  it  only. 

A  large  business  requires  a  large  capital,  or  large  profits 
are  the  results  of  large  outlays,  also  used  to  describe  an  unprofit- 
able business. 

9  ^g^  ^I^T^  ♦T'^^r^T''^*     Paili  ahara  taba  byohara. 
First  food  then  worlc. 

Used  of  one  who  delays  taking  his  food  in  preference  to  other 
things  at  the  fixed  or  usual  time. 

Don't  attempt  work  on  an  empty  stomach. 

10  «rq  l'';^'^^.     Pancba  Parmesbwara. 
God  in  five  persons. 

I.  e.    God's  will  shown  in  the  opinion  of  the  majority. 

It  is  said  that  once  a  king  in  ancient  times  tried  to  prove 
the  truth  of  this  maxim  by  bringing  a  jar  of  money,  with  its 
mouth  closed  and  sealed  up,  before  a  number  of  people  who  were 
required  to  guess  what  it  contained.  All  of  them  said  that  it 
contained  a  snake.  On  opening  and  emptying  the  jar  a  snake 
came  out  as  predicted  by  the  majority,  to  the  utter  astonishment 
of  the  King. 

11  ^^T^  2TT«    Tuka  men  taura. 

(J.  stick  of  sugarcane)  sour  at  the  end. 


(     260    ) 

A  sugarcane  is  sweeter  towards  its  root,  and  insipid  towards 
the  end. 

Used  of  one  who  after  having  done  some  work  cheerfully 
and  carefully  spoils  it  eventually  by  bad  or  unwise  conduct. 

1^  %^T  ^^T  igfjfT^.     Chelo  bachau  chhati  taka. 
A  son  should  live  up  to  his  sixth  day:. 

On  the  sixth  day  after  the  birth  of  a  son  a  religions  rite  is 
performed  at  which  there  are  great  rejoicings  and  festivities.  The 
father  distributes  alms,  feasts  bi»  relations,  and  gives  dancing 
parties  &c.  The  proverb  means  that  it  is  better  that  a  man  should 
have  a  short  life  and  a  merry  one,  rather  than  live  out  a  long  and 
miserable  esistence. 

Used  to  encourage  sons  to  be  industrious  and  wise  with  a 
view  to  their  becoming  wealthy  and  renowned. 

13  ^jq^vU  ^y  ■^■^^  ^  %T  ^t^  ^TIT^l  %•      Jo  garaja  so. 

barag??  nai  jo  barasa  so  garaja  nai. 

Tits  dovA  Chat  thur.ders  does  not  rain,  and  the  one  thai 
rams  does  not  ihzinder. 

C.  f.    "The  dogs  that  bark  most  bite  least," 

14  tj^  ^  '^TT  ^Jf^  f^^T?;*     Munda  ki  mundai  ghata  k£ 

pisai. 

The  bhaving  of  one's  head  and  the  grinding  of  one's  corn 
{must  le  paid  for). 

This  is  applied  to  denote  expenses  which  are  unavoidably 
neceacary.  A  man  v/ho  does  not  pay  for  his  shaving  will  become- 
a  barber  in  the  jiezt  birth. 

15  ^^T^I  ^T^  '^J'<.  ^  'IT^T  ^^  "^T*     Dui  khano  bars 
bara  rui  khauo  eka  bara. 

One  can  milk  a  cow  again  and  again,  but  can  breaJc  doum 
a  hough  {of  fruit)  only  once. 


(     261    ) 

For  instance  living  on  the  interest  of  money  and  not 
spending  the  capital  itself,  or  living  on  the  produce  of  land  arid 
not  selling  the  land  itself,  enjoying  the  fruit  of  a  tree  -without 
destroying  it.  To  milk  a  cow  gently  and  carefully.  To  break 
down,  to  nse  roughly  so  as  to  destroy. 

Used  to  pursuade  one  to  be  satisfied  with  a  little  help  given 
to  him,  giving  hopes  that  he  will  be  helped  again  and  again  if  tha 
helper  lives. 

C.  /.     "How  lives  the  wise  ?     How  doth  he  use 
"The  gifts  and  sweetness  qf  the  world  ? 
"E'en  as  the  bee  that  takes  the  dews 
"Of  nectar  in  the  flow'ret  furled, 
"But  mars  nor  hue  nor  scent  nor  worth — 
"So  dwells  the  wise  upon  the  earth." 
The  undernoted  story  will  further  illustrate  the  proverb. 
Once  a  prudent  man  went   to   a  foreign  town  with  a   piee 
in  his  hand,  where  he  remained  for  twelve  years.     He  lived  on   hia 
earnings  all  this  time,   but  took  diligent  care   of  what   he   had   in 
cash  (i.  e.  one  pice).     The  man  could   only   earn   his  food,   but  not 
money  for  firewood,  and  so  he  bought  one    pice  worth    of  firewood 
with  the  pice  he  had,  but  as    soon  as   he   had   cooked    his  food   be 
quenched  the  fire  and  preserved  the  charcoal    which  he   sold  to   a 
goldsmith  and  got  a  pice   again.     In    this    way   he   continued  for 
twelve  years,  at  the  end  of  which  he  returned   home   with  his   pice 
still  in  his  possession. 

16  »T^  f^  ^7"fi  ^1"^  ^T  ^T1«    Marda  ki  mauta  namarda 

ka  hatha. 

A  brave  person  is  often  hilled  hy  the  hand  qf  a  coward. 

E.  g.     Great  persons  or  plans  are   often  thrown  by  trifling 
causes.    C.  f.    "A  small  leak  will  sink  a  great  ship." 
"The  best-laid  plans  o'mice  and  men 
"Gang  aft  agley."     (Burns). 

17  55*?  ^T  ^^T  ^^"(T  ^T  ^WT*      "Sata  ko  sawai  asata  to 

dewadho. 

Profit  of  four  annas  in  the  rupee  invested  in  trade  is  fair, 
hut  eight  annas  unfair. 

Used  to  inculcate  that  unfair  profit  will  tend  to  one's  ruin, 
tut  the  fair  one  will  make  the  trader  prosperous  and  happy. 


(     262    ) 

18  faTi^    ^TT^IT    ^T^T  ^TT^«T.       Khano  sarakhata 
rauno  pharakhata. 

One  ought  to  share  his  food  with  others,  but  remain  aloof ^ 

A  man  should  secure  a  certaia  amount  of  privacy  for  his 
own  afifairs  even  in  his  own  house. 

19  ^t'cT*!  ^r 'Sllf^  ^H 'B^tI^'     Dantana  ka  agarhi  jibba 
sayani 

The  tongue  is  cleverer  than  the  teeth. 

The  tongue  remains  unhurt  though  close  to  the  sharp  teeth. 
Advice   to  deal    wisely   with   the    dangerous    people    among 
whom  one  has  to  live. 

20  »[^T  ^1Tf%  ■^T'lir  %•      Naika  agarbi  rasta  nai. 
There  is  no  other  way  in  face  of  a  refusal. 

I.  e.    If  you  refuse  my  request  there's  an  end  on't. 

21  ^n  f%  "^iTT"^^  f%^r^T  ^^  ■<TTfn!    fTrfnr  »TT.      Syapa 

ki  barabari  kitaulo  kara  tani  tani  mara. 

The  insect  or  reptile  called  '^Kitaula"  (a  miniature  of  a 
snake)  in  its  attempt  to  compete  with  a  snake  drags  itself 
to  death. 

An  unequal  match. 

Used  as  a  caution  against  competing  with  a   greater  person^ 

22  ^^^^  ^im  ktlX  "3^1^^  ^fm  HJ  ff|^^.      Rupayan,  kani 
aura  akala  kani  bbeta  nibuni. 

Wealth  and  wisdom  never  meet  together. 

E.  g.  A  wealthy  man  has  no  wisdom  and  a  wise  man  no 
wealth.  A  person  while  in  the  possession  of  wealth  has  no  sense 
to  take  care  of  it,  but  it  comes  to  him  (in  the  way  of  repentance) 
when  he  has  squandered  his  wealth.  So  he  uses  this  proverb, 
bemoaning  his  conduct. 


(     263     ) 

23  ^imi  "^W^  ^3  ^^  f^^^'15-      Apana  tllana  bata  tela 
nikalanchha. 

One  gets  oil  from  his  own  Tila  {i.  e.  sesame). 

One  may  derive  any  amount  of  profit  from  bis  own  property 
or  money. 

24  f^  ^^T  ^T  TTfT  'SJI'iot*     Dina  dusara  ko  rata  apani. 
Day  another's,  hut  night  onis  own. 

Leisure  comes  to  all  when  the  day's  work  is  over. 

25  ^^TWr  (5157^^7  ^7»Tg  ^TT  fi=IW7T^T  ^»T^.     Agliano 
ni  chhorhano  samala  gliama  ni  chhorhano  kamala. 

When  one's  hunger  is  satisfied  he  should  not  leave  his 
provisions  behind,  nor  his  blanket  because  the  sun  is 
shining. 

E.  g.  Food  and  clothes  are  two  things  always  needed,  especially 
on  a  journey,  where  the  traveller  has  to  bear  them  on  his  shoulders. 
So  the  proverb  tells  one  not  to  neglect  to  take  these  with  him.  It 
also  teaches  one  to  provide  himself  with  all  the  necesaries  of  life 
for  his  future  comfort  while  in  good  circumstances. 
Improvidence. 

26  V(m  ^%J  ^7^  f5l^il!7.     G^asa  dino  basa  ni  dino. 

Feed  the  wayfarer  but  do  not  lodge  him. 

For  a  stranger  will  find   out  the  faults  and  failings   of  the 
owner  of  the  house. 

^7  WH^  Ws;^  f%  %T.i^  ^^^'M*      Sunani  sabana  ki  karani 
apani. 

One  ought  to  hear  everybody,  but  do  wliat  he  wishes  to. 

28  f^J  >i^  ^n=ITT  ^12.     Bina  guru  andheri  bata. 

The  path  is  in  the  darJc  without  a  teacher  or  spiritual 
guide. 

I,  e.    Every  one  is  ignorant   of  the  way  he  wishes  to  go 
until  he  is  instructed  or  enlightened  in  the  matter. 


(     264     ) 

29  "^^q   If  ^rs  'TT"»f%  f^«itwl%«       Tiratha  men  janu 
jhoparhi  ni  bandhani. 

One  ought  to  visit  a  shrine  or  sacred  place,  but  not  build 

a  shed  there  to  live  or  settle  in. 

A  man's  religious  zeal  should  not  interfere  -with  his  other 
duties.  Besides  he  is  likely  io  commit  fresh  sins,  if  he  protracts 
his  stay  there.  For  it  is  said  that  sins  committed  elsewhere  can  be 
absolved  in  a  sacred  place,  but  those  committed  in  a  sacred  place  are 
never  forgiven,  nor  can  be  atoned  for  by  any  meritorious  act- 

30  ^T**  ^I"^  ^^  efiT^^T  ^^'      Papa  aura  pantha  katlyo 

sukha. 

One  gets  peace  of  mind  as  soon  as  his  sins   are  forgiven 

{absolved),  and  his  pilgrimage  finished. 

In  other  words  so  long  as  one's  sins  are  not  absolved  or  the 
necessary  journey  to  a  certain  place  not  performed,  they  prick  his 
heart,  and  remind  him  of  the  disagreeable  necessity  he  is  under  to 
expiate  them. 

31  ?n^l'^^  eRT^  f^i^i^^T'     GfU  khaika  kala  ni  kata  do. 

One  cannot  pass  over  famine  (get  over  the  time  of  scarcity) 

by  living  on  human  dung. 

I.  e.  One's  poverty  cannot  be  overcome  by  resorting  to  wick- 
ed and  unlawful  means,  such  as  theft,  falsehood  &c. 

32  '^f?T  ^T^I  ^      Ati  bhalo  nai. 
Too  much  (of  a  thing)  is  not  good. 

One  should  not  go  to  extremes  ia  any  thing. 

Sita  the  wife  of  Rama,  owing  to  her  remarkable  beauty  was 
carried  off  by  Rawana.  Rawana,  king  of  Ceylon,  boasting  of  his 
great  power,  was  slain  by  Rama.  Bali,  an  ancient  Indian  king,  was 
very  liberal  in  his  charities.  On  one  occasion  in  his  form  of  dwarf 
Brahman  went  to  him  (Bamana  Avatara)  he  went  to  Bali  and  asled 


(     265     ) 

for  so  much  land  as  could  be  covered  by  his  three  feet.  On  receivmg 
tlie  boon  he  expanded  to  such  an  enormous  stature  that  he  filledthe 
three  worlds  with  his  two  feet  alone  and  there  remained  no  space 
for  his  third  foot,  for  which  he  had  stipulated.  Therefore  Bali  in 
his  excess  of  liberality  proposed  that  the  third  foot  should  be 
placed  upon  his  own  head.  Thus  he  was  thrust  down  into  the  lower 
Tegion.s. 

S3   ^q-  %5T  %f  |[   ^t  ^5T  ^31  ^  ^?I  %^  qi;^3l  ^.        i-pun 

chainu  gaun  nai  gaun  cliainu  desha  nai,  desha  chainu 
paradesha  nai. 

What  a  man  needs  for  himself  should  not  be  given   away 
or  sold  to  his  village,   and  what  is   needed  for   the   village 
should  not  be  allowed  to  go  out  therefrom,  nor  what  is  needed 
for  one^s  own  country  to  go  to  a  foreign  land. 

f  Else  the  man  himself  or  his  neighbours  will  eventually  suffer 
want  or  inconvenience). 

A  caution  against  exhausting  the  resources  on  which  the 
people  depend. 

34  ^T^T  i-^^T  ^%r  -^J^J  ^^  Ri  ^t^  g^T2  ^Trz-      Saro 
dhebaro  mudo  mado  puehha  ki  danwa  larata  karata. 

The  sheep  kept  silent  while  its  body  was  sheared,  but 
made  a  great  outcry  when  they  sheared  the  tail. 

Applied  to  one  who  after  having  almost  settled  or  completed 
an  affair,  quarrels  about  some  small  detail. 

E.  g.  They  agreed  upon  the  price  of  the  elephant,  bat 
quarrelled  about  the  Mahat's  spear. 

25  %Jit  ^j\jmj  ftf^  ^T3%  JHf^.      Jai  gaun  ni  jano  wi 
ki  bata  ke  puchhani. 

Why  should  one  enquire  after  the  pathway  to  a  village 
lie  does  not  wish  to  go  to. 

Unnecessary  interference. 

H  2 


(     266     ) 

36  TTT'JfT  is  l^jfr  'aW-     Talo  dyun  na  cbori  lao-un. 

Neither  loill  I  give  you  my   hey   nor   accuse   iioil   of 
theft.  "^         "^ 

I'll  manage  my  own  affairs. 

^^  ^%\  ^T^  5l%t  Tir^.      Na  jaun  ali  na  khaun  gali. 

If  I  do   not   trespass  upon   the   land   {belonging    to 
another)  why  shoidd  I  be  abused  by  him. 
Caution  against  trespass. 

38  -^rf^  ^T?|  f^?i^7  ?T^^%T  'ST^^T  ^^T-      Bacbhi  baga 
ligayo  taba  hulo  halano  sikbo. 

One  learns  to  bolt  his  door  after  his  calf  has  been  talcen 
away  by  the  leopard. 

Wise   after   the   event.     C.  f.    "A    stumble   may   prevent 
a   fall." 

39  TrT^cfi  ■^'^  ^T^T^r  '5TT^  ^=^  ^T^5i.      Marlka  bacha 

so  dano  khaika  bacha  so  bija. 

He  who    has    escaped  from   a  fatal  sickness  is  an 
experienced    man,   and   the  grain   left  after   eating  is 
for  seed. 

40  SfiTT^  ^^I'?  fsi^fif':  ^'l^T  fH^  ^ir-      Nai  thain  salaha 
nikari  munalo  bhijai  baitho. 

Lathering   one's   head    {for   being   shaved  )    without 
consulting  a  barber. 

E.  g.  Whenever  one  wishes  to  get  his  head  shaved  he 
engages  the  services  of  a  barber  for  the  purpose,  but  if  he  lathers 
his  head  without  doing  so  he  subjects  himself  to  laughter  and 
ridicule. 

One  ought  to  make  every  arrangement  necessary  for  a  work 
or  business  before  he  starts,  otherwise  he  will  not  get  his  work 
accomplished. 


(     267     ) 

41  51'SIT'^  ^T  ^^  ^Tf^^T  ^T'lTII  f^^J-     Juari  ko  dhana 

dokhila  ka  nana  tina. 

Wealth  in   the   hand  of  a  gambler   and   children   of 
ghost-affected  {diseased)  parents  will  not  last  long. 

42  ^^7  ^T^T  ^T^T  f%  "T'sTT'O^T^r-       Mero  khoro  saro  ki 
pakhana  saro. 

Is  my  head  harder  or  the  rock  ? 

Applied  to  one  who  wishes  to  fight  a  stronger  man,  to  dissuade 
him  from  doing  so. 

43  iTTSlI  %  f^l'^'JIT  f^'S'^T.       Marana  hai   bigacbana   ki 
dara. 

To  he  ruined  is  more  to  he  dreaded  than  to  die. 

44  ^^  ^  5lf%^T  5T^  "^X^  ^^  ^-     Duda  ko  jaliyo  chhansa 

phukibera  pe. 

One  who  happened  to  hum  his  lips  hy  drinking  hot 
milk  does  7iot  drink  even  Chhansa  {butter  milk)  without 
blotcing  on  it  to  cool  it. 

Applied  to  one  who,  once  cheated  or  betrayed  by  another, 
is  suspicious  of  every  one.  A  burnt  child  dreads  the  fire.  C  f. 
^'A  scalded  cat  dreads  cold  water." 

45  ^^T  "^m  f<^^  i^T^T  ^T  W^T  'J^f  ^T^T  •      Jaiko 

bapa  rikba  le  kbayo  so  kala  khunda  so  darau. 

One  whose  father  was  killed  by  a  hear  is  afraid  even 
of  the  hlack  trunk  of  a  tree. 

(A  stumble  makes  one  careful). 

46  ^T^  f^  ^\^  ^T^  f^  5ff .      Roka  ki  pboka  pboka  kt 
chbutti 


(     268     ) 

Cash  {scattered  and  turned^  into  goods  {purchased 
with  cash )  and  the  articles,  if  lent  on  credit,  disappear 
or  are  lost  through  insolvent  borrowers. 

Precaution  against  imprudent  speculations  and  loans  to 
persons  who  arc  cheats. 

47  5if5i  qfifSj  ^trf  l|»i.     Naja  kani  danta  chhana. 
Tke  grain  has  teeth. 

I  e.  If  you  eat  too  much  of  it  it  will  kill  you  (in  the  way 
of  indigestion/. 

48  ^?r  ■^Jim  qg  ^">f  ^"T^-      Kabhain  baingana  patha  ka-- 
bhain  apatha_ 

Egg-plants  wholesome  at  one  time  and  unwholesome 
at  another. 

This  vegetable  when  eaten  is  said  to  be  injurious,  but 
if  one  at  any  time  eats  it  without  any  such  effect  this  cannot  be  said 
to  be  a  proof  of  its  wholesomeness.  For  evil  things  ought  always 
to  be  guarded  against  even  if  they  do  not  hurt  one  on  one  occusion. 

49  ^J^  ^•q^  "^I^T  ^^^T  5l3tJTT^.    Apa  dubante  bamana 

le  duba  jajamana. 

In  trying  to  save  his  priest,  the  man  himself  was 
drowned. 

Caution     against    rashly    undertaking    to    help    those    in 
difficulties. 

50  'aqj'^ITS^  ^t  ^%  W^  "^X^J*      Asamana  son  thuko 

muha  men  ayo. 

iSpitting  towards  the  shy  the  spittle  falls  bach  on  one's 
own  face. 

"Curses  come  home  to  roost." 

51  '^(irsi  5!T^T  '^T'lT  '^t'^I  t^  ^T^T  ^T^T-      Anatha  jaiTO 
ancro  bango  dull  iano  samo. 


(     2G2     ) 

One  should  enter  one's  hole  straight,  even  though  momng 
zigzag  elsewhere,  as  a  snake  does. 

This  enjoins  submission  and  reserve  with  the  strong  and  great, 
and  simplicity  towards  the  members  of  one's  own  family.  As  a 
snake  wriggling  about  when  abroad  yet  enters  its  hole  straight  ; 
s&  a  man  should  practice  worldly  arts  in  dealing  with  the  world 
or  with  superiors,  but  be  simple  and  natural  with  his  own  people. 

52  ^^g  iFJ^  fgi  ^Tf%%5^'ii  f^TTfoi.     Akalmanda  ki  laun- 
di  kewakupha  ki  rani. 

To  be  the  maid-servant  of  an  intelligent  man  is  better 
flian  to  be  the  queen-consort  of  a  foolish  Jcing. 

53  ^fgg  ^r  gj-^iT  cff%^r  f5^Tf%  %\^.      Aghila  ko  la- 
tarho  baliyOj'pichharhi  aunchha. 

The  fire  lohich  burns  at  one  end'  of  a  piece  of  wood  will 
gradually  come  to  the  other  end. 

What  is  beneficial  or  the  reverse  to  one  will  in  the  end  be 
found  the  same  for  all. 

54  '^l\  W(^  *f T'*f%  ^TT  f^^^r  ^T  -^HH.     i-ga  lagi  jhoparhi 
jo  nikalau  so  labha. 

Any  thing  taken  out  of  a  burning  house  is  a  gain. 
"Something  is  better  than  nothing." 

55  Jjf  ^T  "^m  ^  \j  •1I^«    Gaim  ko  basa  kula  ko  nasba. 

To  live  in  the  country  is  to  ruin  one's  oicn  descendants. 

The  children  of  one  residing  in  a  village  are  liable  to  contract 
the  unpolished  habits  of  their  neighbours,  and  are  debarred  from 
the  advantages  of  education  which  in  India  are  found  only  in  towns. 
Tillage  life  also  renders  young  people  awkward  and  clownish. 

56  ■^^T  "qfT^I  %T  "^T^T  1T¥  (^^1T-     Barobarlya  ko  soho 
garba  ni  bagau. 


(     270     ) 

The  gold  of  one  of  eqtud  rank  cannot  he  sive^yt  away 
even  by  a  river  {if  throion  into  it). 

A  person  of  equal  position  cannot  be  imposed  upon,  as  he  can 
claim  redress  in  case  he  is  put  to  any  loss. 

57  ^T  n»{  511^7  ^^T  ^NT  ft^T  ^T7-     Jo  dhana  jano  de- 

kho  adha  diyau  banta. 

Wealth  which  is  about  to   be   taken   away,   give  away 
half  of  it. 

I.  e.  If  a  case  seems  likely  to  be  lost,  spend  liberally  in  order 
to  better  your  chance  of  winning  it.  Also  applied  to  those  about  to 
become  bankrupt. 

58  %?]■  ^^7  ^f  ■q^7      Jo  nerho  so  perho. 

One  who  is  near  is  dear 

The  converse  of  "out  of  sight,  out  of  mind". 

59  si'^rT^R  '^7^^  ffJ  ^"^7  ^  ^"^^  ^^-     Jabataka  balaka 
ni  runo  mai  dudha  ni  dini. 

A  mother  does  not  give  her  child  milk  unless  it  cries. 
C.f.  "Nothing  ask  nothing  have." 

60  ^7^187  ?i7in  ?i7^7  ^^  "^  ^^  Tfisn^T.      Apano  kbanu 
kbano  duma  tben  cbbuwe  mangano. 

To  eat  one's   own  food,   after  it  has  been   touched  by  a 
'■'dumr 

The  food  of  a  Hindu  of  any  of  the  higher  castes  {Bithas)  if 
touched  by  a  Diima  is  considered  defiled  and  only  fit  to  be  thrown  awaj-. 
Whenever  there  is  any  trouble  or  inconvenience  in  the  manage- 
ment of  one's  own  property  through  having  intrusted  it  to  another, 
this  proverb  is  used. 

61  ^^^t:  ^  f^^T57.     Maranera  ke  ni  karanu. 
0ns  about  to  be  killed,  lohat  will  he  not  do  ? 

A  desperate  plight. 


(     271     ) 

62  ^zj  efiT  5Tf  T  %f^  ^\^  ^fT  9BT  Z^^  fsi^^^T*     Mitlia 

ka  jarha  khaini  khanda  karha  ka  tukulu  ni  chherbado. 

The  roots  of  a  sweet  plant  are  dug  out  and  eaten,  but 
not  even  the  leaves  or  shoots  of  a  hitter  one  ard 
touched. 

This  is  applied  to  a  man  of  good  temper  who  is  always  being 
troubled  and  resorted  to,  whereas  a  person  of  cross  temper 
is  shunned; 

Story.  Once  the  sweetmeat  being  oppressed  and  troubled 
hy  every  one  in  the  world  went  to  one  of  the  gods  and  laid  her 
complaint  before  him  saying  that  every  creature  in  the  world 
attempted  to  eat  her.  The  god  after  hearing  the  tale  of  her  woes 
was  thereby  tempted  to  taste  her  himself  in  order  to  find  out 
whether  the  universal  liking  for  her  was  justified.  Whereupon 
she  returned  to  the  earth  in  utter  despair  to  undergo  her  fate. 

63  ^T^  cf.^$T  ^'S^t  ^["fT  ^5$T  %iT^^f'      Thorhi  ka- 

niuno  aphun  son  bhauta  kamuno  aurana  son. 

One  who  earns  a  little  has  enough  for  himself,  but  one 
who  earns  much  benefits  others  {rather  than  himself). 

64  %f\  eST  TTJl^T^T  e|«l^t  ^I  ^^^«       Beti  ka  magadara 

baladon  ka  lewaka. 

Those  who  come  to  espouse  a  daughter  and  those  who 
come  to  buy  bullocks  are  alike. 

In  Garhwal,  where  daughters  are  sold  like  farm  stock,  those 
who  come  to  make  a  bargain  for  a  wife  are  treated  like  bullock 
dealers  i.  e.  with  scant  courtesy. 

65  %f)"  %T  "^r^T  "^^'^  ^r'^S^T^T^T-     Beti  ko  baidwalo 

buwari  ko  pathyadaro. 

One  who  is  sent  to  bring  one^s  daughter  from  her 
father-in-law' s  house,  and  one  who  is  sent  to  take  one's 
daughter-in-law  to  her  father'' s  house. 

These  two  persons  should  be  most  honest  and  faithful. 


{     272     ) 

66   c|TJI  ZJZ  ^^  *tf  %r  ^t^'      Baga  tata  bhela  kanda  ko 
land  a. 

TPho  will  embrace  a  tiger  or  p7'op  up  a  falling  Mil 
loitTi  his  shoulder  ? 

Dangerous  attempts. 

G7  f^TTIT  ^IH  •IT^'i^r*     Biranu  sonu  nakha  da. 

jLnother's  gold  Gav,ses  pain  in  one's  own  nose. 

Applies  to  one  who  borrows  and  wears  another's  nosering. 
(Women  do  this  on  many  occasions,  especially  during  festivities 
and  fairs)  and  thus  suffer  pain  from  the  unaccustomed  ornament, 
C.  f.    "Borrowed  plumes." 

68  •^^f  fJl^risJ  Z\^J  ^T"'rr  f%^^«T  SRjJiT.     Balda  nilyonu 

dhango  apata  ni  karanu  kango. 

Lean  bullocks  should  not  be  jjurchased,  and  men  in 
poor  circumstances  should  not  be  made  into  relatives 
by  marriage. 

69  ifT^T  ^T^T  SIT   ^'3  "^^IT^  ^T^T*      Chhoto  chhoto  na 

dekha  chapagai  saura. 

Do  not  think  of  hi/m  as  a  harmless  man,  he  is  the  son 
of  a  wild  hull. 

A  dangerous  fellow. 

70  "^jfT  igr  HTT  W-     Anta  cbbyo  maramagliau. 

Excessive  abuse,  and  a  wound  on  a  delicate  part  of 
the  body. 

The  effects  of  these  are  lasting  and  injurious.  One  can  never 
forgive  or  recover  from  the  effects  of  such  abuse.  C.  /.  "Some- 
times words  wound  more  than  swords." 


C     273     ) 

71  UT^  l>  ^TT  srlt^  ^  ^t^TfT  iR^  ^  ^»!T^.      Garha 
mai  tera  najika  nai  aunlo  ta  kaslkai  bagali. 

O  river,  if  I  do  not  come  near  you,  how  can  you  wash 
way  ? 

Safety  by  avoiding  evil  habits  or  men. 


me  away  ? 


72  ^  sn"f  'l'^  ^^  ^T  'sf^  T^T*      Dui  nawa  para  paira 

<3haro  dubi  maro. 

JHi?  who  puts  one  foot  in  one  hoat  and  the  other  in 
another  will  be  drowned. 

Falling   between   two   stools.    C.  f.    "No   man   can    serve 
two  masters." 

73  ^^  ^^  qjT  ^T^T  >T!fw  vtfrr  "^^T^T*    Desha  deshon  ka 

ala  bhanti  bhanti  bulala^ 

JPeople  who  come  from  different  countries  will  speak 
in  different  dialects. 

Tot  homines,  tot  sententiae. 

74  ^r  5f^^  ^gj  -^^  ^^T"^  ^^T*      Nau  nakada  bhala  tera 
udhara  bura. 

Nine   fRupeesJ    in    cash  are    better    than    thirteen 
promised. 

C.  f.    "A  bird  in  the  hand  is  worth  two  in  the  bush." 

75  (si  SR^^  ^<3  (%  'ir^^  ^3t.      Ni  karewa  bhekba  ni  kha- 

yewa  desha. 

One  who  does  not  adopt  the  disguise  fi.  e.  customs  and 
habits)  of  a  foreign  country,  will  not  be  able  to  live  there. 

C.  /.    "In  Rome  do  as  Rome  does." 

Story.  Once  a  man  -went  to  see  his  friend  who  lived  in  a 
foreign  town.  Not  knowing  his  house  he  promised  a  by-stander 
that   he   would    make   him    "K/iusk"   (give   him   an   appropriate 

I  2 


(     274    ) 

rowardj  if  the  man  showed  him  his  friend's  house.  The  native  of 
that  country  accordingly  led  him  to  the  house  he  wanted  to  go.  to. 
On  his  arrival  there  the  man  gave  the  native  Bs-  5/  (supposing 
that  sum  would  satisfy  him),  and  the  native  was  not  satisfied.  Then 
he  offered  Rs-  10/,  but  the  man  was  not  satisfied  with  that  amount 
even,  and  began  to  quarrel,  and  insisted  on  his  being  made 
"khusJia"  (which  also  means  "glad").  His  friend  at  last  came  to 
know  of  the  quarrel  and  came  out,  and  after  listening  to  what 
they  both  said  he  gave  his  friend  the  necessary  advice  as  to  bow 
be  was  to  act  in  the  matter,  and  went  away.  After  this  the  man 
concerned  took  a  club  in  his  band  and  saying  that  be  would  show 
how  Haniimana  (the  celebrated  monkey  spoken  of  in  the  Ramayana) 
destroyed  Lanka  (Ceylon)  began  to  destroy  every  shed  and  house 
like  a  madman.  This  play  of  his  made  all  the  people  standing  by 
laugh  heartily.  Among  them  the  man  also  laughed,  and  was  told 
that  since  according  to  promise  he  had  been  made  "'IChusha"  (glad) 
he  bad  nothing  more  to  expect  as  a  reward  ;  the  man  was  convinced 
that  he  had  had  the  promised  reward  and  went  away ! 

76     sg^ci  1e7  frr  ^%T*{  ^r*      J3'ana  chhau  tau  jahana 
clibau. 

The  world  is  of  use  to  one  only  so  long  as  he  is  alive. 
"Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  tomorrow  we  die."     Carpe    diem. 

mana  nandu  ka  khawana  chhansa  raangana  nandu  ka  gLara 
jawana. 

NandiC s  family  eats  nine  maunds  a  day,  and  yet  people 
go  to  him  to  ash  for  butter  milJc. 

No  one  should  go  to  ask  a   thing    from    a    man   who    cannot 
afford  to  give  it. 

78  T\\si  ^j"^  Tt^  ^fJl  ^r^  'R't^'     Ganwa  khowa  randa  saga 
khowa  manda. 

A  widow  ruins  a  village  and  the  mdnda  {water  in  ivhicl 
rice  has  been  cooked)  spoils  vegetable  food. 


(     275     ) 

On  the  ouo  hand  widows  being  disappointed  of  their  position, 
envy  others,  and  so  become  very  cross  and  quarrelsome.  On  the 
other,  unending  quarrels  and  dissensions  arise  owing  to  their  having 
contracted  intimacy  with  some  one  in  the  village.  Here  the  word 
"widow"  also  includes  an  unchaste  woman. 

Td  jjfii  ?i^?;  '^ftjJlT  ^'IT'ffr'     ^'^ji  ganwai  baniya  sayano. 
The  haniyd  became  clever  after  having  lost  his  cloth. 
Wise  after  the  event. 

80  ST  ^grw  si^x;  ^jq  ^I'Sj^T  ^j^  t^x.  ^t  ^T^«      Gbyu 

lihanu  shakkara  satba  duniya  kbani  raakkara  ka  satha. 

Ghi  should  he  eaten  loith  sugar,  and  the  world  subdued 
by  pride. 

As  GJii  without  sugar  cannot  be  digested  or  relished,  so  the 
world  cannot  be  imposed  upon  without  some  pretence  or  assumption 
of  pride. 

81  ^[^  ^T^r  «BI'ii^r  ^'R-       Grbasi  gborbo   kapbalya 
paika. 

A  horse  fed  only  on  grass  and  a  hero  on  vegetable  food 
are  strong  and  capable  of  doing  great  deeds. 

Refers  to  the  swiftness  of  wild  horses  which  live  only  on 
grass  and  to  the  bravery  of  soldiers  who  generally  come  from 
families  that  live  on  coarse  food  and  vegetables.  Implies  that  the 
swiftness  of  a  horse  and  the  heroism  of  a  man  are  natural  gifts 
and  have  nothing  to  do  with  food. 

82  J[m  cRT  ^^  i?JlTT  tH  "TiT  ^  1T^-     Garba  ka  mukba 

pagara  randa  ka  mukba  gara. 

Who  would  build  a  wall  across  the  mouth  of  a  stream, 
and  who  would  abuse  a  icidow  to  her  face. 

One  who  abuses  a  widow  brings  upon  himself  a  shower  of 
abuse.     Used  of  impossible  or  foolish  attempts. 


(     27ff     ) 

83  3T7^  f|$f  ^^^11  %j^  f|(5j  sisqf  fT.      Gom  dlrio  khad- 

yanta  nauni  dini  najyanta. 

Cows  should  be  sold  to  those  who  have  plenty  of  grass 
and  grazing  ground,  and  daughters  given  to  those  who  have 
much  grain,  otherwise  the  cows  will  suffer  and  their  daugh- 
ters starve. 

84  '^T^  f%  ji^JT  ^?T  ^^H-     Hatba  ki  ganwai  bhirha 
ki  sana. 

Having  lost  what  was  in  his  hand  he  begins  to  try  to  seize 
a  wall. 

Applied  to  one  who  has  given  or  lent  a  thing  to  anothe-r 
■which  he  cannot  be  sure  of  getting  back  when  needed.  "Catching 
at  the  shadow  and  los^ing  the  substance." 

85  5igTf    vfSJT  T^lT  ^f%  '^'<.'     Jala  men  rauno  magara 

dagarhi  baira. 

To  live  in  xvater  and  bear  enmity  with  a  crocodile  (  *? 
not  wise). 

This  is  used  to  dissuade  or  discourage  one  from  contending 
"with  his  superiors. 

86  ¥f;zj  SSJT  ^t^T  "IT-    Jbuta  bya  sancha  nya. 

Marriages  will  be  effected  by  false  representatioiis  but 
justice  will  be  obtained  by  speaking  the  truth. 

It  is  difficult  to  get  a  poor  man  married  unless  he  is  falsely 
represented  to  be  of  high  caste  and  a  man  of  property  and  wealth. 

87  try  f^^T  ^\  ?3T^T  ^T  ^H^I-      Jo  diyo  ya  kbayo  eo 

dpano. 

Only  what  one  has  given  {in  charity}  or  eaten  is  one's  own^ 

88  ill  ^j  ^7  sj%j  %.    Jo  kau  so  gbyu  son  jau. 
Whoever  will  talk  of  Ghi  will  have  to  go  to  fetch  it. 


(    277    ; 

E.  g.  Whoever  will  inform  any  man  of  Ghi  to  be  had  at  a 
certain  place  will  be  told  to  bring  it. 

This  is  used  to  caution  one  against  giving  information  of  any- 
thing in  which  he  is  not  concerned  ;  if  he  does,  he  will  have  the 
burden  of  procuring  it  or  of  proving  it. 

89  -^Tl  fk  ^f%  ^  '^T^  ^T^^T*     Baga  ki  karbi  men  hatha 
halano. 

To  touch  the  person  of  a  lion. 

To  enrage  a  great  man  in  any  way  is  dangerous. 
"To  tread  on  the  lion's  tail." 

90  T^  ^T^T  f%  T?^  '^T^  "?T^5T.    Jhimorha  ki  purha  men 
hatha  halanu. 

To  thrust  one's  hand  into  a  nest  of  hornets. 

I.  e.   To  stir  up  a  number  of  wicked  people  against  one. 

91  ?i^  ^x;?!  5T7f^  llf^  ^«!!T  ^Tf^    Guru  karanu  jani  pani 

pino  chhani. 

Strain  your  drinTcing  water  and  use  judgment  in  selectirg 
your  Guru  {spiritual  guide). 

Act  with  deliberation. 

92  ^T$r  ^i!fT  T^T  »nTi!!T-     Phato  syuno  rutho  manuno. 

That  which  is  torn  or  ripped  must  be  mended,   and   the 
angry  must  be  soothed. 

Applied  especially  to  daily  life  in  the  family. 

93  ^T  T^lW  ^H  ^m-     Paira  rarhawa  jibha  dandawa. 
The  foot  causes  one  to  slip  and  the   tongue  causes  one  to 

he  punished. 

"Whosoever  keepeth  his  mouth  and  his  tongue  keepeth  his 
soul  from  troubles." 

94  31^  ^Tf%  ^^T  ^^^r»    Shatru  sakhidhhungo  achaino. 


(     278     ) 

To  choose  an  enemy  as  a  witness  and  to  take  a  stone- for  a 
chopping  block. 

A  fatal  mistake. 

95  ^  ^^1%[  5llf  %I  f^»l^^r  5112^7-      Sudharau  tau  nai 
ko  bigarha  tau  jata  ko. 

If  the  shaving  is  well  done  it  i?  creditable  to  the  harber, 
and  if  any  injury  be  caused  it  is  to  the  head  of  the  man  who 
is  shaved. 

Applied  to  people  who  are  careless  in  working  for  others. 

96  ^^  ^T  ^T^  "^TT  Tl^  ^T  'GC*  ^T''^'  Sasti  ro  bara  bara 
mahagi  ro  eku  bara. 

One  who  purchases  a  cheap  thing  has  to  weep  constantly, 
but  one  who  pays  a  good  price  for  a  good  article  weeps, 
but  once. 

97  5f%  ^I'I't:  ^  (^  %^^-     Esi  khira  mai  ni  kbai  sakun. 
/  shall  not  be  able  to  eat  rice  pudding  of  that  hind. 

"Not  if  I  know  it !"     "Not  for  Joseph." 

Story.  Once  a  blind  beggar  was  promised  a  feed  of  khir 
(a  pudding  of  rice  and  milk}.  The  blind  man  enquired  what  kind 
of  food  ''Khir'  was.  He  was  told  that  it  was  white.  As  the  blind 
man  had  no  notion  of  color,  he  asked  what  was  meant  by  white  ; 
For  answer  he  was  referred  to  the  color  of  the  heron  which  is  pure 
white.  The  blind  man  then  asked  what  a  heron  was  like.  On  this 
some  one  made  a  figure  of  the  bird  by  patting  up  his  fore-arna 
representing  the  neck,  and  his  hand  with  his  fingers  pointing  down- 
wards representing  the  head  and  throat  of  the  bird,  which  the 
blind  man  touched  with  his  hand,  and  finding  it  of  a  crooked  form 
said  that  "He  could  not  eat  Khira  like  that,"  for  it  would  stick  in 
bis  throat.  Hence  the  proverb  ;  which  is  applied  to  one's  refusing 
to  undertake  any  business  which  he  thinks  will  go  against  his  own 
interests  or  involve  him  in  difficulties. 

98  tH  >lt^  ^^'JT  M^T  f^Jl^  I^T  ^T  ^^W  ^^T-      Kanda 
bhanda  arana  bhainsa  bigarha  gaya  to  karana  kaisa. 


(     279     ; 

If  a  widow,  a  buffoon,   and  a  wild  buffalo,   become  mad 
or  angry,  what  is  to  be  done  P 

There  is  no  remedy. 

Caution  to  deal  carefully  with  violent  people.  [The  widow 
in  Hindu  society,  being  neglected  and  despised  and  made  to  do  the 
most  menial  duties,  usually  developes  a  shrewish  temper.] 

99  J\'mx.  %J  tm  3^T^-     Grawara  ko  mana  thawara. 

You  can  only  manage  a  villager  by  professing   to   agree 
with  him. 

100  Jj^^  %%^  ^f,g  %\^.     Thokara  khaibera  akala  aun- 
chhya. 

A  stumble  causes  one  to  be  careful  inftoture. 
C  f.  "A  stumble  may  prevent  a  fall. 

101  ^g  %  Kf%  '^^.     Saba  hai  bbali  chupa. 

Silence  is  best  of  all. 

Illustrated  in  the  following  story. 

Birbal  or  Birbar  the  most  intelligent  and  wisest  man  of  his 
time,  was  the  beloved  minister  of  Akbar  the  great.  In  consequence  of 
favour  with  the  Emperor  he  was  hated  by  the  other  ministers  of  the 
same  court.  As  they  could  not  surpass  him  in  intelligence,  wit, 
and  capacit}^,  they  were  alwaj's  intent  on  finding  out  his  flaws  and 
faults.  Failing  in  this,  and  knowing  that  his  father  was  a  stupid 
and  ignorant  man,  they  found  a  way  of  revenging  themselves  upon 
the  hated  minister  by  bringing  Birbal's  father  before  the  king  so 
that  he  might  see  bis  failings.  Birbal  was  not  unaware  of  the  plot, 
and  he  instructed  his  father  to  shew  all  proper  marks  of  respect 
and  homage  to  the  king,  but  to  keep  silent.  Soon  after  this  the 
contemplated  meeting  took  place,  during  which  Birbal's  father,  in 
spite  of  the  many  questions  put  to  him,  on  topics  of  conversation 
raised  by  the  Emperor,  remained  perfectly  mute  as  previously 
advised,  to  the  great  astonishment  of  the  latter  ;  who,  at  last,  asked 
Birbal  himself  for  an  explanation  of  his  father's  conduct.  Birabala 
said,  "My  Lord,  what  should  one  do  if  he  happened  to  be  in  the 
company  of  a  fool  ?"  To  this  the  Monarch  readily  replied  "I  presume 
nothing  but  maintain  silence."  (By  this  reply  the  King  indirectly 
acknowledged  himself  to  be  a  fool). 

C.  f.    "Speech  is  silver,  silence  is  golden." 


C     280     ) 

102  ^T^TTgT^T'!  ^^   ^1^1  ^T1  '»T^T  ^T^If  'ift  mj^. 

Wobarawalana  kana  llgayo  baga  panda  walana  parhi  ja^a. 

Tlie  tiger  carried  off  the  people   of  the  lower  story  and 
those  of  the  upper  story  awoke. 

Take  warning  from  the  distress  of  others. 


%m.     Mala  janu  mala  janu  sabana  le  kayo  ukala  holara 

kaile  bI  dekha. 

Every  one  without  due  regard  to  the  difficult  ascents  and 
descents  of  the  hills  wishes  to  go  to  the  plains. 

I.  e.  One  ought  not  to  undertake  a  work  without  first 
acquainting  himself  with  the  obstacles  that  he  is  likely  to  meet 
on  the  way.  C.  f.  "Look  before  you  leap."  [See  Introduction 
for  description  of  this  feature  of  the  country]. 

104  ^f%  %•{  t}^  5f%  f^  ^.      Mushti  ko  dhana  drishti  ki 
jwe. 

Money  in  one's  hand,  and  a  wife  within  one's  sight. 

This  means  that  money  in  one's  own  possession  and  a  wife 
kept  under  surveillance  are  safe.  This  corresponds  with  the 
Sanscrit  proverb.  "The  learning  in  books  and  the  money  in  the 
hand  of  another  person  are  of  no  use  in  time  of  need.'"' 

105  5iTin  sfJl  %T^r  ^fl«     Janu  dhangu  auno  angu. 

One  who  goes  to  Dhdngu  {a  steep  and  precipitous  portion 
of  Garhwai)  must  come  bach  carefully  and  slowly. 
A  perilous  task. 

106  sin  "^(%  $^T?r  ^JZ^'       Nanga  chunani  kulyarha 

katani. 

The  thing  which  could  be  nipped  in  the  bud  with  the  nails, 
if  suffered  to  remain  must  be  cut  with  an  axe. 

C.  f.    "A  small  leak  will   sink   a   great   ship."     "A    stitch 
in  time  saves  nine.'-' 


(     281     ) 

107  q^T  ^Tt%  ^Z^  '«^T  ^TT  Tfij'i  ^  If  ^f^  %T^T     Wala 
dhunga  ki   phataka  pala   dhunga   pujige  pai  hatta  harbL 

kauno. 

One  should  leap  from  one  stone  to  the  other  before  he 
boasts  of  the  deed. 

C.  f.    "Praise  not  the  day,  till  night  comes." 

108  JFmf  Jl^7  ?ra  I^T-     Gaya  gaya  gayai  gaya. 

One  gone  to  Gaya  has  gone  for  ever. 

In  former  times  when  there  were  no  railways  people  repairing 
to  Gaya,  (a  famous  place  of  pilgrimage)  had  to  travel  for  months 
on  foot,  and  so  only  about  one  fourth  of  the  average  number 
nsed  to  return  home  and  the  rest  perished.  Still  used  to  dissuade 
from  undertaking  a  perilous  pilgrimage  or  long  journey. 

109  ?i5r  ?|i7Tn  ^T^T  WJ-     Grama  kbanu  ya  kama  klianu. 
One  ought  to  forbear  or  eat  little. 

To  forgive  and  to  eat  little  food  are  advised  as  the  safest 
course  one  ought  to  take  in  this  world.  The  first  puts  a  stop  to 
quarrels  and  contentions  ;  and  the  second  protects  a  man  from  the 
evil  consequences  of  an  over-loaded  stomach. 

110  K'3  'Ir?  T<^Tf  IfT-     Kakha  pata  rakhawa  pata. 

Be  charitable  {courteous)  to  others  and  you  will  be  treated 
charitably  {courteously). 

One  morning  in  the  pionth  of  May,  the  Emperor  Akbar 
the  Great,  his  son,  and  Birbar  his  Prime  Minister,  went 
out  for  a  walk.  They  walked  several  miles.  As  soon  as  the 
sun  had  risen  the  monarch  felt  his  cloak  heavy  and  re- 
lieved himself  of  it  by  putting  it  on  the  shoulders  of  Birbal. 
As  soon  as  he  had  done  this  his  son  also  followed  his  father's 
example.  On  this  the  Emperor  looking  at  Birbal  said  ironically 
that  the  load  was  heavy  enough  for  one  ass,  to  which  Birbar 
said.  "No  Sire,  tho  load  I  am  bearing  is  properly  speaking  the 
load  of  two  asses." 

J  2 


(     282     ) 

111  q^r   q]^  ^j(k  •!  ^i^rTT.      Pakka  pana  kbansi  na 
jukhama. 

Hipe  betel  causes  no  cough  or  catarrh. 

Applied  to  dealings  with,  and  the  society  of,  old  people. 
This  proverb  teaches  that  friendship  and  dealings  with  boys 
should  be  avoided.  Indians  eat  the  leaf  of  the  betel  when  they 
have  cough  or  cold. 

113  Ji?i7  ^mjifj  '3S|J!irft'5lT  ^f^  %r^r  i^^^l-     Gaya  bajaya 

anyariya  kani  auno  chitaya. 

Sing  and  beat  drums,   but   be   teamed  of  the   approach 
of  Anydriyd. 

Caution  against  the  consequence  of  a  dangerous  and  trouble- 
some nndertaking. 

The  proverb  has  its  origin  from  the  undermentioned  tradition  : — 
Aneriyakot  is  a  village  on  the  banks  of  the  river  known  as 
"Swanla."  On  the  bank  of  the  same  river  is  a  GMta  called 
Bishwa  Nath  about  two  miles  east  of  Almora  where  all  the  dead 
bodies  of  the  town  of  Almora  are  cremated.  The  road  from 
Almora  to  Aneriyakota  passes  close  to  the  Ghat.  The  Ghats 
where  dead  bodies  are  burnt  are  supposed  to  be  haunted  by  ghosts 
or  evil  spirits.  It  is  also  supposed  that  these  ghosts  occasionally,  and 
generally  on  the  day  Amabashya  or  the  30th  of  the  lunar  month 
fwhen  the  moon  is  invisible)  rise  up  and  beat  their  drums  and 
dance  after  midnight.  On  one  occasion  a  villager  of  Aneriyakot 
happened  to  go  to  his  home  from  Almora  late  in  the  night  and  by 
mischance  met  with  their  procession  and  was  greatly  frightened  at 
the  horrible  sight.  For  some  of  them  were  without  heads,  some 
without  legs,  some  without  arms,  some  with  eyes  jutting  out 
and  bleeding,  some  with  eyes  depressed  looking  like  two  holes,  some 
with  bleeding  hair,  some  in  huge  shape  with  frightful  faces  and 
teeth,  some  walking  on  the  ground  and  bearing  their  king  f  who  was 
in  a  still  more  appalling  form,)  others  flying  and  dancing  round 
him,  but  all  in  hideous  and  prodigious  human  form  with  their  feet 
turned  backward.  In  the  desperation  of  his  terror  he  rushed  forward 
and  seized  the  leader,  and  notwithstanding  the  threats  of  the  ghosts 
kept  hold  of  him,  until  at  last  the  king  of  the  demons  was  forced  to 
submit  and  ask  him  what  he  wanted  from  him.  The  villager  there- 
upon conceived  the  happy  idea  of  demanding  from  the  demon  king 
the  greatest  favour  that  he  could  imagine,  viz  that  all  manure 


(     283     ) 

heaps  ?hould  be  carried  from  the  village  of  Khatyarhi  near  Almora 
to  his  own  village,  and  that  all  the  millet  crops  in  his  village  should 
he  weeded.  The  king  of  evil  spirits  agreed  to  do  this  and  pledged 
his  faith-  for  it,  whereupon  he  was  released  by  the  man.  On  the 
morning  of  the  next  daj  to  his  satisfaction  he  found  his  village  fall 
of  heaps  of  manure,  but  to  his  utter  grief  saw  all  his  millet  crops 
uprooted  (instead  of  being  weeded,  as  promised  by  the  king  of  the 
devils).  He  then  started  from  his  village  and  again  laid  wait  for 
him,  and  overtaking  him  reproved  him  for  the  damage  done  to  his 
crops,  but  the  devils  pleaded  their  innocence  since  they  did 
not  know  how  to  weed.  So  the  process  was  explained  to  them. 
They  also  gave  their  sacred  vows  to  the  villager  that  any  person 
taken  possession  of  by  ghosts  would  be  cured  if  he  or  any  member 
of  his  village  or  their  descendants  should  touch  him,  and  that  they 
■would  remain  at  their  will  and  pleasure  in  future  to  do  any  service 
for  them.  So  the  man  releasing  the  king  of  ghosts  returned  to  his 
home  and  found  his  crops  properly  weeded.  Since  that  time  the 
residents  of  the  village  have  become  famous  and  successful  mendi- 
cant exorcisers  of  evil  spirits  and  are  employed  as  such  wherever 
their  services  are  required.  At  the  same  time  the  ghosts  have  be- 
come so  cautious  of  the  residents  of  the  village  that  they  never  appear 
in  their  sight  and  always  warn  each  other  with  these  words,  which 
have  become  proverbial. 

113  ^^  ^T^r  H'^  IT^I^.       Paili  atma  taba  parama- 

tma. 

Mrst  one's  own  soul,  then  God  (are  to  he  regarded  J . 

That  is  one  ought  to  take  care  of  his  own  life  before  he 
undertakes  to  please  God.  For  only  so  long  as  he  is  alive  he  can  re- 
member God. 

Barha  maisa  ka  nijano  ditha  kana  ko    boja  ni   lagono 

pitha. 

No  one  should  go  in  the  sight  of  a  great  man,  or  take 
a  load  of  thorns  on  his  back. 

Great  men  have  to  be  obeyed  and  heeded.  If  a  poor  man 
does  not  obey  him  he  will  be  a  marked  man.  In  the  same  way 
load   of  thorns  if  taken  on  one's  back  causes  inconvenience.. 


(     284     ) 

115  (kH!  firf^STT  fi\V!  f5lf%^.      -Rina  milija  tina  nimila. 

One  can  get  a  deht,  hut  not  grass  fin  the  cold  season  J. 

Used  to  warn  people  to  provide  grass  for  their  cattle  during 
the  winter. 

116  '^^  IT^^'^.     Anna  Parmeshwara. 
Grain  too  is  a  God. 

Used  to  caution  one  against  wasting  grain,  which  supports  life. 

117  qiqiTUJ  ^»T  JITI      Papa  pragata  dharma  gupta. 

Sin  comes  out,   but  righteousness  remains  silent    or 
hid. 

That  is,  howsoever  one  may  conceal  his  sins  they  will  find 
him  out  eventually. 

Also  that  one  ought  to  expose  his  sins  to  evade  future- 
punishment,  and  to  conceal  his  virtuous  deeds  ;  since  it  is  supposed 
that  a  good  deed  if  done  "in  public  is  rewarded  less  than  if  done 
in  private. 

118  ^\^^  ^??f%  %f%  f^??f%  -^TST  f5[f^»ll%  ^T^   f%ilf%. 

Laundana  dagarhi  kheli  dhingarhi  aja  ni  bigarhi  bhola 

bigarhi. 

Dealings  with  hoys  will  bring  evil  tomorrow,  if  not 
today. 

Caution  against  dealing  with  boys. 

119  ^T^TT  ilfK^T  fT^^TT-  Darabara,  pariwara,  talawara. 
A  Court,   a   house-hold,   and  a   sword   {^are   difficult 

to  manage). 

Used  to  denote  that  the  management  of  each  of  these  thing* 
requires  a  great  amount  of  intelligence,  care,  and  skill. 

120  frts  JlT'fg  'TTT^T  ^i|t  ^Tg  ^TTr  liT"    Eina  garhanra 
pura  ko  dagarho  karanu  shura  ka. 


(     285     ) 

Borrow  money  from  a  really  rich  man  and  have  a 
hero  for  a  companion. 

I.  e.  An  ordinary  money  lender  is  troublesome,  not  so  a 
hereditary  rich  man  (banker).  In  the  same  way  one  is  safe  in  the 
company  of  a  hero  or  brave  man. 

121  ^lT5IT^I^€T^'»T'«T^^lT5?T^I^'rif^^IW.     Khai 

jano  kela  ko  pata  ni  khai  jano  kapali  hatha. 

If  one  knows  how  to  eat  his  food  on  a  plaintain  leaf 
he  can  eat,  but  if  he  does  not  know  it  then  he  may  put 
his  hand  to  his  forehead  fa  sign  of  disappointment  J . 

E.  g.  One  ■who  is  eating  from  a  plaintain  leaf  must  be  very 
careful  or  the  leaf  will  split  and  the  food  be  spoiled. 
The  need  of  carefulness  in  everything. 

122  ^f  t:  iH^(%  "^i^  ^  %TiT '»Tf^  rf  ^I^T  ^if^.    Kukura 

boda  ki  hadi  ten  kaunlo  pani  ten  saro  kuchha  ni. 

A  dog  finds  nothing  softer  than  a  bone  and  nothing 
harder  than  water. 

I.  e.  He  loves  bones  and  hates  water. 

Applied  to  people  who  go  contrary  to  custom  in  everything. 

123  ?5Ti!i  ^Z^T^sfi  HT^  M21TT^«       Khanu  ghatakaika 
maranu  bhatakaika. 

To  eat  voraciously  and  die  with  difficulty. 

Used  to  teach  that  one  should  do  everything  bravely. 
(A  quiet  death  is  considered  a  cowardly  one,  while  it  is  thought  a 
brave  thing  to  die  with  difficulty). 

124  ^TW  ^  Hi^I^tT  ^T^r  ^Sir  f;-      Khano  ni  phasaku 

ta  rono  daaha  ku. 

When  I  cannot  get  even  plain  tobacco  to  smoke  why 
should  I  not  lament  ? 


(     286     ) 

Tobacco  is  prepared  for  smoking  by  mixing  it  with  treacle. 
Hence  to  be  unable  to  get  even  plain  tobacco  is  a  sign  of  extreme 
poverty. 

125  gift  'q^T  't^fgi  ^T^  ^T'»f%  ^^  ^^I-      Kawa  chalo 

hansa  ki  chala  apani  laga  bhulo. 

The  crow  copied  the  movements  of  the  swan  and  forgot 
her  own. 

Applies  to  one  who  in  imitating  the  actions  of  greater  people 
neglects  his  own  business  and  is  thus  ruined. 

126  ^rl'^T^I  »J^V  ^^%  ^T1 '^T^r  ^*%  ^'^^T-    Kutta 

ayo  bhukado  bhukado  baga  ayo  lukado  lukado. 

The  dog  came  barhing,  but  the  leopard  came  silently. 

One  who  rebukes  or  reprimands  does  not  wish  to  injure, 
but  one  who  is  intent  to  injure  does  so  secretly. 

127  eRj^j-  ^JT  "^^fK  TTfT-     Kalo  chora  andheri  rata. 

A  thief  in  black  and  darh  night. 

E.  g.  A  thing  difficult  to  be  found  out  or  discovered. 


QUARRELS. 

1  ^^  1T^^  *Tlf%  f^'^T^ll'I-     Eka  hatha  le  tali  ni  bajani. 

Clapping  cannot  be  done  with  one  hand  only. 
"It  takes  two  to  make  a  quarrel." 

2  s^^i^T  JI^  5^1^  Tt^  ^^-     J  we  khasama  eka  chhuyala 

randa  chheka. 

The  wife  and  husband  are  one,   and   let   the  scandal- 
monger be  a-ccursed. 


(     287     ) 

Applied   to   dissuade   people   from    raising   quarrels 
relatives. 


amonsr 


a 


3  «qt5^JT  ^  ^^  j^  >TT?T  €)•  %g.      Jwe  khasama  ki  kala 
dudha  bhata  ki  bela. 

The  quarrel  between  a  husband  and  wife  ends  like  «, 
meal  of  rice  and  milk  (i.  e.  quickly  over,  and  will  not 
last  long). 

E.  g.  As  elsewhere  said,  the  fighting  of  goats,  the  ceremony 
performed  for  one's  forefathers  by  a  saint  or  hermit,  a  cloudy 
morning,  a  quarrel  between  husband  and  wife,  will  not  last  lono-, 

4  fz^m  q^l^.     Thinaka  parhai. 

Striking  a  spark  with  flint  and  steel. 

(Villagers  still  get  their  fire  in  this  way). 
Applied  to  quarrels  which   unexpectedly   take   place   between 
parties  without  any  evident  or  palpable  cause"!     A  sudden  quarrel. 

5  <STr  ^ill%  I'i/^l.     I)uma  dagarbi  gugeli. 

A  quarrel  with  a  low-caste  man  is   like  playing  tvith 
human  excreta. 

I.  e.  Degrading  to  oneself. 

6  TT^^  ^  f%?pr  •^T^'H  "^T  ^'^  ^^'     Tu  danda  mai  tris- 

hula  nachana  bait"ha  tinu  kuln. 

You  are  a  club,   I~am  a    Trishula   (^trident)   three 
generations  began  to  dance. 

Among  illiterate  folk,  deities  and  ghosts  are  supposed  to 
possess  people  and  make  them  dance.  During  festivals  the  people 
of  every  village  assemble  at  night  near  the  village  temple,  and  a  great 
fire  is  lighted  (called  "DMni"  )  in  the  centre.  One  of  the  people 
gathered  there,  stands  up  and  takes  hold  of  the  wooden  club,  while 
another  takes  the  three-pointed  iron  bar  which  belong  to  the  temple, 
to  represent  the  deities.  The  drummers  beat  their  drums  ;  the  two 
men  begin  a  wild  dance.     This  stimulates  and  excites  all  the   other 


(     288     ) 

people  to  dance  and  make  a  great  shouting  and  noise.  Thus  the 
combination  of  two  big  persons  is  able  to  excite  the  whole  popula- 
tion of  a  neighbourhood.  That  is,  two  persons  combined  and 
united  can  play  a  far  better  part  than  a  single  person  can.  "Two 
heads  are  better  than  one."  This  is  also  interpreted  to  mean  that 
when  two  persons  begin  to  quarrel  one  thinks  or  says  that  he  is  in 
no  way  inferior  to  the  other  ;  if  one  claims  to  be  the  club  the  other 
says  he  is  the  Trishula  (trident)  and  so  the  quarrel  or  contention 
arises.  Hence  the  proverb.    C.  /.  "If  you  are  Turk  I  am  a  Tartar." 

7  ^^m  ^^J^  %J^  ^ir%  ^''^^T^^      Sutro  na  kapasa  koli 
dagarhi  karchha  karchha. 

Neither  thread  nor  cotton  quarrel  with  the  weaver. 
Applied  to  one  who  quarrels  with  others  for  no  cause. 

8  ^tV  ^ft  W^  fijsnf  f%  m^^  ^^  %7i  ^T^f.     Teri  meri  kaba 

bigarbali  jaba  lena  dena  holo. 

When  shall  we  quarrel  with  each  other  ?     When  we  begin 
to  lend  to  and  borrow  from  each  other. 

Another  proverb  says  that  three   things   des,troy   friendship  ; 
1  To  converse  with  a  man's  wife  in  his    absence  ;  2   to    lend 
to  or  borJow  from  him,  3  to  debate  with  him. 

9  ^TT  f^f%'IT  ^  ^"^1  f^f^^T-      Tera  pisiya  men  mero 
misiyo. 

Your  grist  and  mine  are  ground  together. 

It  is  difficult  to  separate  grist  belonging  to  two  or  more 
parties  without  some  disagreement.  Hence  the  proverb  refers  to 
cause  of  quarrels. 

Applicable  to  division  of  joint  property  or  cited  to  warn 
one  against  running  the  risk  of  such  liabilities  or  to  advise  him  to 
abstain  from  such  a  bargain. 

10  (^  ^  ^5  ^'^^T'^^T'^'     Twe  ku  na  main  ku  bhuichala 

rasa. 

Neither  for   thyself  nor   for   myself,  hut  for   the  earth- 
quake. 


(     289     ) 

Tills  means  that  the  thing  which  we  are  quarreling  about 
neither  remained  with  you,  nor  with  me,  but  was  taken  away  by  a 
third  person  while  we  were  disputing. 

The  lawyer  milks  the  cows  whilst  the  disputants  struggle  for 
its  possession. 

11  *fiTf  ^f2  *ii71f  T.     Jbarha  kutl  jhagarlio. 

One  raises  a  quarrel  by  beating  grass. 

Beating  grass  is  nobody's  business  at  all,  or  is  a  useless  act, 
so  if  one  beats  it  he  does  it  to  raise  some  contention  without  cause. 

Applied  to  those  wbo  are  fond  of  quarrels,  and  seek  an 
occasion  of  offence,  or  to  critics  who  ar«  alw-ays  ready  to  find  fault. 

12  fTlf^  f^lIT^*^  ^  ^T^f.W-      Tali  dwi  hathana  le  bajan- 

chhi. 

'J}wo  hands  are  needed  for  clapping. 

Applied  to  quarrels  in  which  both  parties  are  to  blatoe. 

13  ^^ITt  ^^'fi'^  'T"<:t  "^Jf^T.  !ll%r^-     Ival3^ari  kalakari 
niarama  ankbara  naboli. 

Quarrel,  but  do  not  say  anything  that  may  give  mortal 
offence. 

Quarrelling  is  allowable  if  it  is  not  carried  too  far. 


RASH  AND  FOOLISH  ACTS. 

1  ^T^g  ^  ^1%  ^JT.  TiXJ  WC^  ^*^T  W^«    A  baila  mai 
kani  mara  mera  gala  me  pbanda  dala. 

Come,     bulloch,    beat    me,    and  put    the    yohe    on 
my  nech. 

I.  e.  A  bullock  is  generally  yoked  and  beaten. 
If  one  unnecessarily  and  rashly  undertakes  the   liabilities    of 
the  bullock  (another  person)  he  will  be  treated  accordingly. 

K2 


(     290     } 

2  ^I  ?RX:5gT  ^T^  ^r^r-      Chhanda  karchhula  hatha 
dadono. 

In  spite  of  having  a  spoon  {to  stir  up   the  food  in  the 
potj  he  gets  his  hand  burnt. 

Applied  to  one  who  rashly  endangers  himself  by  attempting 
unnecessary  work,  or  to  one  who  instead  of  taking  a  safe  path  goes 
by  one  which  is  evidently  perilous. 

3  "^gT  ^T  '^T'^^'lIT  ^TT*     Cbatura  ka  cbara  jaga  laga. 
A  wise  man  feels  four  difficulties. 

Before  starting  a  thing  a  prudent  man  will  reflect  over  its 
present  and  future  consequences  to  himself  and  other  people, 
whereas  a  fool  will  attempt  a  thing  rashly  and  without  any 
deliberation  at  all. 

4  ^cj  '^f^T'I  ^T  ^^   '^'S'T.      Chhana  ankhana   ka  bhela 
parhanu. 

Falls  down  a  precipice  in  spite  of  having  eyes. 

Applied  to  one  who  does  an  evidently  foolish  thing  rashly 
and  without  deliberation. 

5  %T^^  W^l  TTg-     Au  khunda  myara  mnnda. 

O  log,  strike  my  head. 

I.  e.  No  one  should  endanger  himself  by  meddlinor  in 
another's  affairs. 

6  ^T^T  ^T'^T  ^   ^1^  Tl   %.      Ala   kacha  khai  nakha 

mukha  ai. 

The  food   rate  and  half-cooked  if  eaten    comes   out 
through  the  nose  and  mouth. 

E.  g.  As  it  is  not  digested  it  produces  colic,  causing  vomiting 
and  derangement  of  the  stomach. 

Used  to  warn  people  not  to  do  anything  without  deliberation, 
for  one  who  does  a  thing  rashly  eventually  suffers  in  consequence 
of  it.  "Look  before  you  leap."  "Haste  makes  waste."  "The  more 
haste  the  less  speed." 


(     291     ) 

7  fTIW %t  5!f%  T'5.     Tatai  khaun  jali  marun. 

One  who  eats  hot  food  is  sure  to  burn  his  mouth 
or  lips. 

Used  of  one  who  unwisely  and  rashly  is  determined  to  do  a 
ruinous  work  without  regard  to  its  consequences. 

Caution  against  doing  a  thing  rashly  or  without  prudence. 
C.  /.  "Hasty  climbers  have  sudden  falls." 

8  13^^  ^rf%^  'gl  IT  l[l^.     Khasama  bolika  duma  para 
hatha. 

A  caste  woman  lays  her  hand  upon   a  Duma  ( low 
caste  man). 

Applied  to  one  who  thoughtlessly  does  something  wrong. 

READINESS  FOR  CONTINGENCIES. 

1  ^T^  ^  'sffTT  ^T  ^T  ZT*!-     Sbyala  kl  larhai  shera  ko 
thana. 

One  who  goes  to  hunt  a  jaelcal  must  provide   himself 
with  iceapons  to  fight  with  a  tiger. 

Be  ready  for  all  possible  emergencies. 

REGRET,   REPINING  OR  DISSATISFACTION. 

1  'It^^T'^'^  'It^  ^IZ*     Sill  wobarijhili  khata. 
A  damp  cellar  and  loose  bed. 

Destitution,  or  untoward  circumstances. 

2  ^'t5I  ^t  Tf^^IT  ^  "B'«l"fT  ^f^T-     fsanja  ka  mariya  ku  kaba 
ten  rono. 

Sow  long  will  kinsmen  and  relatives  weep  for  one  who 
dies  in  the  evening. 

E.  g.  When  one  dies  his  kinsmen  immediately  take  him  to 
the  ghata  for  burning,  and  so  long  as  the  body  is  in  the  house  they 
weep  over  him,  and  as  one  who  dies  in  the  evening  cannot   be    re~ 


(    292     ) 

moved  until  the  next  morning  it  has  become  a  question  "how    long 
will  his  people  mourn  over  him." 

Applied  by  one,  who  is  either  disabled  or  made  unfit  for  any 
business  in  his  early  life,  or  is  in  constant  distress,  for  his  own 
consolation. 

3  ^TIIT  f^^T^  'TT'S  ^  Icai^f-      Kano  biralu  manda  le 
patyayo. 

A  one-eyed  cat  is  deceived  by   rice  water   (  because   it 
looks  like  milk). 

Applied  by  one  (bemoaning  his  ill  luck)  who  is  obliged  to  be 
satisfied  with  a  little  in  place  of  much,  or  by  one  who  has  been 
misled  by  false  hopes,  or  has  been  deceived  through  his  simplicity. 

4  gjl  ^TJIT  *l  ^Jl{  ^W^^'      L^ga  lagau  na  dhata  pahun- 
chau. 

I  have  no  inediator,  and  no  one  hears  my  cry. 

Used  by  one  who  considers  a  certain  thing  totally  out  of 
his  power. 

5  q'f  I'l  f515TriTi7  %^7  ^a[fil3l«l^r  ^WT-    Paharha  nijanamau 

chelo  desba  nijanamau  belo. 

Let  me  not  he  a  man  in  the  hills,    or   a   he-buffalo   in 
the  Plains. 

Men  in  the  hills  have  to  carry  heavy  loads  up  the  steep  paths 
while  those  in  the  plains  have  not  to  do  so.  In  the  same  way  a  he- 
buffalo  in  the  hills  has  no  work  whatever  to  do,  whereas  in  the 
plains  he  is  always  employed  in  heavy  labour. 

Used  by  a  Paharhi  grumbling  at  his  Jot. 

6  WTWI  efi)"  %fi:  ^  ^^r  '^ri-   Machha  ki  boi  ku  sada  shoga. 
The  fishes'  mother  is  always  in  sorrow  for  her  children. 

{for  they  are  caught). 

Applied  to  one  who  is  incessantly  in  adverse  circumstances. 

"  ^lOT  JfiT  ^¥^  "Tf^  ^Z^-     Ghana  ka  perha  men  garb 
ataki. 


(     293     ) 

A  cart  stopped  by  a  stalk  of  gram. 
E.  g.  Great  affairs  hindered  by  trifles. 

8  figtq^  3iii7.     Chliappana  taka. 

Fifty-six  takas  i.  e.   112  pice    the   maximum  amount 
of  a  gift. 

In  ancient  times  when  money  was  very  scarce  112  pice  was 
the  greatest  amount  one  could  give  another.  This  is  still  used  by 
one  who  is  not  satisfied  with  what  he  has  received,  and  says  he 
expected  at  least  56  Takas. 

9  ^  ^^T  ^■'^I  "^"SiT  ^T  'JI^  s^l^ir^  ^it  ^WW»  Se  runo  tera 
baba  ka  santha  nahai  gochba  harhi  runo  chha. 

Sleep  for  me  has  gone  with  thy  father,  now  I  can  only 
lie  {like  a  log). 

Spoken  by  a  widow  to  her  son  who  tells  her  to  sleep. 
This  is  made  use  of  by    one  whose    prosfierity    or    happiness 
has  left  him,  and  who  can  do  nothing  but  grieve  and  repine. 

10  \TS  ^^  ^  f^%imj  g%  ^t%  ^T^^T  %  ^WT«     Dukha 

sukha  kai  pain  ni  kauno  sukhi  sakhi  lakarho  bai  runo. 

J3etter  to  shrivel  up  like  a  log  of  wood   than    to    tell 
one's  distresses  to  another. 

This  is  applied  by  one  who  bemoans  his  having  no  real 
friends  and  relatives,  and  so  makes  up  his  mind  not  to  expose  him- 
self to  others,  who,  having  no  interest  in  or  S3'mpiithy  with  him, 
are  likely  to  laugh  at  or  take  advantage  of  his  weakness. 

il  ^  %  '^f5i  fTTl^  ^.fW«     J^'e  jai  buni  ta  roi  ke  cbbi. 
■J 

If  I  had  a  wife,  tohat  should  I  cry  for  ? 

A  wife  is  a  very  useful  article  to  the  Pahdrhi,  as  she  does 
nearly  all  the  work. 

12  %2l^  ^  ^Tf<:  ^^  fz^T  ^1^  ^\<-     Jetha  jyii  ki  khori 
phnti  tika  laini  thaura. 


(    294    ) 

The  husband's  elder  brother   hurt   the  middle   of  his 
forehead  {or  defamed  himself). 

I.  e.  When  any  great  man  does  anything  bad  it  becomes 
widely  known. 

13  (%v}7^  eR7  fq^T^  fk^J^  \j  V{^  mT^.    Sinalu  ka  pinalu 
pinalu  ko  bliela  paparha. 

Sinalu  (yam  or  big  sweet  potatoes)  if  neglected  (  not 
cultivated,  but  allowed  to  grow  wild)  degenerate  into 
Pindlus  (small  roots)  ;  and  if  Findlus  grow  wild  they 
become  like  grass  and  not  fit  for  food. 

Used  by  ono  bomoaning  his  degraded  position  due  to  his 
friends  not  taking  proper  care  of  him. 

14  -^^r  ^T''^  ^T  %W^¥T  '»n^  '^i'^'     Barba  bapa  ka  chela 
barha  papa  le  huni. 

To  be  the  son  of  a  big  {rich)  man  is  the  consequence 
of  great  sins  committed  in  a  previous  state  of  existence. 

E.  g.  The  son  of  a  rich  and  great  man  who  is  brought  up  in 
luxurious  and  lavish  habits  takes  no  trouble  to  learn  any  useful 
profesion  and  consequently  is  not  in  such  easy  circumstances  as  his 
father.  After  his  father's  death  when  he  is  unable  to  go  on  as 
before  he  feels  ashamed  and  regrets  bitterly  that  he  was  born  a  rich 
man's  son,  seeing  himself  now  reduced  to  poverty. 

15  ttar  ^  ^  CKT  ^f^l^ir  ^f^  ^Tf<:  ^Tf%  ^"^l-     Jettia  jyu 

phun  phan  karigaya  meri  kbori  pborhigaya. 

My  husband's  elder  brother  in  gratifying  his  own  wish 

broke  my  head  {I suffered  much  loss). 

E.  g.  If  the  husband's  elder  brother  going  here  and  there  ort 
his  own  ends  happens  to  touch  the  younger  brother's  wife  (which 
is  forbidden  )  then  she  says,  you  have  hurt  my  reputation.  Used  by 
one  who  suffers  in  consequence  of  the  doings  of  others. 


(     295     ) 

16  ^TT  ^qioT  ?3?T^f%  ^  TTf«     Mora  apana  kbuta  dekbi 
ka  rowa. 

The  peacock  loolcing  at  Ids  oven  feet  wept. 

The  peacock  was  cheated  out  of  his  beautiful  feet  by  a 
partridge,  and  in  lieu  of  them  he  received  the  ugly  ones  of  the 
partridge  ;  he  mourns  over  his  deception,  of  which  his  feet  remind 
him  whenever  he  sees  them.  (The  fact  is  :  While  dancing  the  pea- 
cock is  pleased  by  looking  over  the  other  part?  of  his  beautiful  body, 
but  tears  flow  from  his  eyes  when  he  sees  his  feet). 

•  Story.  Once  a  peacock  and  a  partridge  proposed  to  have  a 
dancing  party  in  a  forest  ;  the  condition  entered  into  was  that  one 
should  dance  before  the  other  by  turns.  The  peacock  was  the  first 
to  please  his  comrade,  the  partiidge,  with  his  dancing,  but  when 
the  partridge's  turn  came  he  refused  to  dance  unless  the  former 
exchanged  feet  with  him  for  the  dance,  to  which  the  peacock  agreed 
and  gave  away  his  feet  to  the  partridge.  The  partiidge  after  dancing 
a  while  flew  away  to  the  jnngle  with  the  borrowed  feet  and  left  his 
own  with  the  peacock,  leaving  him  to  disap[iointment.  Hence  the 
proverb  applied  to  ooe  who  regrets  his  own  foolishness  in  having 
lost  something. 

17  ^"^T^  5(f|-g  ^  ^iist  5T»i-§^  €}■  ^^-      Nahoi  khila  ki 

kauiii  na  mandala  ki  bbikha. 

JSi either  did  I  get  any  kauni,  {a  land  of  milletj  out 
of  the  jungle  fields  {neioly  cultivated  in  the  jungle)  nor 
have  I  been  able  to  collect  grain  by  begging  from  in- 
habited places  {villages). 

Used  by  one  bemoaning  that  his  labors  and  efforts  to  get  a 
livelihood  have  been  in  vain. 

18  ^T^ t:?:  q  ^T^  J1?:  -^  ^^ ^^  ^^rl  vt.     Ghara  me 
rai  na  tirathagai  munda  mundaibera  pbajita  bhai. 

Neither  remained  at  home  nor  went  on  a  pilgrimage, 
but  was  disgraced  by  having  her  head  shaved. 

The  heads  of  those  who  become  ascetics  are  first  of  all  shaved, 
and  after  that  they  are  ordered  to  quit  their  homes  and  spend 
their  time  in  visiting  sacred  places.  If  one  does  not  do  this  after 
having  his  head  shaved  he  is  regarded  as  depraved,  being  neither 
an  ascetic  nor  a  family  man. 


C    206    ; 

19  1 T^  ^  Um  h\T  ^m-     Hatha  ra  gata  dhunga  matha. 
Neither  in   his  hand,    nor  on   his   body    hut   spilt  on 

a  stone. 

Apyilied  to  things  lost  and  wasted  without  being  in   any   way- 
used  or  enioved. 

"Spilt'milk." 

20  ^f%  ?iTf%  ^2^  f)-  ^7  cijH  ^^nj.     Jaiki  garhi  ataki 
wi  ko  nama  chutiya. 

The   man    whose    cart  sticks    in   a   rut   is  called   a 
stupid  man. 

Unfortunate  men  are  generally  considered  fools. 

21  ^f%^T  ^  ^T^r  ^f%?lT  mi^X-       Jarhiya   ke    khayo 
karbiya  khayo. 

Why  did  I  eat  jarhiya  {a  vegetable,  a  kind  of  mustard)  ? 
it  proved  to  he  an  unholy  thing  to  me. 

Applicable  to  one  who  repents  for  some  acts  of  his  which  has 
resulted  very  differently  from  what  he  expected,  to  his  trouble 
and  harm. 

Jakha  sono  chha  takha  nakha  ni  jakha  nakha  chha  takha 

sono  ni. 

Where  there  is  gold  there  is  no  nose,  and   where  there 
is  a  nose  there  is  no  gold  {nose-ring')  for  it. 

A  rich  man  without  a  wife,  or  a  man  with  a  wife  and  family 
but  no  wealth.  So  a  rich  man  without  children  or  without  culture. 
Plenty  with  ill  health  &c. 

23   ^'^T  ^^  ^  'SUfTOrTr*     Thecha  kuti  ye  achhana  ma. 

This  wooden  block  {on  which  all  the  chopping  of  fire- 
wood, meat  etc,  is  done)  gets  all  the  heating  and  cutting. 

The  head  of  tho  family  is  made  to  bear  all  the  expenses 
incurred  by  every  member  of  his  family. 

Used  by  the  head  of  a  family  who  grudges  the  expenditure 
which  his  household  is  incurring.  "The  willing  horse  is  always 
burdened." 


(     297     ) 

24  ^1  '^J$lll  ifii  {^^  H^r  ^r^T  ^ia^t  ^t  (^^  v^T  f^si 

"SiXJ  ^Kt  %T  ^^T  ^^r  ^T  ^if^  f^^r*  Khilda  bakhsha  k» 
dina  bhala  Maula  bakhasha  ka  dina  bbala  dina  bura  mera 
jo  tera  gharhau  ko  pani  piyo. 

The  fate  of  thy  sons  Khudd  JSakhsh  and  Mauld  Bakhsh 
will  b6  good,  but  mihe  is  evil,  because  I  have  drunk  water 
out  of  thy  vessel. 

E.  g.  The  Hindus  are  prohibited  frovn  drinking  water  out  of 
the  vessel  of  a  Mahomedan ;  if  any  one  does  so  he  is  excommunicated. 
Once  an  astrologer  travelling  in  the  plains  grew  very  thirsty.  He 
happened  to  meet  a  woman,  who  enquired  of  him  who  he  was.  He 
said  that  he  was  an  astrologer.  On  which  she  requested  him  to 
kindly  predict  the  future  of  her  sons,  after  consulting  their 
horoscopes.  To  this  the  Pandit  replied  in  the  affirmative,  and  ask- 
ed her  for  water  (taking  her  to  be  a  Hindu  woman,  as  in  the  Plains 
Hindu  and  Mahomedan  women  wear  clothes  of  the  same  fashion).- 
As  soon  as  the  Pandit  had  drunk  the  water  given  by  her,  she  laid 
the  horoscopes  of  her  two  sons  before  him,  and  he  began  to  examine 
them.  He  found  one  was  that  of  Khuda  Bakhsh  and  the  other 
of  Maula  Bakhsh.  At  this  he  was  astounded  (fixing  his  eyes  on  the 
said  names)  and  did  not  know  what  to  do.  She,  seeing  the  attitude 
of  the  Pandit,  supposed  that  he  was  absorbed  in  contemplation  of 
the  horoscopes,  and  therefore  addressed  him  thus  :  "Panditji !  what 
is  the  future  of  Khuda  Bakhsh  and  Maula  Bakhsh?"  To  this  earnest 
enquiry  of  hers  the  Pandit  replied  thus  : — "The  days  of  thy  sons 
Khuda  Bakhsh  and  Maula  Bakhsh  are  fortunate,  but  mine  are  the 
evil  days,  inasmuch  as  I  have  drunk  water  out  of  thy  pot.  Hence 
the  proverb.  Applied'by  one  who  regrets  the  evil  consequences 
of  his  errors. 

kaputa  pathayo  cbori  jhusalyana  am  lyayo  torhi. 

A  bad  son  sent  to  steal  brought  bach  only  green  apricots. 

This  is  applied  to  one's  own  relations  or  kinsmen,  who 
though  they  have  had  recourse  to  evil  ways  of  getting  money, 
are  yet  poor. 

L  2 


(     298     ) 

Suta    katlka    koli  ki  bhaudi    puta  saintlka   buwarl     ki 
bhaudi 

The  thread  spun  is  made  over  to   a  weaver,  and  the  son 
nourished  is  made  over  to  a  daughter-in-law. 
Natural  regret  of  parents. 


(^^  ®v  ^  o^ 

putij  kala  na  puti,  keson  phuli  tau  na  puti. 

To  day  childless,  tomorrow  without  issue,  and  when  turned 
grey  still  without  issue. 

This  is  applied  to  one  who  is  never  successful  in  any- 
undertaking,  or  one  who  never  grows  wiser  or  learns  from 
experience. 

28  '9SIT5!  ^T  f^??!^  ^31%  ^f^^T  i^'ll^  ^T%     Aja  kapinalu 
kbarhai,  bbola  ka  pinalu  kharbai. 

The  Pindlus  {sweet  yams)  dug  up  to-day  are  buried,  and 
those  dug  up  tomorrow  will  also  he  buried. 

This  vegetable  root  is  generally  covered  over  with  earth 
after  being  dug  up,  otherwise  it  dries  up  or  rots.  Infant  children 
when  they  die  are  buried  under  ground.  So  this  proverb  is  cited 
with  reward  to  one  all  whose  children  have  died  in  infancj^.  It  is  also 
applied  to  one  who  has  failed  in  all  his  efforts  to  obtain  some 
objeci!. 

29  ^g'  IT^T  ^  'irf^''^  W^h      Artba  pajo  na  gobinda 
gayo. 

No  wealth  earned,  nor  yet  a  pious  life  led  {the  praises  of 
Govind  not  sung). 

Recrret  for  having  lost  both  this  and  next  world.  For  the 
theory  is  that  one  must  either  get  his  human  birth  blessed  by  the 
adoration  of  God  with  a  view  to  the  nest  existence,  or  by  the 
accumulation  of  wealth  for  comfort  and  reputation  daring  the  pre- 
sent life. 


(     299     ) 

30  ^rg  ^T  ^"^  f^^J^  %Tf%  T'EIT^  ^r  >T^  f%^lt  ^r^-    Bapu 
ka  gbara  nilai  choli  payala  ka  bhara  ni  khai  poli. 

No  good  clothes  when  in  my  father's  house,  and  no  sweet- 
meats when  in  my  father-in-law  s  house. 

"Poll"  is  a  cake  made  oi  gur.ha  (treaclej  and  is  given  to  young 
girls  in  order  to  make  them  grow  up  quickly. 

This  proverb  expresses  regret  at  one's  continued  bad  fortune. 

31  -mq  ^  ^'ZT^  ^  Tiff  f^^IT^  ^«    Bapa  ki  katari  ni, 

ma  ki  pitari  ni. 

I  have  received  710  katari  (a  three-edged  knife  kept  by 
Kshetrias  or  Majputs,\from  my  father,  and  no  box  (in  which 
women  keep  cash  and  valuables)  from  my  mother. 

Used  by  one  who  complains  of  his  poor  and  unlucky  circums- 
tances, or  by  one  who  boasts  of  his  own  earnings. 

32  st<T5T  %  i5fz  »]^T  ff  ^t3^  ^  fsi  l^'ft^T*     Dantana  hai 
ebhuti  gayo  ta  onthana  le  ni  pakarMno. 

A  thing  that  has  slipped  from  one's  teeth  cannot  'be  held 
by  the  lips. 

Applied  by  one  who  bemoans  that  he  has  lost  the  favor  of  a 
greater  man,  which  cannot  be  made  up  for  by  the  favor  of  poorer 
people.     This  is  also  spoken  of  lost  opportunities. 

33  qT^T^  ^T  ^r^«     Paraloka  ko  chora. 
The  thief  of  the  former  existence. 

The  theory  is  that  one  who  does  not  get  a  thing  in  this  life 
is  supposed  to  have  robbed  another  of  it  in  his  former  life. 

Used  to  express  regret  and  grief  of  one  who  is  destitute 
and  in  want. 

34  fTT<TT  «T^  %T  '»Tf^*     Tata  tawa  ko  pani. 

Water  on  a  red-hot  oven. 

Used  to  represent  one's  insignificant  income  which  is  insuffi.- 
cicnt  to  meet  his  large  expenses. 


(     300     ) 

35  ^  ^  ^7  ilT^T*     ^^^  ^^^  k<?  makho. 
A  Jly  in  curd. 

E.  g.    If  one  finds  a  fly  in   curd  he   immediately   throws    it 
away  in  disornst. 

Used  by  one  who  is  disliked,   being   a   stranger    and    looked 
upon  as  an  intruder. 

36  ^^T  ^'5T  ^t  TI^TT  ^^T  «JiT  ^W  f^^|5|  ^^j.     Kasa  kasa 
kari  gaya  musa  ka  chela  diwana  bhaya. 

l^hat  has  become  of  others  that  the  sons  of  a  mouse  have 
become  statesmen. 

Used  to  express  regret  as  to  pne  of  low   family   rising   to  an 
important  post. 

37  ^^7^  %  vl^  T'5»)  ZZ\-     Kauali  khai  bhuti  rarha  ge 
tutl.  ^        -      -V 

He  longed  for  nettles  and  ate  them,  but  afterwards  his 
longing  was  changed  to  aversion. 

One  who  follows  after  evil  will  suffer  in  the   end.     Also   that 
all  inordinate  desire  should  be  repressed. 

38  ^jini  mtm  »lf  ^  ^faiT^T  ^^     Khani  pini  gadha 

raige  rauntyalo  kumun. 

Food  and  drink  is  left  in  Garhwal,  hut  beautiful  scenery 
in  K/wmaun. 

A  Garhwali  saying.     Garhwalis  in   Kumaun  cannot  get  as 
good  food  and  water  as  when  at  home. 

Khana  kamuna  ku  bidoli  ka  danga  dekhana  darshana  ku 

gostu  ki  barhe. 

The  stony  land  of^  the  village  Bidoli  is  cultivated  pro- 
fitably, but  pleasant  to  be  looked  at  is  Gostu-Jci-bdrhe. 

These  two    villages    are   in   Garhwal.     All   is  not  gold  that 
glitters. 


(     801     ) 

40  ^g  efiT  tmjt  "^^JX  «Bt  ^I'E.     Kbala  ka  gusai  dada- 

wara  hi  syane. 

One  who  was  once  the  owner   of  threshing  floors  now 
longs  for  J)adwara  {alms). 

E.  g.  When  the  crops  are  threshed  aud  winnowed  the  village 
blacksmith,  the  drummer  who  beats  his  drum  before  each  house  on 
festival  days,  the  priest  who  performs  the  religious  ceremonies, 
the  tailor,  the  -weaver,  the  oilman,  the  ploughman  etc,  and  other 
poor  men  go  and  get  some  grain  from  the  owner  of  the  threshing-floor 
as  a  gift  ;  this  gift  is  called  "Dadwdra."  Hence  the  proverb  which 
is  applied  to  one  who  being  once  the  master  of  -wealth  has  no-w 
become  a  beggar. 

DO 

41  %  ^7^  "^^if^  ^^I^  ^QT.      Khai  ale  buari  pi  ale 

sasura. 

What  shall  the  daughter-in-laio  eat  and  the  father-in- 
law  drink  ? 

An  ironical  phrase  used  when  there  is  very  little  to  eat,  or 
expressing  regret  and  surprise  when  the  supply  is  very  small. 

42  ^Tfz^T  IJlfl  ^'^*     Katiyan.  machha  dhara. 

Fish  cut  in  pieces  {for  cooMng)fled  away  to  a  ridge. 

An  impossible  or  astonishing  thing. 

43  5T^^  f^5J^  ?E^rT   TI^TI'lt  ^rar.      Kala  mu  binati 
karita  rojahi  Hgyo. 

Death  on  being   requested  to  spare  one   took  away 
the  best. 

REJOICING   AT   OTHERS.   CALAMITY. 

Bhalada  marigayo  bhali  bbai  duma   kurbi  ago  lago  bhali 
bbai. 


(     302     ) 

That  our  elder  brother  the  bear  {a  compUmentry  term, 
iised  now  when  the  bear  is  dead)  loas  Jcilled,  was  a  good 
thing  ;  but  that  the  house  of  the  Duma  (a  lower  caste)  was 
burned  down  was  also  a  good  thing. 

This  saying  originnted  from  the  story  of  a  bear  who  once 
entered  the  house  of  a  Duma  after  honey  in  a  hive,  and  accidentally- 
set  fire  to  the  house  by  stirring  up  the  cinders.  So,  according  to 
the  higher  castes.  (Bithas)  of  Gangoli,  "Two  birds  were  killed 
by  one  stone." 

2  q^t  ^T  "^T^^  f^W^T  ^^'      Bain  ko  bacliharu  pijayo 

suklia. 

It  is  pleasant  to  see  the  milk  of  an  anemy''s  cow  drunk 
up)  by  its  calf. 

Rejoicing  at  the  injury  done  to  one's  enemy. 

3  5^T  W\  f^'SfT  ^T.  f^TT^   ^T  ^^«      Musa  ka  jiya  para 
biralu  ka  khela. 

The  raVs  painful  death  is  the  sport  of  the  cat. 

This  proverb  has  the  same  meaning  as  Esops'  fable  of  the 
boys  and  frogs.     "What  is  fan  to  you  is  death  to  us." 

RELATIONSHIP. 

1  ^q^T  ^i^J  ^Vkl  "^TT^r  'sTTf   ^T^-     Apano  palo  poso 
parayo  kbarba  kocbyo. 

One  cherishes  one's  own,  but  beats  to  the  ground 
another's. 

1.  e.  No  one  is  as  careful  of  another's  property  as  he  is  of 
his  own. 

2  ^\mi  ^n  f^^r  ^T  5^^!  ^T^  ^TSr-     Apana  goru  diya 
ko  punya  aura  posba. 

He  who  feeds  his  otcn  coiv,  obtains  both  virtue  and 
nourishment. 


(     303     ) 

I.  e  To  feed  the  cow  is  an  act  of  merit,  aud  also  repays  one 
by  supplying  milk.  Applies  to  maintaining  one's  own  kinsmen 
and  relatives. 

3  ^T'^'Ur  ^1^5?!  f^^nj    'FT%T?«       Apano   apanu   biranu 
machoda. 

One's  own  j^eople  are  dear,  a  stranger  is  cursed  in 
comparison. 

4  ^imj  ^ifx^"^  iiItt   f^TI^T   «Tlf%%^  'TT^T*      Apano 
maribera  palau  birano  palibera  marau. 

A  man  will  continue  to  love  his  own  even  if  heaten  by 
him,  but  an  outsider  even  if  tenderly  cared  for,  will  beat 
{not  love)  the  benefactor. 

5  "3Sjt?^T  ^ift^  ^%T   'I'^I^T  »TTf^^  ^^r«     Apano   marika 

undo  parayo  marika  phundo, 

One^s  oion,  even  when  beaten,  loill  come  closer,  but  a 
stranger,  if  beaten,  xoill  leave. 

This  teaches  that  we  should  chastise  our  own  kinsmen  for 
their  good,  but  not  beat  strangers  who  are  employed  as 
servants  &c. 

6  ^r'^Wr  '^^^  ^iT  ^siT  'ifl*  Apana  balada  ka  paina  singa. 
The  horns  of  one's  own  hulloclc  are  always  considered 

very  sharp  hy  every  one. 

I.  e.  Every  one  thinks  his  own  wit  to  be  better  than  that 
of  others.  A  man  thinks  that  he  possesses  one  full  wit  and  that  half 
a  wit  is  spread  over  the  rest  of  the  world,  since  God  has  bestowed 
only  one-and-a-half  wits  on  the  world. 

7  ^^^^[  %'\  ■^•if^  ^I^T  H^7»  Apana  ko  munakitolo  bhalo. 

A  tadpole  caught  by  one's  oion   child  is   considered   a  • 
good  fish. 

I.  e.  Even  a  mite  earned  by  the  industry  of  their  own  child- 
ren is  considered  great  gain  by  the  parents. 


(     304     ) 

8  %T  ■^T''  ^r^'^f  '^^  ^T  "^T^TT  2fiT  ^T  ^-     Jo  bapa  lyawa 
sya  bai  jo  raja  kara  sya  sai. 

Ani/  woman  taken  by  one's  father  should  be  considered 
equal  to  a  mother,  and  the  decision  arrived  at  by  a  Icing 
inust  be  right. 

Inevitable  respect  due  to  the  deeds  of  fathers  and  officers 
owing  to  there  being  no  remedy  for  such  grievances.  C.  /.  "What 
cannot  be  cured  must  be  endured." 

9  ^T^f^  siT-g  ^s^ITT  m^T  S:  m^J-     Apani  jangba  kanyai 
cbharo  i  cbliaro. 

One  gets  but  ashes  fscurf)  by  scratching  his  own  thigh. 

IE.  g.  By  scratching  the  thigh  streaks  like  ashes  become 
visible.  This  proverb  is  applied  to  one  who  exposes  the  fault 
of  his  own  kinsmen  or  relations,  to  dissuade  him  from  doing  so. 
"Fouling  one's  own  nest." 

10  "^T^r  fJl^T^r  '^''^  "^TtUT  f%  ^^f'HT*      Baulya   gijauuo 
para  pauno  nigijauno. 

A  laborer  may  be  treated  well,  but  not  a  guest  who  is 
a  poor  relative,  otherwise  he  will  come  again  and  again, 
and  become  dependent  on  one. 

11  W{^  ^1%  "Trf?!  ■^(^  %%  ^\^-     Chhoti  cheli  nangi  barbi 

cbeli  laja. 

Seeing  her  younger  sister  naked  the  elder  one  feels 
ashamed. 

Blood  sympathies  are  absolute.  Applied  to  induce  one  to 
help  his  relatives  who  are  in  distress. 

C.  f.    "Blood  is  thicker  than  water." 

12  ^^T  ^T  ^T^  ^^T  ^T'^^T  ^T  ^T^  ^l^T^      Luwa  ko  kala 
luwa  sora  ko  kala  soro. 

Iron  cujts  iron.,  and  a  kinsman  inju,res  his  own  kinsman. 


,(     805    ) 

Applied  to  one  who  is  injured  by  his  own  caste  fellows.     The 
trees  of  the  forest  heard  that  an  iron  axe  was  coming  to  injure  them 
but  the  old  trees  on  hearing  this  s;iid  there   was   no    danger    as    he 
belonged  to  another  caste.     But  when  they  heard  that  the  iron  was 
joined  to  a  piece  of  wood  they  were  filled  with  fear, 

i  J  .J  vj^ 

Jaga  jagii  kai  dagarho  nihunu  raero  chhai  mero  chhai  kai 

apanu  nihunu. 

No  one  can  be  sure  of  his  company  by  requesting  other 
travellers  to  wait  for  him,  nor  can  any  one  be  certain 
of  a  stranger  becoming  his  friend,  by  assuring  him 
that  he  is  so. 

No  one  in  the  world  feels  true  sympathy  for  another  except  a 
real  relation. 

14  ^^7  ^TBI  ^T'fr  VT?.     Daino  hatha  bayan  dhowa. 

The  right  hand  washes  the  left. 

E.  g.  The  good  deeds  of  a  man  cover  his  faults  and  failino's  ; 
or  a  man  ought  to  help  his  poorer  kinsmen,  who  will  do  the  same 
iu  their  turn. 

15  ^T  W^  ^'^T  f^ill^X*      Ghara  chhedu  Lanka  binasba. 

JLanha  {^Ceylon)  was  destroyed  through  the  information 
given  by  a  traitor  (member  of  the  household) . 

Rawana  was  killed  and  Ceylon  taken  by  Rama  through  "the 
secret  information  given  by  Rawan's  own  brother  Bibhikhana  (  vide 
Ramayan )  Applied  to  a  member  of  one's  family  who  has  be- 
come estranged  and  turned  an  enemy  and  is  dreaded  in  conse- 
quence.   Ones  worst  enemies  are  those  of  his  own  household. 

16  »TT»TT  31^  %\  ^r^T  f^  f^TT^  Sl^t^r  ^WrlT  jfj"       Mama 
shariko  pauno  ni  pitara  shariko  dewata  ni. 

A  man  has  no  better  guest  than  his  own  maternal  uncle 
(  i.  e.  mother^s  brother  ),  and  no  better  deities  than  his 
own  father  and  mother. 

M  2 


(     306     ) 

Used  to  induce  people  to  honor  such  relatives.  C  f.  Honour 
thy  father  and  thy  mother. 

I''  llf^TT^'I^f^'iT'!!-      Hani  maranu  bechi  kbanu. 

I  can  heat  Mm  or  sell  Mm. 

Applied  to  one's  own  brother  or  son  etc,  wbom  one  can  trea't 
as  one  likes. 

18  %rT  I^T^^  ^T  ^I^T  ^T  '^T'^^wt-      Jo  mabadeva  gbara 
basau  so  parabati. 

Any  woman  living  with  MaJiddeva  may   he  treated   as 
Pdrbati  (the  renoioned  wife  of  the  God  MahddevaJ . 

Applied  to  an  unmarried  woman  who  lives  with  a  relative  or 
some  great  man  as  a  concubine,  in  regard  to  her  being  treated 
exactly  as  if  she  were  married  to  him. 

19  3Jr  '^^^^]Z  ifr  ^fni'^tZ-    Jan  apanyata  tan  kbanyata, 
TVUere  there  is  kinship,  there  is  enmity. 

Men  of  the  same  caste  will  be  more  bitter  against  one  another 
than  those  of  different  castes. 

20  grf3  ^T^    fkx   'U^Jl  ^"S^.      Lathi  marl  sbira  alaga 
nai  bunu. 

No  one  can  he  beheaded  hy  the  stroJce  of  a  club. 

This  is  used  to  show  that  it  is  useless  to  try  and  sow  discord 
among  the  members  of  a  family. 

21  ^jfz  Hff^  %^  ^J^  "^^l  iW^'^r.      Lathi  mari  bera  pani 
alaga  ni  bunu. 

Water  cannot  be  divided  by  the  stroke  of  a  stick. 

Applied  to  brothers  and  kinsmen  who  though  they  may  some- 
times quarrel  among  themselves  will  eventually  get  reconciled, 
and  it  is  of  little  use  to  try  and  separate  them  by  sowing  dissensions 
among  them. 


f     307    ) 

22  -^j  %«^  ^efi  Jij^.     Sau  dhoti  eVa  goti. 

One  hundred  Dhotis  {Brahmins)  and  one  Goti  {blood 
relation).     C.f.  "Charity  begins  at  home" 

Applied  to  pursuade  one  to  give  to  or  help  his  own  kins- 
men by  saying  that  helping  one  kinsmen  is  equal  to  helping  a  hundred. 
Brahmins. 

23  ^  gz^r^  ^f%  5i?iT  fsi^TT  ^^T  ^TF^  ^TTT  ^TT-      Ye 

latula  ku  kakhi  jaga  ni  boi  mera  nakba  bhitara  hoi. 

This  cluster  of  hairs ^  having  no  other  place,  found  'place 
withm  my  nostril. 

Used  by  one  who  laments  on  account  of  a  useless  and  trouble- 
some member  of  his  family. 

24  ^  ^grrr  %T  ^TT  ^I  M^T  ^TT  ^T1  ^T^T-      Ye  dewata 
ko  koi  nai  bhayo  mera  anga  ayo. 

This    deity    has    no    one  else,   and  so  he  has  come 
upon  me. 

E.  g.  Deities  and  ghosts  are  supposed  to  enter  into  people  and 
make  them  dance.  Used  by  parents  with  respect  to  worthless  child- 
ren or  relatives  dependent  upon  them, 

25  fiT?l  T5?j  ^g  ^T^T  <T  ^^3T  '^^r.     ^^iya  jyu  ghaila  holata 

haluwa  khuula. 

If  my  husband  is  hurt  I  shall  eat   Saluwd   (a   dish 
made  of  flour,  Ghi,  and  treacle  or  sugar) . 

This  is  a  saying  regarding  a  woman  whose  husband  was  a 
great  miser,  and  who  used  to  keep  all  supplies  under  lock  and  key, 
contrary  to  the  common  custom  which  allows  such  articles  of  food 
to  be  in  the  custody  of  the  wives.  Once  the  miser  fell  down  a 
precipice  and  was  advised  by  his  physicians  to  eat  Hahi,wd  which 
is  believed  to  cure  hurts  by  dispersing  bad  blood  in  the  body.  The 
miser  being  unable  at  the  time  to  give  out  the  necessary  ingredients 
himself  was  obliged  to  send  the  key  of  the  store  room  to  his  wife, 
who  instead  of  taking  a  little  of  each  ingredient  took  every  thing 
in  plenty  and  so  got  much  Haluwa  cooked  not  only  for  the  sick  man 
but  for  herself  also.     The  miser  as  soon  as  he    was    up    took    away 


(     308     ) 

tbe  key  from  his  wife  and  kept  it  in  his  own-  possession  which  iil- 
duced  the  wife  to  pray  that  some  accident  might  bofal  her  husband 
so  that  she  might  have  the  chance  of  eatino  Haluwd.  The  proverb 
is  applied  to  persons  who  wish  injury  to  their  own  people  or  family, 
and  ironically  to  the  miser  as  well* 

26  5f«(f3  %  TT5ir  ^T  ^T^  ^^■^^x.  -a^fz  h  xmi  %r  ^tt. 

Syai  bati  ai  raja  ko  dara  binasara  bati  ai  raja  ko  dara. 

The  timber  that  comes  from  Syai  {a  great  fir  forest) 
belongs  to  the  king,  and  that  which  is  brought  from 
Binsar  (  another  great  fir  forest  )  also  belongs  to 
the  king. 

Used  to  denote  that  any  expense  whatever  incurred  by  any 
member  of  one's  family  at  any  time  or  place  devolves  on  the  head 
of  the  family. 

Syahi  and  Binsar  are  the  two  great  forests  which  supply  wood 
for  building  at  Almora. 

21  m^X  ^,^1  f^TT^  %^I  ^  "tjfk  ^^T*      Kukura  chela  bl- 

ralu  chela  mai  randi  chela. 

The  dogs  have  sons,  the  cats  have  sons,  I,  an  accursed 
{unfortunate)  woman,  have  also  sons. 

This  is  a  reply  by  a  woman,  indignantly  mourning  over  her 
sons  who  proved  useless  and  troublesome  to  her,  to  a  query  by 
another  woman  who  asked  her  whether  she  had  sons. 

E.  g.  In  India  the  birth  of  sons  is  welcomed  generally 
whereas  those  of  daughters  are  regretted,  far  the  former  are 
valued  and  the  latter  depreciated  for  the  reasons  noted  below. 

The  sons  inherit  their  fathers'  property  and  remain 
at  home,  while  the  daughters  have  to  be  given  away  in 
marriage  to  others  with  a  dowry  ;  but  the  sons  who  bring  disgrace 
on  thei°  parents  or  family,  squander  property,  and  are  either  dis- 
obedient or  troublesome  to  parents,  are  much  bemoaned. 

28  iTrT  ^^-^  tV  b^I^T-     P«ta  kaputa  guko  walano. 
A    bad   son     brings     blame    for     excreta    (trifling 
mischief). 


(    309     ) 

/  e.  Ho  eases  himself  in  a  forbidden  place  and  thus  his 
parents  are  chastised  for  the  act  by  his  neighbours. 

29  ^JTT  I^I^T'O^  IT  ^I^T  f^'3T'H^«     Soro  ni  kbanade  ya 

khoro  ni  khanade. 

Neither  will  one's  kinsmen  of  the  same  caste  suffer 
him  to  enjoy  or  continue  in  his  prosperity,  nor  the  skull 
{the  suture  of  the  skull  denoting  good  or  bad  luck). 

Used  hv  one  bemoaninn  losses  due  to  either  of  the  above 
sources.  For  kinsmen  envy  one  another's  prosperity  through 
jealousy,  and  so  take  steps  to  ruin  one  another. 

30  f^Hi'^^lT  WT  'kj'^1  ^^m'^*      Bigaliya  bhai  sora  bara- 

bara. 

Brothers,  when  they  get  separted  from  each  other  do  not 
treat  each  other  as  brothers  but  as  kinsmen. 

Living  apart  frcm  each  other  they  become  wrapped  up  in 
their  own  interests. 

31  ^]2cqT  'y  %^  ^^«     Katanya  Iwe  bagyan  sukha. 

One  gets  relief  as  soon  as  he  has  discharged  the  painful 
blood  {referring  to  dysentery). 

Used  of  worthless  and  troublesome  members  of  one's  family 
whose  absence  or  loss  is  welcomed  instead  of  beino  regretted. 

32  ^»IT  vjfm  fl^  "ff^  ^"J^g.     Pina  pani  eka  tela  uprhaila. 

The  choff  (  the  matter  out  of  which  oil  has  been 
extracted )  and  water  becom,e  one,  but  the  oil  is  a 
stranger  (a  separate  thing  ). 

Used  by  one  bemoaning  his  estrangement  from  a  friend  or 
relation  owing  to  another  introduced  by  him  to  his  friend  having 
supplanted  him  in  his  esteem.  For  at  first  the  chjifF  was  part  of 
the  seed  and  united  completely  with  it  and  water  was  a  foreign 
element,  but  in  the  oil  press  water  and  chaff  have  become  one, 
and  the  oil  is  driven  away  as  a  stranger. 


(    310     ) 

33  ^^  f^  -fim^  %^X  fk  "^inf^I'     Kerhai  kl  tapani  dewara 

ki  apani. 

The  fire  of  dried-tungs  is  like   the  endearment  of  the 
Dewara  (  husband^ s  younger  brother  ). 

A  husband  will  love  his  wife  with  the  same  tender  love  all  alone 
or  with  a  lastino;  love.  A  husbiind's  younger  brother^after  the  decease 
of  his  brother,  shews  <T'"eat  affection  towards  his  sister-in-law  for  a 
while  in  order  to  impr»'ss  her  with  his  solicitude,  but  soon  necrlects 
her  as  the  fire  of  thin  twiors  burns  up  for  a  time  and  dies  out. 

Used    by    women    only.     Small    thin    dry   twii^s    are    called 

34  ^  ^jq  ^T  'ir^T  ^Tiat  ^r  ^TfT.      Mai  bapa  ko  gota  pant 

ko  sota. 

The  descent  of  one'' s  oion  parents   and   the  source  of 
water  {are  never  to  be  depreciated  . 

This  also  denotes  that  by  descent  from  his  parents  one  has 
connection  with  people  far  and  wide  as  a  source  of  water  has  with, 
other  waters  and  oceans. 

35  %V  ^T^T  ^St  ft  ^T  ^T^r  tS^r-     Jaiko  soro  chKuto 
wi  ko  khoro  phuto. 

He  who  is  deserted  by  his  relations  is  an  unfortunate 
one. 

For  he  will  be  rendered  an  isolated  and  weak  party  in  the 
world,  as  every  one  consults  his  relations  in  family  alliances 
and  other  matters. 

36  ^TiiJT  '^'^  '^WfiJ  «»TT^r  T7T  H^r-      Apana  puta  ra- 
khanta  paraya  puta  bhakhanta. 

To  protect  one^s  own  son  and  to  devour  another's. 

Used  to  represent  the  custom  and  nature  of  relationship 
in  this  world. 


37  ^«V  Tl^'i  7T^  JIH'^'^.      Paili  gai  sukha  taba  garbha 
sukha. 


(     311     ) 

Mrst  wish  comfort  to  the  cow  and  then  to  its  embryo. 

If  the  head  of  a  family  is  happy  all  the  members  are  so, 
"and  if  he  is  in  trouble  all  share  with  him.  This  teaches  that  every 
one  should  take  proper  care  of  aad  look  after  the  comforts  of  the 
head  of  the  family. 

38  iTTTT  'S'R  ^T 1KTT  W^J  "^^t  ^T^TT-    Mama  phuphu  ka 
bhai  kaka  barhon  ka  dai. 

Maternal  uncles'  sons  and  fathers'  sisters'  sons  act 
like  one's  brothers,  bat  cousins  act  like  enemies. 

E  g.  Generally  the  former  live  in  separate  villages  and  are 
entitled  to  alms  and  help  from  their  relations,  and  so  they  are 
friendly  with  him  (the  speaker),  but  the  latter,  who  have  to  live 
in  the  same  village  where  he  does,  and  have  collateral  and  joint 
interest  with  him  in  every  thing  they  possess,  are  liable  often  to 
have  quarrels  with  him. 

39  ^3T^T  ^^T  ^^r  JJ3ir  it  SI^JJT  ^t  g=TI.      Khalo  pelo 
mero  guja  chhaun  dholana  son  tuja. 

My  Guja,  (.friend  or  relative  )  loill  have  to  eat  and 
drinJc,  but  you  shall  throw  aicay  the  filth  or  do  my 
drudgery. 

Near  relations  are  valued  and  well-treated,  distant  ones  are 
of  no  consequence. 

40  «!3t^  ^T  ^SITII  ZT^  %  ^7^«      Najika  ko  dushamana 

tarha  ko  dosta. 

The  one  near  is  an  enemy,  and  the  one  who  is  at  a 
distance  is  a  friend. 

Used  of  troublesome  neighbours  or  members  of  the  same 
household.  This  is  further  compared  to  a  troublesome  disease 
contracted  in  one's  own  body  which  certain  herbs  foreign  to  him 
cure  him  of. 

khana  bati  auni  s^hunana  bati  ni  auna. 


(    31S     ) 

Tears  flow  from  eyes  and  not  from  knees. 

A  man's  own  relations  will  sympathize  with  him,  but  not 
a  stranger. 

Story.  Once  a  tj'rannical  kin<;,  not  satisfied  with  taxing  his 
subjects  while  they  were  alive,  laid  a  tax  on  every  dead  body  taken 
for  cremation  to  the  river  side.  After  some  years  the  king  felt 
the  approach  of  death,  and  sending  for  his  eldest  son  instructed 
him  to  reign  in  sucli  a  manner  that  the  peo()le  siiould  praise  his 
(the  father's)  administration.  After  his  f.ther's  death  the  new 
king,  in  order  to  make  his  subjects  regret  the  decease  of  their 
former  ruler,  issued  orders  to  the  effect  that,  in  addition  to  the 
death  tax,  no  body  should  he  burnt  at  any  ghat  (  burning  place) 
until  a  "'coffin  officer''  had  driven  into  it  a  wooden  peg  as  a  sign 
of  final  sanction  Iriving  been  given  for  the  cremation  This  new 
law  caused  great  consternation  among  the  people,  for  it  was  equi- 
valent to  a  public  disgrace  to  the  body  of  every  dead  person.  The 
king's  subjects,  therefore,  began  to  lament  bitterly  the  new  reign, 
and  long  for  the  old  king,  who,  though  oppressive  enough,  had  yet 
never  imposed  such  a  shocking  order  on  his  people.  Thus  the  son 
shewed  his  filial  obedience  and  piety  by  making  his  father's  death 
regretted  and  his  administration  praised,  though  at  the  expense 
of  his  own  profmlarity.  Such  a  duty  would  have  been  fulfilled  by 
no  one  except  tne  king's  own  son  Hence  this  story  is  often  told 
as  an  illustration  of  the  proverb  quoted  above. 

A  Lakshmi  mera  ghara  a,  mera  parhosha  me  a  mera  desha 
me  a. 

O  wealth,  come  to  me  (to  enrich),  or  to  my  neighbour 
(to  enrich  him),  or  my  country  (to  enrich  it). 

Used  by  good  and  p^itriotic  people  who  rejoice  at  the  good  or 
welfare  of  their  kinsmen,  neighbours  and  country. 

43  %T  TIT  ^T  ^T"^  f^l  ^rt  %  f%  ^  ^1^  f^  ^f^  U.%^^  \-[ 
^7^.  Hoiya  ko  baba,niiioiyai  ki  mai,  asa  ki  baini,  ni 
asa  ko  dosta. 

The  father  likes  his  son  if  the  latter  is  in  good 
circumstances,  whereas  the  mother  does  so  even  if  he  is  in 
adverse  circumstances,  the  sister  likes  his   brother,  if  she 


f     313     ) 

has  some  hope  of  advantage  from  him^  hut  a  friend   will 
iove  him  even  if  he  has  no  hope  of  Mm. 

REMEDY. 

1  '^^JT  fifi  ^3T  •I'^r^V-      Bahama  ki  dawa  nabati. 
There  is  no   remedy  for  a  {groundless)   suspicion   or 

presumption. 

No  one  cac  know  what  suspicion  another  has  with  regard  to 
him  in  his  mind. 

2  f^^^  qi7  ^ig  ^g.       Biklia  ka  mukha  chisa. 

The  poison  will  not  heal  without  a  scorch. 

The  bite  of  a  venomous  creature  must  be  cautorizoJ.  Serious 
maladies  re<juire  sharp  remedies. 

-3  f^^^  %IT^W  f^^.     Biklia  ki  aukhadha  bikba. 

The  remedy  of  poison  is  poison. 

Once  during  the  intense  cold  in  the  month  of  January  the 
Emperor  Akbar  the  Great,  while  taking  a  walk  round  about  his 
city,  saw  a  tank  of  water,  and  enquired  of  his  chief  minister 
Birbal  whether  any  man  would  be  able  to  live  a  whole  night  in 
the  cold  water  of  the  tank.  A  person  who  had  overheard  their 
conversation  on  the  road  came  forward,  and  said  that  he  would 
be  the  man  to  do  it,  if  he  were  given  a  good  reward.  The 
Emperor  said  he  would  give  him  fis-  10,000/-  if  he  should  find 
him  alive  the  next  morning.  The  poor  man  accepted  the  stake. 
Accordingly  he  was  put  naked  into  the  pool,  the  water  of  which 
came  up  to  his  neck,  and  a  guard  was  placed  there  to  watch  him. 
The  poor  man  thus  spent  the  night,  and  was  brought  by  the 
guard  before  the  Emperor  the  next  morning  to  receive  the  pro- 
mised reward.  The  Emperor  asked  him  how  ho  spent  the  night 
in  the  water  in  such  unbearable  cold.  The  man  replied,  "My  Lord. 
I  saw  a  fire  at  a  distance  of  four  or  five  miles  just  in  front  of  me  ;" 
depending  on  which  ( in  hope  that  he  would  have  such  a  fire  to 
warm  him  next  morning  )  he  had  felt  no  cold  during  the  night. 
At  this  the  Emperor  refused  to  give  him  any  thing  at  all,  since 
he  had  had  fire  before  him  during  the  night.  But  Birbal  did 
not  think  the  Emperor  freed  from  his  promise.  He  interceded  and 
pleaded  for  the  poor  man,  but  in  vain.    After  a  few  days  the  Prime 

N  2 


C     314     ) 

minister  was  ordered  to  aocompnny  the  king  on  a  certain  day  at  a 
given  time.  Tlie  statesman  in  ttie  meantime  had  a  bamboo  5  yards 
long  split  up  into  three  pieces  and  then  made  a  Chfda  fhearth 
stovej  on  them,  which  stood  5  yards  high.  On  the  top  of  this  hearth 
he  pnt  the  vessel  containing  rice  and  water,  and  lighted  a  fire 
below  it  on  the  ground.  On  the  fixed  day  and  at  the  appointed 
time  Birbal  was  sent  for  by  the  Emperor.  He  gave  answer  that  as 
soon  as  he  had  had  his  food  he  would  present  himself  before 
the  Emperor,  who  on  hearing  this  waited  for  him  for  some  time. 
As  Birbal  did  not  come,  the  Emperor  sent  his  messenger  again 
to  command  him  to  make  haste.  Birbal  sent  him  the  same  message 
again.  After  waiting  for  some -time  further,  the  Emperor  became 
angry  at  the  delay,  and  went  to  Birbal's  house,  whereupon 
Birbal  prostrated  himself  at  the  feet  of  the  Emperor  and  asked 
forgiveness  for  the  unaviodable  delay,  and  shewed  him  the  pot  of 
rice  on  the  bamboo  chiila.  On  seeing  this  the  Emperor  expressed 
his  astonishment  and  said  "What  a  fool  you  are;  how  can  the  rice 
be  cooked  with  the  fire  lighted  at  such  a  distance  from  it  I"  To  this 
Birbal  said  "My  Lord,  the  rice  will  be  cooked  in  the  same  way  by 
the  heat  of  the  fire  as  the  poor  man  in  the  tank  was  warmed  by 
the  fire  so  many  miles  away  from  him."  The  Emperor  became 
convinced  of  his  mistake,  and  at  once  ordered  Jls-  10,000/-  to  bo 
paid  to  the  poor  man. 

4  T.1^^  ^if  >f  ^eR^.      Rakasa  ko  bhai  bhekasa. 

Oriio  brother  of  a  goblin  is  one  lolio  assumes  Ms  guise 
(^0  subdue  him). 

A  goblin  can  only  be  subdued  by  some  one  assuming  the 
same  form.  I.  e.  A  wicked  man  can  be  brought  to  his  proper 
bearings  by  wickedness  only  ! 

leiii  swaina  rosarha  ko  khano  banto. 

The  tvife  of  one,  loho  falsely  charges  her  with  tmchastity , 
should  be  taken  by  others,  and  the  share  of  one  who  gets 
angry  at  dinner  time  should  be  eaten  by  others. 
Ironical  censure  of  such  conduct 

6  557^  ^^f^  ^  f^  %Xkl'     Sami  anguli  ghyu   ni  aundo, 
■J        <^ 


(     315     ) 

A  straight  iinger  cannot  bring  out  any  gJd   [clarified 
butter)  out  of  a  narrow  vessel. 

Simplicity  cannot  thrive  iu  this  world;  trickiness  is  needed. 

7  f^  VT^  f^^T  f^'^^'lT-     Bina  blieda  Idrlia  ni  jharhana. 
Worms  cannot  be  extracted  without  charming. 

1.  e.  wickedness  should  be  matched  by  corresponding  arts. 
Worms  infest  sores  in  animals  and  incantations  are  used  to  exter- 
minate them.  "Diamond  cut  diamond." 

Story.  Once  the  Emperor  Akbar  the  great  ordered  his  prime 
minister  Birbal  to  convert  him  into  a  Hindu.  Fearing  to  offend 
the  monarch  by  saying  anything  against  his  wishes  he  gave  his 
assent.  Next  day  Birbal  stationed  a  man  by  the  side  of  the  road 
daily  frequented  by  the  Emperor,  and  ordered  him  to  take  a 
donkey  with  him,  and  to  clean  it  by  rubbing  and  scrubbing  the 
animal  with  a  stone.  This  process  was  going  on,  and  owing  to 
the  rough  usage  that  he  was  getting  the  animal  was  braying 
loud,  when  the  monarch  accompanied  by  Birbal  approached  the 
scene.  Akbar  asked  what  all  this  meant,  and  why  the  ass  was  being 
handled  so  cruelly.  Birbal  replied  that  the  man  was  trying  to 
turn  the  ass  into  a  cow.  On  this  the  Emperor  expressed  his 
surprise  and  said  that  the  roan  was  attempting  an  impossible  thing. 
To  which  Birbal  replied  "Nay,  Sire,  it  is  as  possible  as  to  turn 
your  majesty  into  a  Hindu."  The  Emperor  convinced  of  the 
force  of  Birbal's  reasoning  remained  silent. 

This  story  is  also  applied  to  the  proverb,  "The  remedy  of 
poison  is  another  poison  used."     (under  the  head  of  "Remedy"). 

REPUTATION. 

1  '^r'^^r.     -A-ba  rau. 

One  ought  to  preserve  his  lustre  i.  e.  reputation. 

One  who  has  lost  his  reputation  is  disregarded,  as  pearls 
having  vivid  lustre  sell  dear,  while  the  same,  though  bigger,  but 
wanting  in  splendour,  sell  cheap. 

2  %TTT  ^TT^T^T^T.     Koro  bhano  moso. 

A  new  ( unused )  vessel  ( soon )  gets  black. 

A  new  vessel  quickly  shows  the  soot. 

A  small  fault  tarnishes  a  good  reputation,  but  it  would  not 
be  noticed  did  a  scoundrel  commit  it 


(     316     ) 
REQUITALS  AND  RETRIBUTION. 

1  %T  ^X   ZmT  ^t  %I  %T  WT.      Jo  kara  tuno  ui  so  ha 

runo. 

He  loJio  performs  enchantments  on  another  will  (  have 
to  grieve  or)  suffer  in  the  end. 

JU.  g.  Oue  who  wishes  to  injure  another  will  himself  meet 
with  the  reward  of  his  endeavours  to  ruin  another.  C  f.  "The- 
righteousness  of  the  perfect  shall  direct  his  way  :  but  the  wicked, 
shall  fall  by  his  own  wickeduess." 

2  f^*l  %"';t^T  ■'^iffT  '^^^T-     Din  a  khainya  rati  parhyo. 
Dug  a  jjit  (for  others)  during  the  day  time  and  fell  into- 

it  himself  in  the  night. 

3  %T  ^ITI  %t  ^TT  '^'3  ^i;  ^T  ^?T  fr?JTT.    Jo  aurana  sob 

khada  khona  ui  so  kuwa  tayara. 

W  hosoever  digs  a  pit  for  another  will   himself  fall 
down  a  well. 

I .  e.  He  who  wishes  to  harm  another  will  thereby  achieve 
his  own  ruin.     A  bad  deed  has  an  evil  end. 

Ps.  vii.  15.  "He  made  a  pit  and  digged  it  and  is  fallen  inta 
the  ditch  which  he  made." 

RESPONSIBILITY  OR  LIABILITY  FOR 
ONE'S   DEEDS. 

1  '^'^^  W^^  ^T^.  HTTT^.     Apani  karani  para  utaranl 
Ones  oion  deed  will  save  a  man. 

1.  e.  One  will  get  salvation  by  his  own  deeds  alone.  Any 
thin (T  good  or  high    to  which  a  man  aspiies    must   be    attained    by 

himself.  .      ,, 

"Work  out  your  own  salvation. 

2  M^T  ^^  ^^T  ^T^T  %T^r  ^^  ^''il  ^T^r-     Bbalo  kara 
bbalo  bolo  sauda  kara  napha  bolo. 


C     317     ) 

Do  good  so  that  you  may  get  good;  and  trade  so  thai 
you  may  get  profit. 

This  is  spoken  to  one  wLo  is  engaged  in  good  works  or 
trade  by  way  of  encouragement.  C.  f.  "Industry  is  never 
unfruitful." 

ko  mala  cbandala  kbau  papa  ko  mala  prachita  jau. 

Stolen  property  is  {eaten )  enjoyed  only  by  low  caste 
people  {i.  e.  by  mean  men)  but  property  obtained  by  sin  has 
to  be  spent  in  atoning  for  the  crime. 

No  good  man  can  rejoice  in  the  fruits  of  his  evil   doings,  bat 
suffers  sooner  or  later.      C.  /.  "Evil  got  evil  spent." 

4  e(i7?T  fifi  q^T^  ^"^T  ^t'Bl       Kama  ki  pachharha  pacliha 
auncbhya. 

The  effects  of  an  act  are  felt  afterwards. 

E.  g.  In  performing  a  ceremony  such  as  a  marriage  or 
tonsure  every  one  wishes  to  make  it  as  splendid  as  he  can,  but 
afterwards  when  he  has  to  pay  for  every  thing  he  feels  it  bitterly, 
and  so  one  who  is  wise  restricts  expenditure  as  much  as  possible 
from  the  beginning  by  thinking  of  all  items  which  are  absolutely 
necessary  and  which  he  has  to  pay  for.  Used  as  a  precaution 
against  acting,  or  incurring  liabilities,  without  due  regard  to  their 
consequences. 

5  ^dl  tf^  ?f  '^f%  Tif%  ^  qjq  f^T  ^.    I)bimgi  dbupgi  men 

cbarhi  cbarhi  men  papa  shira  men. 

The  stone  to  stones,  the  bird  to  other  birds,  but  the  sin  on 
his  own  head. 

E.  g.  One  threw  a  stone  at  a  bird  but  missed  his  aim.  The 
tird  flew  and  joined  other  birds,  the  stone  fell  among  the  other 
stones,  but  the  sin  of  wishing  to  kill  the  bird  remained  with 
bim,  for  the  Hindu  Scriptures  strongly  condemn  the  taking  of 
animal  life. 

dewata  apana  gbarun  gaya  meli  lipani  mai  ku  kai  gaya. 


(     318     ) 

The  gods  and  spirits  have  gone  away  to   their  homes   but 
I  have  now  to  replaster  (  repair  )  the  floor   of  my   house. 

E.g.  People  said  to  be  possessed  bv  deities  aud  spirits,  dance 
inside  a  house  with  such  wild  force  that  they  break  up  the  floor 
("which  needs  repairiugj  and  eo  the  mistress  of  the  house  complains 
of  the  trouble  she  has  in  consequence. 

Applies  to  one's  feasting  the  people  and  making  them  merry 
with  eating  and  drinking  but  having  to  bear  the  expenses  etc. 
consequent  on  it.  C.  f.  "Dinner  over,  away  go  the  guests." 
"Having  to  pay  the  piper." 

7  qji:  faiT  ^  •^T'3  ^^55  1?^  1T55T  %I^'      Nai  shira  men 

bala  katuka  chbana  hazara  auni. 

O,  barber  how  many  hairs  have  I  in  my  head  ? 
Ansioer,     They  will  socn  lie  bejore  yoit,. 

To  be  over-anxious  about  things  which  tirce  alone  can 
disclose.  Also  used  of  the  consequences  of  one's  dark  deeds,  which 
are  certain  to  appear  at  some  time. 

8  f^^TTT  ^r  ^"T^  ^T^fT-     Niyata  ka  santha  ba.rakata. 

A  man  is  blessed  in propoi'tion  as  he  uses  his  property 
icell. 

9  rni  sfrf^  ^'?1IT  ^T^r  ^J  V^T  ^IT^T  '^^m  "^m-       Ganga 
nani  apana  wasta  gadhero  nano  apana  wasta^ 

One  who  bathes  in  the  Ganges  does  it  for  his  own  benefit, 
and  one  who  bathes  in  a  rivulet  (  not  in  the  Ganges  )  does 
it  for  his  own  purposes. 

Applied  to  one's  being  answerable  for  his  own  deeds. 

vj  vj  ^ 

Kali  yuga  nahati  kara  yuga  chha  eka  hatha  le  de  dusard, 
hathale  le. 

This  is  not  the  ^'Iron  age"  bid  "the  age ^  of  the  hand;' 
if  you  give  with  one  hand  you  will  receive  with  the  other. 


(    319     ) 

Used  against  the  teacliincr  of  the  Hindu  scriptures  which 
says  that  in  this  age  one  who  does  evil  will  prosper  but  those  who 
do  good  will  come  to  trouble  in  this  existence,  as  illustrated  by  the 
story  No.  1;  but  the  proverb  which  says  this  is  not  the  iron  age 
is  illustrated  by  the  story  No.  2  narrated  below. 

Story  No.  1.  it  was  at  the  time  when  the  third  age,  known  as 
"■DwdparaJuga,"  had  departed  and  the  fourth  age,  oalled"^aZz J«^a," 
had  stepped  in,  that  a  man  brought  up  in  the  righteousness  of  the 
former  time  felt  exhausted  and  fatigued  on  account  of  hunger  and 
thirst  while  journeying  to  a  certain  place  distant  from  his  home. 
He  still  travelled  on  in  hope  to  find  some  village  where  he  might 
refresh  himself.  But  he  could  not  find  one.  At  last  he  saw  a 
garden  at  a  distance,  to  which  he  plodded  on.  On  reaching  the 
place  he  found  the  garden  full  of  various  kinds  of  trees  bearing 
flowers  and  fruit,  but  no  man  or  water  were  to  be  seen  there. 
The  honest  man  called  out  loudly,  but  no  one  answered  him.  He 
then,  being  compelled  by  hunger,  plucked  one  citron  and  tied  a 
gold  mohar  to  the  stem  from  which  the  fruit  vvas  taken,  with  a  piece  of 
cloth,  believing  that  the  price  of  the  fruit  did  not  exceed  the  gold 
coin,  and  that  on  looking  for  the  fruit  the  owner  of  the  garden 
would  find  the  price,  and  so  ho  (the  honest  man)  would  be  justified 
in  taking  the  fruit  in  the  absence  of  the  owner.  After  doing  this 
he  resumed  his  way,  having  the  fruit  tied  up  in  his  handkerchief, 
in  hope  to  find  water  where  he  could  eat  it  after  performing  the 
iiecesary  ablution.  When  he  had  gone  a  few  furlongs  from  the 
garden  he  was  called  on  to  stop  b}'  a  dark-coloured  man  behind 
him,  who  charged  him  v^ith  having  cut  otf  his  son's  head,  and 
taken  it  away.  The  honest  man  thinking  himself  innocent  stapped 
at  his  call.  The  black-faced  man  coming  near  him  said  again.  "O, 
good  man,  why  did  you  behead  my  sou  and  take  away  his  head?"  To 
this  accusation  the  honest  man  related  what  he  had  really  done.  On 
this  the  black  man  said  that  it  was  not  the  fruit,  but  his  son's  head. 
After  this  the  former  put  the  handkerchief  with  its  contents  before 
the  latter.  On  opening  it  to  the  utter  amazement  of  the  former  they 
both  saw  the  head  of  a  boy  freshly  cut  off  (it  was  bleeding)  in  the 
cloth,  instead  of  the  citron.  At  this  wondrous  sight  the  honest- 
man  became  convinced,  and  with  great  sorrow  admitted  his  guilt. 
Then  the  black  man  said.  "0,  my  good  man,  I  am  Kaliyuga 
(Iron  age) .  My  reign  has  begun  now.  Why  should  I  be  pleased 
•with  one  who  does  an  honest  act  such,  as  was  becoming  to  my 
predecessors.  I  can  be  pleased  only  with  the  man  who  does 
wrongful  acts  which  add  to  the  dignity  of  my  reign.  They  alone 
are  becoming  during  my  sovereignty.  I  am  glorified  by  such 
dark  deeds.  Righteous  deeds  cast  a  slur  on  my  rule,  therefore 
I  afflict  and  render  poor    those    who    do    such    things   during    my 


C     320    ) 

i-frign.  Had  you  destroyed  many  trees,  eaten  much  fruit,  stolen  it 
without  putting  any  price  thereon,  and  then  said  that  you  did  not 
do  it,  but  some  one  else,  I  would  have  been  pleased  with  your 
conduct.  Beware  now  that  you  do  not  annoy  me  again  by  a 
repetition  of  such  honest  deeds  in  future.  I  forgive  you  this  first 
time  ;  goto'your  home,  good  bye  ;  and  communicate  my  instructions 
to  all  whom  you  see,  so  that  by  following  them  they  may  become 
jirosperous,  and  escape  the  punishment  inflicted  by  me  on  those 
who  observe  the  righteous  laws  of  my  adversaries  (predecessors) 
during  my  reign. 

Story  No.  2.  There  was  once,  some  hundreds  of  years  ago, 
a  king  named  Narhachiya,  who,  besides  having  a  kingdom  over 
which  he  ruled,  was  possessed  of  fifty  sis  crores  of  Rupees  in  his 
treasury.  According  to  the  ancestral  custom  in  vogue  he  used  to 
distribute  three  handfuls  of  parched  grain  to  those  only  who  had 
had  no  food  at  all  during  the  past  three  days.  Even  this  was  felt 
as  a  hardship  by  the  king,  who  was  a  great  miser,  and  so  he  stopped 
this,  in  consequence  of  which  God  was  very  angry  with  the  king. 
One  day  while  the  king  was  away  from  his  palace,  God  sent  auother 
man  exactly  of  the  same  form,  countenance,  and  stature  as  Narha- 
chiya. This  new  man  sat  on  the  throne  and  commenced  the  work 
of  the  realm  as  usual.  All  the  people  of  the  empire  recognized  him 
as  king  Narhachiya  without  the  least  suspicion  of  his  being  a 
man  other  than  the  real  Narhachij'a.  Soon  after  this  the  real  king 
returned  to  his  palace,  but  was  refused  admission  and  reviled  by 
the  new  king  and  the  people  of  the  kingdom  as  an  impostor.  As 
no  one  in  the  place  or  kingdom  discerned  him  to  be  the  real  king, 
he  was  obliged  to  take  refuge  in  the  jungles  in  order  to  save  his  life. 
While  living  in  the  forest  he  used  to  lead  a  secluded  life, 
sustaining  himself  on  wild  roots  and  leaves.  At  last  he  came  to 
his  senses  and  sincerely  repented  of  his  wrongful  conduct,  and 
prayed  to  God  saying,  "0  Lord,  if  thou  wilt  give  me  even  one 
twentieth  part  of  the  money  I  had  in  my  treasury,  I  will  devote 
it  to  the  maintenance  of  poor  people."  God  approved  of  this 
conduct  and  told  him  to  go  to  his  throne,  and  when  he  did  so, 
he  was  greeted  and  accepted  as  a  king  by  all  the  people.  No 
sooner  did  he  ascend  his  throne  than  he  distributed  all  his  wealth 
to  the  poor  of  his  empire.  Immediately  after  this  he  made  over  the 
kingdom  to  his  heir,  and  himself  became  an  ascetic.  Ho  began  to 
live  naked  with  a  fire  before  him  on  the  bank  of  a  river  caring  for 
no  wordly  things  whatever.  After  this  one  day  a  messenger  came 
to  him  from  another  king  to  whom  his  own  sister  was  married,  and 
who  hitherto  was  not  aware  of  his  brother-in-law  having  become 
ajogi.  The  messenger  came  to  invite  him  to  visit  the  other  king 
whoso  daughter  had  to  be  married  on  a  certain  day.  Narhachiya  had 


f     321     ) 

nothing  to  feed  the  messenger  with,'and  so  he  (Narhachiya^  told 
him  to  take  any  thing  he  wanted  out  of  his  Dhitni  (fire).  The  man 
accordingly  thrust  his  hand  into  the  ashes  of  the  Dhiini,  and  drew 
out  some  sweetmeats,  to  the  utter  amazeiuent  of  the  messenger. 
The  envoy  stayed  then  for  some  days  with  Narhachiya  and  got 
all  the  food  he  wished  for  out  of  the  Uhvni.  At  last  he  took 
leave  of  Narhachij-a  and  returned  to  his  own  king.  At  the  time 
the  messenger  departed  Narhachiya  (having  nothing  else)  gave  the 
messenger  three  handfuls  of  the  ashes  as  a  gift,  and  a  stone  to  be 
given  to  his  niece  on  the  marriage  day  as  prescribed  by  the  established 
usage,  saying  that  he  would  be  there  on  the  fixed  day,  and  would 
then  present  the  stone  to  the  girl  personally.  The  messenger  while 
on  his  way  to  his  master  found  the  ashes  Cgiven  by  Narhachiva 
as  a  gift)  to  be  gold  dust.  After  this  Narhachiya  arrived  at  his 
brother-in-l.iw's  house  on  the  day  his  daughter  was  to  be  m.-irried. 
He  was  extremely  sorry  to  see  Narhachiya  as  a  Faquir  and 
regretted  his  having  invited  him,  for  he  supposed  it  would  be  very 
disgraceful  to  him  to  acknowledge  Narhachiya  as  his  relation  in  tho 
presence  of  the  other  kings  who  were  also  invited  for  the  occasion. 
And  so  he  got  Narhachiya  lodged  at  some  distance  from  his  palace 
in  a  garden.  But  on  that  day  God  sent  his  angel  with  a  gold 
chariot  full  of  precious  stones,  clothes  etc  to  Narhachiya  so  that 
lie  might  present  it  as  a  dowry  to  the  daughter  of  the  king.  On  this 
all  the  kings  and  other  people  left  the  palace  and  went  to  where 
Narhachiya  was  with  the  angel,  to  see  the  scene,  and  everybody 
paid  his  reverence  and  homage  to  Narhachiya  and  angel.  The 
stone  formerly  sent  b}'  Narhachiya  to  be  presented  to  the  girl 
had  become  a  Mani  (a  gem).  So  Narhachiya  at  the  marriao-e 
presented  all  the  valuables  to  his  niece.  Hence  the  proverb  that 
this  is  not  the  iron  age,  but  the  hand  age  &c. 

12  ^^  *%T  ^^I  ^f  *T^T-     Hara  kaso  jasa  son  taso. 

God  is  to  each  as  that  person  is  towards  Sim. 

C  /.  With  the  pure  Thou  wilt  show  thyself  pure,  and   with 
the  perverse  Thou  wilt  show  thyself  froward.    (II  Sam.  22:  27). 

13  %T  «B^  %T  '♦IT*    Jo  kara  so  bhara. 
One  will  enjoy  the  fruit  of  his  deeds. 

As  a  man  does,  so  he  will  have  to  endure. 

14  ^^T  '^n  «?^T  m^*    Jaiko  papa  taiko  bapa. 

O  2 


(     322     ) 

The  crime  is  the  father  of  the  sinner. 

I.  e.  Whoever  has  committed  the  sin,  the  sin  is  his  father. 
This  literally  means  to  curse  (the  father  of)  the  sinner,  for  it  says 
his  father  is  sin,  and  sin's  father  is  also  sin  which  will  be  pa- 
nished   sooner  or  later.     This  is  applied  to  an  unknown  offender. 

Or,  a  man's  sin  is  his  father.  I.  e.  He  can  never  get  rid 
of  it.      C.  f.  "Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out." 

15  '"ij^  >f^T  ^T  ^^T«     Anta  bhala  ko  bhalo. 
A  good  man's  end  is  good. 

I.  e.  One  who  does  good  deeds  will  have  a  good  end,  as 
illustrated  by  the  following  story. 

Story.  Once  a  goldsmith,  a  barber,  a  lion,  and  a  .snake 
had  fallen  into  a  deep  well  in  a  dreary  jungle,  where  a  good  man 
happened  to  pass.  On  perceiving  him,  each  of  them  cried  out 
for  help,  and  each  of  tbem  promised  to  help  the  traveller  in  time 
of  need.  So,  first  of  all  the  good  man  took  out  of  the  well  the 
lion,  who  presented  him  with  a  diamond  ring,  promised  that  he 
would  come  to  his  help  whenever  he  should  remember  him,  and  told 
him  not  to  take  out  the  barber  and  the  goldsmith,  and  then  went 
away.  After  this  the  good  man  got  the  serpent  up,  who  also  having 
promised  his  help  in  time  of  need  went  away,  giving  his  advice  to 
the  good  man  not  to  take  out  the  goldsmith  and  the  barber.  The 
good  man  contrary  to  the  admonitions  of  the  lion  and  the  snake 
helped  the  barber  and  the  goldsmith  out  of  the  deep  well,  who  also 
took  their  way  after  promising  to  reward  the  services  of  the  good 
man.  After  some  years  when  the  barber  had  become  a  Kotwdl  of 
a  certain  cit3',  and  the  goldsmith  was  also  trading  at  the  same 
place,  the  good  man,  on  arriving  there,  \vent  to  see  his  friends  the 
barber  and  the  goldsmith,  who,  though  they  knew  him  well, 
feigned  ignorance  of  him,  and,  seeing  the  diamond  ring  on  his 
finger,  went  straight  to  report  him  to  the  king,  who,  in  the 
meantime,  not  knowing  that  his  daughter  who  had  worn  the  dia- 
mond ring  on  her  finger  had  been  killed  by  the  lion,  had  issued 
proclamations  throughout  his  kingdom  that  anv  one  finding  any 
clue  to  her  ornaments  would  be  rewarded.  The  good  man  was 
consequent!}'  arrested  and  put  in  charge  of  the  Police,  when  the 
barber  (now  Kotwdl)  unnecessarily  troubled  and  tortured  him. 
After  that  in  spite  of  his  ph^adiug  innocence  by  representincr  all 
the  facts  of  the  case  the  king  sentenced  him  to  be  beheaded, 
on  the  proof  of  the  diamond  ring  having  been  found  with  him. 
^t  this  moment  the  good  man   remembered  his   friend   the   snake, 


f     323    j 

who,  after  biting  the  qneen,  came  to  the  good  man,  and  said  that 
the  queen  would  die  unless  she  was  treated  by  him.  The  queen 
was  senseless  in  consequence  of  the  snake-bite.  All  remedies  and 
charms  were  administered  in  vain.  Every  one  supposed  her  last 
hour  had  come.  The  n<?xt  day,  when  the  good  man  was  about  to 
be  executed,  he  offered  his  services  to  cure  the  queen,  and  accord- 
ingly he  was  sent  for  and  told  to  treat  her.  No  sooner  had  he 
used  his  charms  than  she  became  quite  convalescent.  But  the 
kins',  notwithstanding  this,  said  that  he  wonld  not  spare  the  life 
of  the  man.  Then  tiie  good  man  adduced  the  lion  as  his  witness, 
and  as  soon  as  he  remembered  the  lien  a  great  number  of  lions 
came  to  his  help,  so  that  the  city  became  full  of  them.  At  this 
spectacle  the  king  became  convinced  of  the  truth  spoken  by  the 
good  man,  though  the  barber  and  the  goldsmith  denied  the  fuct, 
and  ordered  them  to  be  beheaded  iii  his  place. 

16  ^^T  ^51  ff^r  Ti?T.     Jaikocliuna  taiko  punya. 
The  reward  is  his  icho  gives  the  flour. 

Used  to  encourage  charity. 

17  §rT  5p^T  'ST^  "JTset  ^^  '^I^-     '^^  J^anjya  kha^a  taiki 
gall  dada. 

Whoever  eats  kaniyd  (  a  wild   hut  sweet  vegetable  which 
causes  irritation  in  the  throat)  will  have  his  throat  inflamed. 

This  teaches  that  every  one  will  have  to  taste  the  bitter  fruit 
of  his  own  evil  deeds. 

^^I  ^%  \'t{'    Rama  jharokha  baitha  kara  saba  ka  mujara 
leta..    Jaisi  jaiki  chakari  taisa  wako  deta. 

The  God  Rama  sitting  at  the  window  sees  every  one's  work, 
and  gives  wages  for  the  work  done  hy  each. 

This  is  quoted  in  regard  to  Rama  who  rewards  or  chastises 
people  according  to  the  nature  of  the  work  done  by  each. 

C.  /.  "The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in  every  place  beholding 
the  evil  and  the  good," 


{     324     ) 

19  g  (%g  ^iIt  (^'3^  fl  ^^T  ^TJ  f^^  (%^^T'     Tu  kbi- 
lawarho  ni  khanado  ta  tera  bapu  riliha  nl  khando. 

Sad  you  not  cultivated  a  field  in  the  midst  of  the  forest, 
your  father  would  not  have  been  killed  by  a  bear. 

Applies  to  one  who  suffers  for  his  own  unwise  conduct. 

20  «ll^fU!  ^gf^    55^  ^ITf^I.       Nachani   kbelani   muha 
Eamani. 

The  dancers  and  players  will  come  in  front  of  each  one. 

I.  e.  The  result  of  each  one's  conduct  comes  home  to  him, 
just  as  in  a  dance  the  performers  come  in  front  of  each  of  the- 
spectators. 

21  ^^TI^  *itTT;«fi  'sT'Iif^'lT^  W^-      Kuirala  kLaika  khan- 
karyala  kada. 

Whoever  will  eat  Icuirdla  (  a  kind  of  wild  tree  the  flowers 
of  which  are  eaten  by  poor  people  )  will  be  liable  to  catarrh. 

I.  e.  Every  one  is  himself  responsible  for  any  thing  which 
he  does  without  due  regard  to  its  consequences. 

22  5i^x  ^f^T  ff^T  ^3T^T-     Jaso  bolo  taso  lawalo.^ 
As  much  as  one  sows,  so  much  will  he  reap. 

Applied  only  to  giving  charities.  In  a  future  existence  s 
man  will  be  blessed  in  proportion  to  his  gifts  in  this  life. 

lUnstriition.  Once  there  was  a  poor,  simple,  and  virtuous 
beggar  living  with  his  wife  in  a  town.  He  used  to  earn  only 
three  Chhataks  of  flour  a  day,  whether  he  begged  at  five  houses  or 
fifty,  but  never  more.  One  day  when  they  had  cooked  one  and 
a  half  cakes  with  the  three  Chhataks  of  flour,  a  saint  arrived  there 
who  said  that  he  was  very  hungry.  They  gave  him  the  one  and 
a,  half  (three  chhataks)  of  ready  made  bread,  which  the  saint  ate  and 
departed.  The  hermit  then  went  to  God,  and  interceded  for  the 
poor  man,  but  God  shewed  him  the  account-book  and  said  that  since 
he  had  given  on!}'  one  and  a  half  rupees  in  his  former  existence,  he 
was  not  entitled  to  more  than  what  he  received,  and  if  he  got  that 
one  and  a  half  rupees  at  one  time,  after  that  he  would  get  nothing 
more.   The  kind-hearted  saint  then  petitioned  God  to  let  him  have  the 


(    325     ) 

one  and  a  half  rupees  at  once,  and  God  gave  it  to  him.  Then  the  saint 
came  back  to  earth  again  and  advised  the  poor  man  that  the  one  and 
half  a  rupees  should  he  spent  on  charity,  and  whatever  he  got  there- 
after should  also  be  devoted  to  the  help  of  the  poor.  The  beggar 
did  as  he  was  told.  The  very  next  day,  having  spent  one  and  half 
rupees  on  charity,  he  earned  three  rupees,  and  this  sum  also  having 
been  given  to  the  poor,  the  next  day  he  got  six  rupees.  In  this  way 
as  his  income  increased  he  increased  his  alms  also,  sjjending  all  he 
received  on  charity.  After  this  the  same  saint  went  to  Paradise 
again,  and  saw  God  in  the  form  of  an  old  man,  sitting  in  a  bending 
posture.  On  his  enquiring  the  cause  of  this,  God  said  that  the  man 
who  had  received  one  and  a  half  rupees,  some  time  ago,  had  become 
very  charitable,  and  that  whatever  he  got  he  gave  it  away  to  the  poor, 
and  that  his  charity  had  thus  put  a  heavy  burden  upon  himself. 
After  this  the  saint  came  to  the  man  again  and  said  that  he  was 
a  very  pious  man,  and  gave  him  advice  as  to  his  saving  something 
for  times  of  need.  The  man  being  puffed  up  with  pride  began 
to  withhold  his  hand  from  charity  and  the  consequence  was  that 
he  became  poor  again  very  soon. 

C.  f.  "Much  is  expected  when  much  is  given."  "As  you 
sow,  so  you  shall  reap." 

23  5?g^  ^^g  f>T5I  wgi  *TTfT.      Jatuka  kammala  bhija 
tatuka  bhari. 

The  wetter  the  blanket  gets,  the  heavier  it  becomes. 

Used  in  reference  to  liabilities  and  debts,  for  the  sooner  they 
are  discharged  and  settled  the  better  ;  putting  them  off  only  makes 
them  more  burdensome.  (The  ordinary  dress  of  a  hill  man  consists 
of  a  blanket).  Also  used  to  denote  that  one's  responsibilities 
increase  with  the  increase  of  his  family. 

24  ^^  ^?T^  ^'fl  ^'fT  "^T^  ^ZI  ^^r  «ri^r«  Sasu  buwari 

^»  vj  ■ 

unjo  painjo  bapa  beta  lekho  jokho. 

Mother-in-law  and  daughter-in-law  borrow  and  lend,  and 
accounts  are  Tcept  between  fixther  and  son. 

The  necessity  of  keeping  accounts  even  in  dealings  with 
near  friends. 

25  ^\m  ^X.\  ^1^  ^f  5^1  ^ITl  Zf^  ^tf*    Nana  kbora 
nani  pirha  thula  khora  thuli  pirha- 


(     326     ) 

The  small  shull  has  little  pain  ( cares   and  anxieties  )  th& 
big  skull  has  great  pain. 

The  burdens  and  responsibilities  of  wealth  and  position. 

26  ^if  siT^  %  ^^W«     Swarga  naraka  yain  dekhinchba. 

One  finds  paradise  and  hell  here  ( lohile  alive   in  this, 
world ). 

E.g.  The  doctrine  of  the  Hindu  scriptnres  is  that  a  man 
gets  human  life  as  a  reward  of  good  deeds  after  undergoing 
transmigration  through  eighty-four  lacs  of  animal  lives,  as  con- 
sequences of  wicked  deeds  committed  by  him  during  his  former 
human  existence.  So  human  life  is  said  to  be  a  period  of  probation 
(outof  the  eternity  the  soul  has  to  pass  through)  and  the  last 
improved  state  in  which  he  can  cither  obtain  salvation  through 
virtue,  piety  and  contemplation  of  God,  or  earn  other  future  lives^ 
or  hells  which  are  forty-five  in  number  according  to  the  sins  he 
commits  in  human  life.  The  illiterate  or  common  belief  is  that  one 
in  blissful  circumstances  is  enjoying  his  paradise  here,  and  one  in 
distressed  circumstances  is  said  to  be  enduring  his  portion  of  hell-, 
here  (in  the  present  human  life). 

'^'^  %^  %mi^  "hxf^  ^^■^r^  Z%%      Keku  paunyali 

hoi  tl  keku  dwara  dhakadi. 

Why  did  you  make  alliance  with  me,  and  why  do  you  now 
shut  your  doors  against  me  ? 

E.  g.  As  you  have  intermarried  with  me  I  must  be  treated 
as  a  relative.  A  thing  agreed  to  should  be  maintained  at  any 
cost  of  trouble,  risk  or  loss. 


RIDICULE  AND  LAUGHTER 

1  ^I'^^TfT  ^  "fi^^Tft  ^gRt   %r  '^r^^.     Adbikarl    ko- 
fethakari  kukara  ko  chakara. 

The  officer  s  servant  keeps  a  servant  for  his  own  dog. 

The  dog-keeper  is  a  very  menial  servant,  but  gives  commands 
as  if  he  were  an  officer  oppressing  the  people. 

Applied  contemptuously  to  one  who  takes  on  airs  of  command; 
(a  gentleman's  gentleman). 


(    327     ; 

2  ^T1  l«7g^  ^t'lt  »?iTI?I%T  S^  'l[T^-      Roga  ko  mula 
khansi  jhagarha  ko  mula  hansi. 

Coughing   a  root  of  sickness,   and   ridicule   a  root  of 
quarrels. 

An  axiom  cautioning  people  against  mockery. 

RIVALS 

1  ^T»l  %T^   %I"?T  ^TT)"  ^^  ^^-     ^ga  aura  sauta  tborhl 
laga  buri. 

No  one  sJiould  despise  a  spark  of  fire,  era  small  rival 
wife  (^.  e.  a  second  wife). 

Both  these  things  are  capable  of  causing  much  mischief  if  left 
nnsuppressed. 

2  ^  WS^X.  Tl^  ?^T^^  ^Ti;  W^iit.     Dui  talawara  eka 
myana  men  ni  rai  sakani. 

Two  swords  cannot  he  kept  in  one  sheath. 

Two  rivals  cannot  live  in  the  same  place  without  quarrellinof. 

3  ^Tff  '?«T,'^  ^l?l  gfr.     Sauta  chuna  ki  laga  buri. 

The  rival  wife,  even  if  made  of  maduwa  flour  {inferior) 
is  a  nuisance. 

This  proverb  is  used  with  keen  appreciation  by  women  who 
have  rivals  ;  and  is  also  applied  to  competetors  in  any   business. 

The  first  or  chief  wife  of  a  Hindu  naturally  resents  with 
bitterness  the  idea  of  a  rival  in  her  husband's  affections.  In 
Bengal,  according  to  a  native  writer,  girls  of  tender  age  are  taught 
to  pray  against  such  a  calamity  in  the  future  and  to  pronounce 
curses  on  the  possible  future  rival. 


(     328     ) 
RUINOUS  AND  FRUITLESS  EFFORTS, 

1  f^lt  ^T  f^mm  ^"^  ^'  ^T  ^^T  '^T^*     Bichhi  ko  nija'no 
mantra  sarpa  ka  dula  hatha. 

To  pttt  one's  hand  into  the  hole  of  a  snake  when  one 
does  not  know  how  to  charm  a  scorpion. 

1.  e.  To  attempt  work  which  is  beyond  one's  power  and 
dangerous.  It  is  supposed  that  tho  effrfcts  of  the  posion  of  a 
snake  or  scorpion  can  be  removed  by  incantations. 

2  ^I=!  $tSt  ^ITfT   '^f%«     Boja  chhoti  jagata  barhi. 

A  small  load  but  a  heavy    tax. 

I.  e.  Much  trouble  attended  with  small  gain.  E.  g.  A 
small  share  in  a  village  gives  a  great  deal  of  trouble. 

3  S^T'l'^r  ^Tf%  1^  ^1J  ^I^TT       Byo  na  syo  laurbi  ki 

khuta  torbai. 

The  legs  of  the  daughter  were  broken,  (  through  fatigue 
in  visiting  all  her  friends  and  relations  to  say  good-bye), 
and  after  all   no  marriage. 

Applied  to  some  bargain  which  after  having  caused  much 
trouble,   does  not  come  to  any  thing. 

4  if)"*!^!'  HT^fT  ^JT^t  ^IfT-      Bbitna  son  bharata  swarga 
son  lata. 

To  wage  a  war  with  BMma  is  like  kicking  the  sky, 

Bhima  is    another   name    of    Bhima    Sena   one    of  the  five 
Pandabas,  a   great  hero,  spoken  of  in  the  Mahabharata. 
Applied  to  fruitless  attempts, 

5  vm^  zm  ^TfT  %T^  >T^r  ^izm  ^i^znni  ^Ifll-    Eka  taka 
ka  ten  jogi  bhayo  nau  taka  jogyuna  laga. 

One  became  a  jogi  (  ascetic)  for  the  sake  of  two  pice, 
but  his  being  made  a  Jogi  cost  him  eighteen  pice, 
A  bad  investment. 


(     329     ) 

6  F^IW  ^'^T^  1«!T  ^I«TH.       Mehanata  barbdda  guna 
lajama* 

I/obour  misspent  proves  a  man  guilty. 

One  who  is  not  successfal  in  this  world  is  generally  blamed. 
Compare  the  expresions  ''Poverty  is  a  crime,"  "Success  justifies 
anything." 

7  3T  ^j^  •^Jz      Gu  khana  bata, 

«v  ~         ■    • 

By  eating  excreta  he  gained  nothitig. 

Applied  tq  atrocious  conduct  by  vhich  no  advantage  is  gained. 

B  f?Tfil^  ^T  f^Tf^HT  ^%?fT  ^5}^T  sfTIT  ^%^r-     Timila  ka 
timila  khataiya  nange  ka  nanga  dekbaiya. 

All  the  figs  collected  fell  down,  and  at  the  same  time 
the  hody  was  exposed. 

The  hill  women  wear  only  a  small  sheet  wrapped  round  their 
loins  and  passed  over  their  head.  One.climbing  up  a  tree  to  collect 
figs  in  her  sheet,  the  sheet  slips  out  of  her  hand,  and  so  she  loses 
the  figs,  and  at  the  same  time  the  upper  part  of  her  person  is 
■exposed.  -  —t-     . ; 

A  double  calamity,  failure  involving  personal  loss  or  disgrace. 

9  ^5f f%  ^iTfTT  S^^t  ^TIT  ^f  IfT  ^T»T  W^Vi  ^31^       ^^^ 
ki  khatara  dhebari  laya  eya  dama  dama  kapasa  kbawa. 

A  sheep  was  kept  for  ike  sake  of  her  wool,  hut  she'  ate 
np  seers  of  cotton, 

.D&ma — Garhwal  weight.    An  unprofitable  speculation. 

10  ^  -^frft  lif  ^r^l  %Tf  I'':  It  ^T5nn  fg'^r^     Ya  buwari 
kucbba  ku  ni  hoi  para  cbhaun  barajana  ku  hoi. 

This  bride  is  of  no  other  use  except  that  I  have  to  take 
care  not  to  touch  her. 

P  2 


(     330     ) 

Applied  to  a  woman  who  instead  of  helping -the  family  tarns 
ont  useless  and  troublesome.  The  wife  of  a  younger  brother 
mast  on  no  account  be  even  touched  by  the  elder  brother,  nor  may 
she  touch  him. 

11  ^■'STIT  ^^^^^En"'CT*    Urhaya  pdthatu  gholyara. 
Young  birds  that  had  flown  away  return  to  the  nest. 

Applied  to  grown  up  children  who  after  they  ar€  married 
become  dependent  on  their  parents. 

12  ^^^filf  ^fr  ^'^'It    *il-       Pharphaten  meri  tumdali 
kathen. 

Where  is  my  wooden  howl. 

A  Dum  (a  low  caste  man)  is  in  the  habit  of  using  this  phrase 
all  day  and  night,  going  in  and  out  of  his  house  asking  "where  is 
my  wooden  dish." 

This  proverb  is  applied  to  one  who  is  moving  here  and  there 
in  vain  in  search  of  employment.  The  Z'wmas  are  in  the  habit  of 
eating  a  little  food  many  times  during  the  day,  and  as  jnany  times 
they  need  their  respective  dishes. 

13  ^^r  ^j-  %T^T  2^T  f^^J^-     Paisa  ko  kodo  taka  pisai. 

One  pice   oj    millet    (maduwd)    hut    two    pice  for 
grinding. 

C.  f.  "The  game  is  not  worth  the  candle." 

14  ^T^T  'l^T^T  ^I^CJT  ^TTi^T  i^T^T  "^l^^  ^T^       Poyo 
pakayo  sagalina  ghagaro  doyo  battisa  hatha. 

The  whole  shirt  after  heing  sewn  and  washed  measured 
only  thirty  two  handbreadths. 

This  is  used  for  any  business  which  takes  much  trouble  but 
affords  little  gain.      C.  f.  "Great  cry  and  little  wool." 

Sukha    ki  khatara   buwari  lyawa  sya    roja  uthi   nialara 
gawa. 


(    331     ) 

A  daughter  in  law  was  brought' to  increase  our  comfort 
but  when  she  rises  in  the  morning  she  does  nothing  but 
sing. 

Applied  to  articles  procured   for   the   sake   of  comfort,  but 
■which  prove  to  be  sources  of  trouble  and  loss. 

16  gyjiT  ^^g^T  ^t  Ji^i  ^=^^17^  ^^  'V^T-  trdhara  nikala. 
nu  son  gayo  paicha  yada  karai  ayo. 

One  went  to  borrow  from  a  certain  person,  but  only 
received  a  reminder  to  pay  up  a  former  debt.. 

C.  f.  "Going  out  for  wool  and  coming  back  sheared." 

17  w^  %^^  %T»I«ir  IW^  '^^'ST-     Gurha  bechi  bera  gana 

naoha  men  chusana. 
\.  —  - 

One  who  barters  his    treacle    for  sugarcanes  has  the 

extra  trouble  of  chewing  them. 

Unprofitable  bargains. 

18  iKTfW*!  ^(W  ^11  ^ifaf^-     Khanina  plni  gbuna  ghuna 
thini. 

Feet  benumbed  to  the  knees  but  nothing  to  eat  and  drink. 

Great  pains,  small  gains. 

19  "%^55i  n^  ^T  ^t  11T  ^^1%  55  -^^r-     Chaube  jyu 

ehhabe  buna  son  gaya  awa  dube  jyu  baithau. 

A  Ghombe  (once)  went  to  another's  house  in  the  hope 
that  he  would  be  taken  therefor  a  Chhabe  {would  be  more 
respected),  but  the  man  said  to  him  "O  dube,  come  and 
sit  down." 

A  Chaabe=one  who  has  read  four  vedas. 

A  Chhabe=         do.         do.      all  the  six  yedas. 

A  Dube=  do.         do.      two  vedas 

Excessive  ambition  meeting  with  a  fall. 


,(     33-2     > 

20  it^T  wf^  m^  ^Tf%  vfr  "^liTf^-      Bela  bhari  nauni 
niali  bbari  kukaupi. 

A  cupful  of  butter  and  one  Ndli  (2  seers)  of  dirt. 

Used  of  work  or  business  which  is  more  trouhlesome  than 
profitable.  This  is  also  used  of  a  person  in  whom  there  is  a 
little  good  and  much  e'siiL 

21  ^^  ^%  %t^T  ^^  «RT  f^  ^'i       -'^ba  ki  jai  khaamlo 

kunchhyun  baba  ki  jaige. 

I  wished  to  earn  for  myself,  hut  the  undertaking  deprived 
me  even  of  what  linherited  from  my  father. 

Used  of  business  which  proves  ruinous. 

22  qi7^  ^JTiUT^t  I^T  •IT'3  ^Tf3  ^»l^r«     Kana  lagupa  son 
gayo  nakha  kati  ligayo. 

One  set  out  in  order  to  fix  or  replace  his  ear  {which 
was  cut  off),  but  his  attempt  to  do  so  deprived  him  qf 
his  nose. 

Used  of  business  which  proves  ruinous. 

23  ^W^  ^T  ^T9-     Kammala  ko  satu. 

The  flour  of  parched  grain  kept  in  a  blanket. 

If  the  flour  of  parched  grain  is  kept  in  a  blanket,  nearly  aB 
of  it  sticks  to  the  blanket.     Bad  investments. 

24  ^^T  ^TST^IIW  "^f^.      Bharo  chhoto  jagata  barhi. 

A  little  load  hut  heavy  toll. 

Used  of  work  or  business  which  is  more  troublesome  than 
profitable. 

SECRETS. 

1  5SB  ^T't  ^T  Wl  wt^T  ^TSf  ^1^-      Eka  kana  dui  kana 
tina  kana  maidana. 

One  ear  or  two  ears, hut  if  three  ears,  then  the  open  plain. 


(     333     ) 

This  is  applied  ito  secrets-wbibb  should  be  confined  at  most  to 
two  persons.     If  it  reaches  a  third  ear  it  will  become  public. 

2  ^Tsq  f^  f^^  iirf^  STTl^ra.     Sau   jyu  ki  pliilanga  paki 

janiya. 

The  private  disorder  of  a  Baniyd  is  made  known  when 
it  comes  to  a  head. 

A  JBaniyd  is  said  to  suppress  the  disease  he  is  laboring  under 
for  fear  of  exposure,  but  when  it  comes  to  the  worst  stage  be  can- 
not bide  it  any  longer. 

Applied  to  secret  dark  deeds  or  evil  designs  which  are  known 
only  when  their  result  appears. 

3  mifT  IT^Ij  ■^JlfT  ^3    Machho  pani  kai  bagata  piwa. 
No  one  knows  when  the  fish  drinks  water. 

Used  to  enjoin  proper  secrecy.  ''     - 

;4  ^T?r  ^g  ^J  f%^r^-     Dai  mu  peta  chhiponu. 
To  hide  the  person  from  a  midwife. 

Applied  to  those  who  keep  any  business  in  which  they  are 
concerned  secret  from  itheir  parents,  or  superiors. 

5  ^Tf%T  %  ^Tf%^  %•     Darhima  khai  darhimai  ai. 

One  ate  pomegranate  and  discharged  the  same  mtire, 
(i.  e.  could  not  digest  its  seeds). 

Used  of  one  who  breaks  secrecy  and  promise. 
SELF-ESTEEM. 


1  ^t^  fi^T  ^''^'IT^.     Saisi  ilaina  daryawa  chta. 

The  work  of  a  groom  is  like  a  deep  stream. 

'  '  Once  a  Syce  was  asked  by  a  gentleman  to  brinjir  another 
Syce  for  him:  the  Syce  replied  that  the  work  of  Syce  is  like  an 
ocean  ;  i.  e.  requires  great  talents,  and  therefore  one  could  not 
be  found,  though  clerks  were  plentiful  everywhere.  This  is  used 
ironically  to  ridicule  the  qualifications  of  one  who  himself  boasts, 
of  them. 


f     334     .) 
SELF-HELP  AND  EXERTION 

1  ^^fzm  K^^T  ^^r^  ^J^  ^^  f%ir»!IT.     Buti  ka  bharasa 
ni  raunu  hatha  paira  hilona. 

Do  not  trust  altogether  to  charms,  but   use  your  hands 
and  feet. 

E.  g.  A  certain  saint  gave  a  man  a  talismanic  herb  wbicH 
■would  secure  his  prosperity.  The  man  was  delighted  with, 
the  boon  and  asked  leave  to  return  home,  whereupon  the  saint 
told  him  that  he  should  not  place  his  confidence  alone  on  the  herb,, 
but  also  exert  himself  to  attain  his  purpose. 

C.  f.  "God  helps  them  who  help  themselves." 
Or,  as  Cromwell  once  said   to    his    soldiers,    "Trust   in  God,, 
and  keep  your  powder  dry". 

2  ^T'T  5Sir  Sfif  r  ^^'^^^t^T-      Bapu  bya  kadau  sanehu  ni- 
lando. 

The  father  can  arrange  for  the  marriage  {of  his  son) 
but  cam,not  create  affection  {in  his  son  toward  his  wife). 

A  teacher  can  do  bis  utmost  in  teaching,  but  cannot  make  bis 
pupil  clever.  This  is  equivalent  to.  "One  man  can  bring  a  horse- 
to  the  water,  but  ten  men  cannot  make  bim  drink." 

3  f%^fT  "3^  1^^  ^^J-     Himmata  banda  madada  Khuda. 

God  helps  a  brave  man. 

A  man  prospers  through  his  own  exertions  and  the  help  ot 
God.     C  f.  "God  helps  them  who  help  themselved." 

4  5iq?lT  IT?:  ^T  TST^T  fTf?1I  JITS^T^  ^5!I$T.      Jathaga 
hai  ko  manuno  tataga  garjyorhi  kanyuno. 

Instead  of  exerting  yourself  to    entreat  another  (to- 
scratch  you)  use  your  efforts  in  scratching  yourself. 

This  teaches  that  one  should  take  the  trouble  himself  of  bis- 
own  work  instead  of  taking  the  trouble  of  inducing  and  entreating, 
another  to  do  the  work  for  him. 


(     335     ) 

S  'JT^  f^  ^I  '^•??r^l  ^»     I'ani  ki  dhau  panyara  mu. 

One  has  to  satiate  his   thirst  by  going   to   the  spring 
itself. 

This  is  used  to  encourage  one  to  take  the  trouble  of  repre- 
senting his  own  case  personally,  and  not  through  others,  to  the 
highest  officer,  who  is  a  fountain  of  justice.  If  you  want  a  thing 
you  must  exert  yourself  to  get  it,  and  not  expect  it  to  come  to 
you  of  itself. 

€  ^T^  f%  ^  ^m  cC'^  %•     Mala  ki  lai  kaba  kaba  kbai. 

How  seldom  do  we  eat  the  mustard  produced  in   the 
Plains. 

1.  e.  One  ought  not  to  depend  on  others  for  help,  because 
it  cannot  always  be  depended  upon,  for  one  will  give  help  only 
for  ouce,  as  we  can  get  the  mustard  of  the  plains  only  occasionally 
since  it  requires  to  be  fetched  from  the  plains. 

7  ^^  f^flJ'  ^t^'fl  fl^-      Ghoghanta  bidya  khodanta 

pani. 

Learning  to  be  had  by  repeating  lessons,  and   the  water 
by  digging. 

C.  /.  'No  gains  without  pains."  "There  is  no  royal  road 
to  learning. 

8  ^^^  ^  ITfl^T  fil^IW*     Akala  le  para  mesh  wara  milan- 
chba. 

Genius  and  wisdom  will  even  gain  God. 

Used  as  an  encouragement  to  one  to  exert  himself  to  find 
out  the  causes  of  things  and  to  surmount  difficulties  instead  of  be- 
ing daunted  by  them. 

SELF-INTERESTEDNESS. 

1   '^•lalT'^T  ^•?  <fT^ '85T5*  Banajara  kana  tandai  sujanchha. 
A    Banjdrd  looks    always  towards  Tdnda,   {i.  e.   the 
place  from  which  he  set  out). 


(    336    ) 

Banjaras  are  Plains  .graia-dealers  who  take  grain  to  sell  in 
the  hills.  E.  g.  The  Banjiras  of  Tanda,  village  on  the  road  tO 
Moradabad  .  are  indefatigable  grain  dealers,  but  they  love  their 
home. 

Every    one    looks    forward    to   the   accomplishment    of  his' 
undertaking. 

2  ?3T^T  '^Tf%  ^TOF  '^ifr*     Khano  barhi  apana  charhi. 
One  eats  hdrhi   {food  made  of  millet  Jlour)  for  his 

own  purpose. 

I.  e.  One  takes  trouble  for  his  one.  sake.  Barhi  is  a  very 
inferior  kind  of  food  which  no  one  would  eat  who  had  not  some  special 
object  in  doing  so. 

3  qT^'^X  %  ^tT^'^  "^T-      Parmeshwara  hai  matalaba 
barho. 

One's  object  or  purpose  is  g)'eater  than   God, 

Every  one  cares  more  about  his  owp  desires  than  about  God. 

Illustration  :  Once  the  Prime  Minister  Birbal  was  deprived 
of  his  post  by  the  Emperor  Akbar  in  consequence  of  the  back- 
biting of  his  Mahomedan  Ministers,  who  could  not  bear  a  Hindu 
being  above  them.  Soon  after  this  the  Emperor  asked  the  foijr 
Mahomedan  Ministers  who  was  the  greatest  man  in  the  world. 
To  this  they  replied  the  Emperor  was  above  all,  then  he  put  an- 
other question  to  them  as  to  who  was  above  him  ;  they  said  "God". 
After  this  the  Emperor  asked  them  what  was  above  God  ;  they 
were  unable,  to  reply  to  this,  but  they  said  they  would  -  answer  the 
question  within  one  month,  the  kiiig  granted  them  the  time.'  In 
the  meantime  they  consulted  many  wise  men  about  the  matter^  and 
fed  many  Faquirs  in  order  to  take  their  opinion  about  the  question, 
but  all  in  vain.  On  the  last  day  of  the  month  they  left  their  home 
at  nigfct  under  the  guise  of  /o^'fs  and  went  to  the  jungles.  But 
Birbal  being  aware  of  this  movement  went  ahead  disguised  as  ajogii 
and  stopped  on  the  side  of  the  road  they  had  to  come  by,  seating 
himself  on  a  Chdrpdi  'bed-stead).  The  Ministers  while  going  along 
that  way  saw  the  i^a^'ir  (Birbal)  _and  taking  him  for  a  real  faqir 
told  him  of  the  difficulty  they  were  labouring  under.  The  Faqir 
consoled  them  and  told  them  that  if  they  would  take  him  to  the 
king  he  would  give  him  the  proper  answer  to  his  question.'  The 
ministpTS  were  only  too  happy  to  do  this,  and  after  stopping  there 
for  the  remainder   of  the  night  they  lifted   up  the  Clidrpai   and 


(     387     ) 

■conveyed  him  to  the  Einporor  the  next  morning  while  he  was  sitting 
in  his  Court.  Birbal  while  thus  being  convoyed  to  the  Darhdr 
upon  the  C/idrpdi  put  on  his  own  clothes  before  ho  reached  the 
Darbdr.  Then  he  saluted  the  king  and  told  him  that  man's  object 
or  purpose  was  greater  than  God,  for  had  the  ministers  not  had  an 
object  the_y  would  iiavo  not  borno  him  on  their  heads  to  the  Court. 
With  this  the  Emperor  was  fully  satisfied  and  reinstated  Birbal 
and  the  other  ministers  in  their  respective  posts. 

■i  ITTT^  o5T  "^TT-     Patala  ka  charLa. 
Chirping  of  birds  in  the  bashes. 

Applied  to  the  criticisms  of  various  people  to  which  one  should 
pay  no  more  heed  than  to  the  different  notes  of  the  various  birds 
in  the  bu.~hes,  but  go  on  with  one's  work.  C.  f.  "Many  men 
many  words." 

5  ?i^  7T^^  siT'lT  "m^X  '^^T^t-   T^li  *^<2la  ki  nauna  balon 
khalaki. 

The  man  who  is  grinding  oil  seeds  is  ihinking  of  his  oil, 
but  the  children  are  anxious  for  the  chaff  or  husks. 

When  oil  is  ground  the  children  eat  the  husks. 
Used  to  show  that  every  one  is  interested  in  his  own  affairs. 
C.  f.  "Every  one  for  himself  and  God  for  all." 

6  S5i[.T  ^rf  5ii;75il?.     Jyana  chha  ta  jahana  cbha. 

The  vwrld  is  in  existence  or  of  use  to  a  man  so  long  as 

he  is  alive. 

Used   to  induce    one    to    take    proper    care    of   himself  and 
enjoy  life. 

7  ^]"qf%  '^lf%  J]VT  sigT^fni-       Apani   charlii  gadha  jawa- 
rani. 

One  salibtes  an  ass  for  a  purpose  of  his  oion. 

E.  g.  Hindus  do  not  touch  donkeys,    and   consider    them    to 
be  impure. 

Q  2 


(     338     ) 

Used  to  teach  one  to  condescend    to    do    every  tiling    possible 
in  order  to  attain  his   object.       As   elsewhere    said    that  one    truly 
intent  on  a   purpose   ought   to    get   it   by    placing    disrespect    and 
contempt  in  front  of  him  and  respect  and  courtesy  behind  him. 

SELFIGHNESS. 

1  %T  ^  ^51  %^  ^T  ^^T  3I^T  %T  ^  ^^  f^%n  ^T  ^TT  W^J. 
Jo  mai  kana  dewa  so  mero  thakura  jo  mai  kana  ni  dewa 
so  mero  kutta. 

The  man  who  gives  me  anything  is  my  master,  iut  Tie 
who  does  not  give  me  anything  is  as  a  dog  to  me,  (for 
which  I  care  nothing). 

Badari  natba  apana  ghara  mai  kana  kya  delo  mera  ghara 

kya  lyalo. 

What  ioill  Badarinatha  give  me  if  I  go  to  his  house, 
and  what  will  he  bring  me  if  he  comes  to  my  house  ? 

The  shrine  of  Badari  Natha  is  considered  by  the  Garhwalis 
as  their  own  peculiar  shrine,  and  they  do  not  have  to  present  any 
offerings  to  it  like  other  pilgims,  but  instead  ask  something 
from  it. 

Addressed  by  poor  persons  to  the  rich  and  great. 

Applied  as  a  slur  to  one  who  is  very  Selfish. 

\_See  Introduction.l 

3  ■^T^'^r  ^T  "^  ■^T'3"'^T  «RT  f'i'^T'  Bakliara  ko  puchha 
bakhara  ka  gicha. 

The  goat  gets  its  oion  tail. 

Each  limb  of  a  he-goat,  which  is  sacrificed,  is  offered  to' 
different  deities.  The  tail  is  assigned  to  Vishnu,  who  alone  has 
power  to  give  salvation.  Its  tail  is  therefore  cut  off  and  put  into  its 
month  so  that  the  goat  may  get  salvation  as  a  compensation  for 
having  been  killed. 

Applied  to  selfish  people  or  when  a  thing  taken  from  one  is 
given  back  to  him  as  a  present. 


(     339     ) 

4  »ifjy  j]^7  Tjjij  ^T^  ^'^^1  I^T   51^5^1  ^J^.      Ganga  gayo 

Ganga  dasa  Jamuna  gayo  Jamuna  dasa. 

When  he  goes  to  the  Ganges  he  becomes  Ganga  das  {i.  e. 
the  slave  of  the  Ganges),  and  when  to  the  Jamuna  he  be- 
comes Jamunddds. 

Applied  either  to  a  fickle-minded  person,  or  to  one  who  is 
selfish  or  a  time-server. 

5  '^^T  ^T  ^I^  ^T^l  f^^sT  ^T  ^*T^  '^'^^     Hukka  ka  santha 
nato  chilama  ka  santha  baira. 

Friendship}  with  the  Jlukltd,  but  enmity  icith  the  Chilam. 

The  Hukkd  and  the  Chilama  are  two  parts  which  together 
form  the  pipe  for  smoking  used  by  natives  of  India. 

Applies  to  one  who  bears  enmity  to  a  father,  but  befriends  his 
son  in  order  to  gain  some  selfish  ends. 

6  ^I^  f^  "afr  rT^T  f^  ^r^-     Hatha  ki  teri  tawa  ki  meri. 

The  loaf  which  is  being  hieaded  is  yours,   that  in  the 
oven  is  mine. 

E.  g.  The  cako  on  the  cooking-pan  is  sure  to  be  ready  sooner 
than  the  one  which  is  being  made  ready:  used  when  one  is  intent  ou 
liavjng  his  own  object  attended  to  first;  putting  ofi"  the  interests  of 
other  people  to  a  future  time. 

7  ^^m  ^  ^T^  ^1!^  ^*r^-      Hasana  ki  dari  dena  ku 
chumarha. 

A  fairy  to  laugh,  but  a  miser  in  giving. 

Applied  to  people  whose  manners  are  very  pleasant,  but  who 
are  selfish  and  good  for  nothing. 

8  »B^  •rni^'lt.     Phate  nagaixhi. 

The  drummer  of  one  loho  is  victorious. 
Time-servers. 


(     3^0     } 

9  ^\X\  W^T  ^'^^  ■^<a  ^  ^TW  ^rW  »irtlT  ^J^%\.     Sara 
sara  myara  mukha  men  paula  paula  madharacboda  ka. 

J?ut  the  best  into  m7j   mnith,   and   give   the   refuse   to 
others. 

10  ^sj  %[^  ?T^*i  T(TT  f^'^TlT  >TT5J.      Sabai  jogi  marana 

mero  hi  pattara  bharana. 

A  Faqir  wishes   that   all   other   Faqirs   should   die  so 
that  his  oion  dish  may  be  filled. 

Applied  to  one  who  wishes  to  be  profited  by  the  ruin  of 
others.  Faquirs  always  inherit  the  possessions  of  their  deceased 
reliitions.  E.  g.  Every  Hindu  puts  a  little  food  into  the  dish  of  a 
Faqir.  If  all  other  Faquirs  were  to  disippear  fro:n  the  world  by 
dying,  householders  would  give  the  surviving  one  plenty  (a  dishful 
or  plateful). 

11  ?[  ^TT  ^«ir"^  "^^  ^  %t^r  ^ni  '^'^^T*     Tu  mero  }'abari 
cbusa  mai  aunda  bhado  chusalo. 

If  you  worlifor  me  now  I  icil'l   toork  for  you  in   the 
month  of  Bhado  f  August  )  next,  i.  e.  a  long  time  hence. 

Illustration.  A  man  once  cried  out  in  the  Bazar,  will  any 
rascal  lend  me  a  lakh  of  rupees,  I  will  pay  him  in  the  next  world  ? 
Some  one  replied  yes,  why  not,  you  can  have  it,  for  your  words  are 
E-o  nice,  the  amount  you  ask  for  is  so-  small,  and  the  time  of  repay- 
ment is  so  near. 

12  ^r^7  551  fJlT'aT  S"^  ^U.     Lala  jiu  girala  dhaba  sanga. 
A  baniyd  is  willing  to  fall  if  he  can  profit  by  it. 

E.  g.  Whatever  a  Baniyd  may  do  or  whatever  course  he  may 
take  it  will  not  be  without  a  motive. 

Stoi-y.  There  was  once  a  Pandit  who  for  some  months  had 
been  reading  and  expounding  religious  books  in  a  temple.  One 
da)'  when  a  Baniyd  went  to  pay  his  homage  to  the  deities  therein 
one  of  the  idols  said  to  the  other  "whenever  the  Pandit  finishes  his 
book  he  mutt  get  one  thousand  rupees."  After  hearing  this  the 
Baniyd  enquired  from  the  Pandit  when  he  would  finish  the  book. 
The  Fandit  informed  him.  Then  the  Baniyd  said  that  he  would 
give  the  Pandit  one  hundred  rupees  in  lieu  of  all  the  offerings  that 


(    341     ) 

he  might  get  on  that  day.  The  Pandit  who  di'l  not  expect  even 
a  few  rupees,  and  who  was  not  aware  of  the  promise  of  one  thousand 
rupees  made  by  the  deity,  gladly  accepted  the  offi^r  and  received 
one  hundred  rupees  from  the  Baniyci  m  advance.  The  latter  stayed 
there  until  the  former  finished  his  book.  But  to  the  great  dis- 
appointment of  the  ^nyi/ya  the  Pandit  did  not  got  a  single  rupee 
on  the  appointed  day.  On  this  the  Baniyd  being  exasperated 
slapped  the  idol  with  his  hand,  and  said  "tho  god  is  false."  But 
his  hand  stuck  to  the  face  of  the  idol,  and  he  could  not  take  it 
awav.  After  this,  one  of  the  gods  asked  this  god  whether  the 
Pandit  had  received  his  one  thousand  rupees.  He  replied  that  the 
Pandit  had  already  received  one  hundred  rupees,  and  for  the  remain- 
ing nine  hundred  rupees  the  Baniyd  had  been  arrested.  On  this 
the  Baniyd  was  obliged  to  effect  his  release  by  paying  nine  hundred 
rupees. 

13  ^FTfT'SI'^  ^  ^^'^t-      Matalaba  ki  duniyan. 
A  selfish  world. 

14  ?3T'nT  ^t  ^fT  ^'^'W  ^T  ^T'il'^T-    KLana  son  puta  larba 
na  son  bhatljo. 

One  feeds  his  sons  but  employs  his  nephews  for  fighting. 

15  ^TT  ^2  f^'et  ^7  f>lf^€]"  ^r  ^f^  KT'TJ.       Tero   ghata 
pisi  ya  ni  pisi  lya  meri  bhaga. 

Whether  your  watermill  may  or  may  not  grind  your  grain 
give  me  my  right  or  wages. 
Used  of  over-selfishness. 

16  Tiwt  ^  f^fl"'^  85"T^  ^T^r^  ^^it-     Rapi  mu  ni  dini 
cbbansa  kumabari  mu  dabi. 

The  queen  is  refused   liotter-millc,    but   the  potter's  wife 
gets  curds. 

Selfishness  conciliates  those   who    are    wicked    and    given    io 
slander. 

17  fq^OT  ■^'ST?  ^T  ^TIET  "^^  ^^^  5BT  '3^%'^      Pina  bakbata 
ka  bacbba  cbadhaiii  bakbata  ka  babarlia. 


(     342     ) 

Xiike  a  calf  to  suck  the  milk  hut  like  a  bull  to  mount. 

Applied  to  selfish  people  who  are  meek  and  humble  iu  ad- 
versity or  when  asking  favours,  but  violent  and  offensive  when  so- 
licited for  favours  in  return,  or  when  thry  get  other  people  into 
their  power. 

18  ^'5T^T  ^^r  *r5f?ir  f^  H^  '^^'^r-       P;ii  l^filo  mero 

malua  ni  pal  bhela  lialua. 

If  I  get  sometliing  from,  him  he  is  my  sweetest  friend,  if 
not,  he  should  be  throivn  down  a  ^^recipice. 

A  selfish  disposition. 

19  m^X  f%   JIT^  HT^fcj  JITTT  fli  ^^^-       Banara  ki  gala 
bhariiii  gata  ki  kushala. 

The  monkei/ s  aUing  his   cheeks    {mouth    loitlifood)  is 
only  for  himself. 

K.  g.  The  monkey  cares  only  for  his  own  cnrcass  and  not 
even  for  his  own  young  ones.  No  sooner  does  he  find  food  than 
he  will  fill  his  mouth  with  it  without  regard  to  his  youncr  ones  though 
present  there. 

Used  of  selfish  persons. 

20  ^r^2  xg^  ^^^»     Lau  leta  khala  ucherha. 

Grasping  or  sticking  to  one  closely  and  then   taking  off' 
his  skin. 

Used  of  one  who  is  shamelessly  selfish,  and  who  would  not 
leave  another  without  extorting  his  object  from  him  even  to  his 
-ruin  or  detriment. 


SHAMELESSNESS< 

1  ^tQsg^T  >T13  «5Tlt  =Er  ^T^'      Ananyuto  bhata  nauti  ka 

sara. 

-     A  bard  or  Brahman  uninvited  is  like  the   land   of  the 
village  of  Nmtti  (hi  Garhwal). 


(     343     ) 

1.  e.  An  uninvited  Brahman  receives  no  attention  from  the 
people  of  the  feast  just  as  the  land  in  the  village  of  Nauti  is  aKvays 
uncared  for  and  uncultivated  (on  account  of  its  being  too  high  to 
produce  any  thing). 

2  ^rr  hR  5=ir^  ^TST  "^TSI  vf^  '^^r-       Beta  bliari  nal<ha 

kato  hatha  bhari  badho. 

The  nose  though  cut  doicn  to  a  span,  gre.w  to   one  cubit 
length. 

1.  e.  When  one  after  being  reprimanded  or  punished  for  a 
crime  instead  oC  repenting  commits  others  much  worse.  Ibis 
proverb  describes  a  shameless  man,  the  nose  being  regarded  as  a 
seat  of  honour  or  sense  of  shame. 

3  ^^TiT  ^T  ^T^  ^  V^  ^T^T  '^Tll  %h  ik  ^.^  "a^^T*      Be- 

sarama  ka  nakha  men  rukha  jarao  kauna  baitho  ki  shela 
baithunlo. 

A  shameless  person  says  he  will  sit  under  the  shade  of 
the  tree  which  has  grown  on  his  noee. 

This  is  exactly  to  the  same  purpose  as  the  preceding  one.  A 
tree  wrowing  on  one's  nose  is  figuratively  used  of  one  who  has  been 
disf^raced  by  committing  a  sinful  act,  and  regardless  of  the  warn- 
ings or  punishment  given  for  it,  gives  himself  up   to    an    evil   life. 

E.  g.  A  man  once  convicted  of  theft  determines  to  live  in 
future  by  stealing. 

4  5ri7^  ^2'  "^TT  ^IHT  TT1-      Nakha  katai  nama  shobha 
rama. 

After    having  his   nose   ctct   off  calls   himself  Shohhd 
Udma  (i.  e.full  of  grandeur  and  honour). 

Ironically  applied  to  one  who,  after  having  his  character 
tarnished,  puts  on  the  airs  of  a  gentleman.  The  nose  is  considered 
to  be  the  sole  glory  of  the  human  face,  and  a  sense  of  honor,  (as 
represented  by  the  nose )  is-  the  chief  ornament  of  a  man's 
character. 

5  »l^f2  ^1?  ^Sl^J  •IT"'*     Nakati  beti  ujala  nama. 


(     S-41     ) 

A  nose-less  daughter  called  hy  a  good  name. 
The  explanation  given  above  holds  good  here  also. 

6  51^21  ''T^  ^^-l  ^T  ft^RT.      Nakato  nakha  cbandana  ko 

tika. 

One  having  no  rose  adorns   his  forehead  with   a    Tilca 
of  sandal. 

Used  to  denote  that  peoi)Ie  destitute  of  the  sense  of  honour  do 
many  odd  or  pompons  things  to  hide  their  defects.  "Tilca'  here 
means  a  small  dot  of  paint  put  on  one's  forehead  as  an  adornment. 

7  aiT^^T^  ^«T  ^'^T^Sr^T  ^51  ^^^rt«  Sbaramadarakana 

sharama  besharama  kana  dubalai. 

A  good  man   is  ashamed   of  wrong,   but   a  shameless 
person  minds  it  not. 

Caution  against  dealing  with  one  who  is  reckless  and  has  no 
sense  of  shame. 

8  ^■a;^\  ■^\  ^^  iril'':«T   ^t  f^^^t-       Sabana  son  sakl  be- 

sbarama  son  ni  saki 

One  can  conquer  every  one  by   proj^er   reasons    except 
a  shameless  person. 

For  no  arguments  whatever  will  prevail  upon  one  who  is 
devoid  cf  common  sense.  Being  deprived  of  the  sense  of  honor  or 
dishonor,  nothing  in  the  world  can  stop  him  from  doing  anythinor. 

Used  of  shameless  persons. 

9  ^^^  qiT  ^T'ST  ^T^^T-       Khankala  ka  kakha  molaka. 

A  shameless  man's  coat  is  very  loose  in  the  arms. 

£■.  ^^f.  When  one's  coat  is  very  tight  his  movements  are  restricted 
by  it.  A.  careless  shameless  man  who  is  afraid  of  nothing  is  not 
restrained  from  doing  whatever  he  wishes. 

SIMPLETIONO 


•v 


1  ^T^''^  ll!^-     Gobara  Ganesha. 
An  idol  of  Ganesha,  made  of  cotcdung. 


(     345    ) 

Applied  to  a  very  simple  man  who  can  be  moulded  into    any 
form  i.  e.  made  to  do  anything  one  wishes. 


SLANDERERS  AND  WHISPERERS. 

1  '^^^  "BT  ^%  ^^T^t  ♦^  %  ^^*     Bapa  beta  ekai  chhuyalon 

na  khai  maike. 

Father  and  son  being  one,  the  man  icho  tries  to  create 
discord  between  them  is  cursed  (  deserves  to  have  his 
mother  abused  ). 

kana  baithya  mai  ko  jara  bantana  baithya  chulL  ko  chbara. 

One  accustomed  to  slander  will  abuse  his  own  mother  by 
naming  her  paramours,  and  one  accustomed  to  give  will 
not  spare  even  the  ashes  of  his  kitchen. 


3  ^r^  "a^Tf^  'C^  W^'[^  "Kv^  ^S|i«      Sasu  buwari  eka  chbu- 

yala  randa  chbeka. 

Mother-in-law  or  daughter-in-law  are  one,    the   woman 
who  caused  them  to  quarrel  is  cursed. 

C.  f.  "Whisperers  separate  chief  friends." 

4  »TTT^^  liT  ITW  ^W^^  ^^T^^  %J  %  l^f  5T.     Mdranera 

ko  hatba  pakarhanu  bolanera  ko  ke  pakarLanu. 

You  can  catch  the  hand  of  one  who  is  about  to  strike  you, 
but  who  can  seize  the  tongue  of  the  slanderer  ? 

5  arf^^ir  ^r"*  ^T  ^t^T  ^^T^T-     Mariya  syapa  ka  ankha 
kbacborana. 

To  prick  the  eyes  of  a  dead  snake. 

R  2 


(     346     > 

Applied  to  one  wto  slanders  or  insults  an  enemy  who  is  dead 
&r  is  in  distress  or  poverty. 

C.  f.  "To  kick  a  man  when  he  is  down." 


SOCIAL  HABITS  AND  CUSTOMS. 

1  ^57?  ^It  ^^  "n^  ■'fhl  "^^  ^^  ^  ''rnfl'*    -A. wa  balthau 
piwa  pani  tinu  bastu  mola  ni  ani. 

Come,  sit  down,  and  drink  water."  This  invitation 
cest»  nothing. 

Nothing  is  lost  by  a  kind  word. 

2  ssiT^  IrT  ^JT  ftfT  ^^1  'Sf  5BT5T.     Byaba  baira  aura 

prita  samana  son  karanra. 

Marriage  hostility/  and  friendship  ought  to  be  between 
equals. 

The  infringement  of  this  maxim  entails  penalty,  and  so  it 
becomes  the  subject  of  a  proverb.  Natives  generally  attend  to 
equality  in  caste  and  not  in  social  status,  hence  the  hindrance  to 
civilization. 

3  gjf 51  %T  ^31  fft  ■?T%T  ^^'    J^?  jiiso  desha'tan  taso  bbesha. 
One  ought  to  adopt  the  guise  of  the  country   in   which 

he  lives. 

C.  f.  "One  in  Rome  must  do  what  Rome  does." 

Story.  A  man  once  arrived  in  a  foriegn  country  to  visit  a  friend. 
He  enquired  for  the  road  leading  to  his  friend's  house  from  a  boy 
standing  by,  telling  him  that  on  arrival  at  his  host's  house  he 
■would  give  him  plenty  of  sweetmeats.  The  boy  led  him  there. 
The  man  before  entering  his  friend's  house  gave  him  one  rupee 
to  buy  sweetmeats.  The  boy  did  not  accept  it,  saying  that  it  was 
not  enough.  The  man,  for  fear  of  disgrace,  offered  him  five  rupees 
but  still  the  boy  refused,  and  becoming  very  obstinate,  began 
to  quarrel  with  him.  He  was  at  a  loss  what  to  do.  At  last  the 
noise  of  the  quarrel  reached  his  friend,  who  came  out  and  enquired 
into  the  whole  matter,  and  then  told  him  the  proverb,  and  g*ve  him 
advice  adapted  to  the  occasion.  The  man  according  to  his  friend's 
advice  bought  some  sweetmeats  for  one  pice,  and  then  divided 
it  into  two  portions  i.  e.  one  greater  and  the  other  smaller,  putting 
ap  ortion  in  each  hand    he   told   the   boy   to   take   whichever   he 


(    347    ) 

pleased,  tbe  boy  took  ihe  greater  portion   with   satisfaction,  and 
tben  went  away.*' 

4  5^T%T^^^T^7^5^%^^^T^T^.    Jyunda  jog£ 
chaba  chaba  mua  jogi  daba  daba. 

Ajogi  while  alive  is  constantly  munching,  but  when  he 
is  dead  he  is  buried  again  and  again. 

This  is  applicable  only  to  a,  jogi' s  life  ;  for  while  alive  he  is 
in  the  habit  of  eating  as  many  times  as  he  gets  alms,  and  when 
dead  he  is  buried  by  those  of  his  disciples  or  relations  who  are 
present ;  bat  whenever  an  absent  disciple  Or  near  relation  arrives 
at  his  tomb  he  also  according  to  the  custom  adds  earth  to  it  or 
enlarges  the  tomb. 

5  ^t!T  ^T  "^Wl  "'I^W  %T  '^I^I*    Uttara  ko  talo  pachhama 
ko  nalo. 

A.  thin  hot  iron  bar  with  which  infants  are  scorched  on 
their  stomachs  is  called  "Told"  and  a  thin  stream  of  water 
poured  on  the  head  of  infants  is  called  "Ndld." 

This  maxiom  advises  the  application  of  the  "Tala"  (in  the 
north=cold)  and  that  of  the  Nala  (in  the  west=heat)  as  established 
remedies  for  infant  children  against  the  attacks  of  diseases. 

Note.  On  the  occasion  of  the  Bikh  Sankrant  (  festival  held 
at  the  time  when  the  sun  passes  from  one  constellation  into  another  ) 
an  iron  rod  is  heated  and  applied  to  the  navels  of  children  in  order 
to  drive  out  the  poison  (bikh  )  caused  by  windy  colic. 

Vide  Gazeteer  of  N.  W.  P.    Vol  XI.  p.  698j. 

6  ^i!I  ^  ^2Rt  int^^  ^  WT^'n.     Rana  mukha  chhyatri 
tiratha  mukha  brahmana. 

A  Kshatri  in  a  conflict  or  a  Brahman  before  a  shrine 
should  never  turn  his  face. 

This  is  a  maxim  for  persuading  Brahmins  to  visit  shrines  and 
perform  religious  acts  and  to  stimulate  Rajputs  to  go  to  battle. 
It  is  said  that  if  a  Brahmin  refuses  to  visit  a  shrine  or  a  Rajput 
refuses  to  go  to  war  their  faces  should  not  be  looked  upon  by 
others. 

7  TiffI  "^^WT  MlfW  ^HT^T*    Kanti  chalano  bhanti  bolano* 


(     348     ) 

Follow  established  customs  and  speak  in  a  pleasant 
manner  and  to  the  purpose.  "^ 

8  ^51  ^HSFI  11^  'Slt^  «r  ^Tm.     Desha  kano  eka  aukha  le 

chanu. 

One  ought  to   looTc  at   the  country   of  one-eyed  men 
with  only  one  eye. 

C.  f.  "In  Rome  do  as  Eome  does." 
Once  a  man  happened  to  arrive  in  a  village  which  was  peopled 
only  with  noseless  men  (who  had  had  their  noses  cut  off  for  some 
crimes).  No  sooner  had  he  arrived  than  he  was  ironically  addressed 
by  the  nickname  "Nacku'  or  the  man  having  a  nose.  As  the 
stranger  was  obliged  to  stay  there  for  his  livelihood  he  was  con- 
temptuously treated  and  tormented  by  the  villagers  until  he  also 
had  his  nose  cut  ofif. 

9  ^T"!!!  ^  ^r*^''^  TTI'UT  ^  ^^'      Fauna  ki  kbatara  ma- 
gana  hai  paili. 

Courtesy  to  a  guest  before  he  asks  for  it. 

10  ^TTfJi  %T'':  ^T1  ^^%TT  f^^^h     Jogi  aura  syapa  eka 
thaiira  ni  runa. 

A  Fakir  (  an  ascetic  )  and  a  snake  do  not  stay  at  one 
place  constantly. 

This  being  contrary  to  their  natural  habits. 

11  ^ir  f^^J  ^^(^    fT^T  f>Tf  T  ^   ^t^T*      Malo  bhirho 
udhari  tala  bhirha  men  aundo. 

The  wall  of  an  upper  field  comes  down  into   the   lower 
one. 

Used  only  as  as  a  lame  excuse  by  certain  sects  of  inferior 
Rajputs  in  Garhwal  who  keep  the  wives  of  their  deceased  elder 
brothers  as  their  own  without  bringing  any  disgrace  on  their 
families.  The  practice  would  be  considered  as  an  incest  by  people 
of  other  castes,  and  would  degrade  the  culprits. 

Ma  muchi  mauni  phaguna  muchi  gai.   Chaita  muchi  banara 
phala  tipi  kbai. 


(    349     ) 

Bees  after  Md  (  January  )  cows  after  Fhaguna  (  Feb- 
ruary )  and  monkeys  after  Chaita  (  march  )  enjoy  fruits 
well. 

Strictly  speaking  this  is  a  hill  song  but  used  as  a  proverb 
as  well  in  consoling  and  encouraging  one  in  distress,  indicating  that 
one  has  to  suffer  only  for  a  brief  period,  which  is  sure  to  be  follow- 
ed by  plenty  and  pleasure.  Bees  are  hard-up  for  food  for  want 
of  flowers  in  January,  cows  in  February  for  want  of  grass,  and 
monkeys  in  March  for  want  of  fruits.  After  this  period  of  scarcity 
each  has  plenty  of  good  cheer  and  is  happy  and  content. 

Shora  ki  nali  katyura  ko  maDO  jwe  jai  thuli  khasama  jai 

nano. 

The  standard  Ndli  of  Shora  and   the  standard  Mdnd 

of  Katyura  are  here  compared  to  a  wife   and  a   husband 

when  the  former  is  older  than  the  later. 

E.  g.  According  to  the  measure  of  capacity  obtaining  here: — 
4     manas  make  1     nali. 

16     nalis         „  1     pirhai  or  duna. 

20     nalis  „  1     bista. 

20     bistas       „  1     khara  or  khari. 

20     kharis      „  I     biswa. 

The  standard  ndli  in  use  in  Pargana  Shora  (Kamaun  district) 
consists  of  eight  handfuls  of  any  grain,  whereas  the  standard 
Tjwfntf  used  in  Patti  (circle)  Katyura  (Pargana  Danapura  2iil]ah 
Kumaun)  contains  twelve  handfuis.  Thus  the  iiidnd  of  Katyura 
is  larger  than  the  ndli  of  Shora.  Hence  the  people  commenting 
on  the  extraordinary  usage  compare  it  to  an  ill-matched  pair, 
a  grown  up  wife  having  a  minor  as  a  husband.  So  a  "ndli"  ought 
to  be  greater  than  a  "mdnd"  the  latter  being  only  one  fourth  of  a 
ndli.  This  proverb  is  therefore  used  to  denote  things  not  fairly 
matched.  Afdnd  is  also  known  by  the  names  of  "Baik'ara"  "Beld  ' 
or  "  Chhapiya." 

15  <aailf%  %J  mi\  ?i^l-f%  ^r  ^TI-      Khatyarbi  ko  saga 
Gangoli  ko  baga. 

Khatydrhifor  vegetables  and  Gangoli  for  tigers. 


<    850    ) 

The  tigers  in  Gangoli  are  as  common  as  vegetables  in  the 
village  of  Khatyarhi  (almost  the  -whole  town  of  Almora  is  sup- 
plied with  vegetables  by  this  village).  Consequently  the  people  of 
that  part  of  the  district  hardly  dread  the  animal.  Once  hearing 
screams  and  yells  the  neighbours  went  to  see  what  was  the  matter, 
but  finding  that  a  tiger  was  the  only  cause  of  all  the  uproar  they 
regretted  coming  there,  and  said  that  they  thought  that  a  court 
peon  (messenger)  had  arrived,  which  prompted  them  to  go  to  their 
help,  and  that,  if  they  had  known  that  it  was  only  a  tiger  that 
•was  the  cause  of  alarm  they  would  not  have  come.  At  the 
beginning  of  the  British  rule  in  this  province  people  used  to  dread 
a  court  peon  far   more  than    a  tiger. 

16  JSf^m  ♦>  ^T%X  ^TT'SF  %  W^T-      Khasiyd  nai  jarho 
Bamapa  khai  jarho. 

A  Khasiyd  feels  cold  after  bathing,  and  a   Brahman 
after  dinner. 

E.  g.  A  Khasij'a  usually  does  not  bathe  at  all,  but  when  he 
does  so  on  some  festival  or  religious  day  he  feels  very  cold,  being 
Hninured  to  the  practice,  while  a  Brahman  accustomed  to  bathing 
does  not  find  it  troublesome,  but  he  takes  his  meals  after  putting 
off  his  clothes  and  so  when  done  eating  he  feels  cold,  while  a 
Khasiya  (coolie  caste)  who  eats  his  food  with  his  clothes  on,  does 
net  feel  cold. 

47  $TT  %'<-J^  ^n:  "^n  H^S^T  ^fl"  ^^T^«     Shora  harama 
khora  bapa  bharhuwa  betl  maitora. 

Shores  livelihood  is  an  evil   one,  fathers  give   their 
daughters  to  shame. 

The  people  of  Shora,  a  pargana  of  Kamaun,  are  said  to 
prostitute  their  own  daughters,  who  therefore  remain  in  the  paren- 
tal home  (a  great  disgrace  in  India). 

18  %  Ti^  ft^^T  ^^  f^'  ^?-      Kai  randa  diwara  bhauja 
ni  suvrawa. 

Is  she  not  a  cursed  woman  who  does  not  like  her  brother- 
in-law,  and  vice  versa. 

Among  lower  classes  of  Hindus  these  persons  are  allowed 
much  freedom  of  intercourse,  and  hence  such  conduct  is  approved. 


(    351     ) 
SOCIETY, 

1  ^W^  ^f^  ITTT  ^  *^«Jli  ^^^  ^^l^^     Asala  bati  khata 
ni  kamasala  bati  wapba  ni. 

A  noble  man  will  not  play  false  {  betray  )  but  a  mean 
man  will  not  prove  true. 

A  warning  against  friendship  with  the  latter. 

2  ^5|i  WTIET  ^I«  ^3^1^  tT.      Eka  machho  tala  kharaba 
kara. 

A  single  fish  infects  the  whole  tanJe. 
C.  f.   One  sickly  sheep  infects  the  flock. 

3  -^  ^fT  iirf^T  ^f^  *T?^I-     Dudha  bbata  chhorhano 
sanga  ni  cbborhano. 

One  may  give  up  rice  milk,  hut  never  a  companion 
on  the  road. 

A  companion  on  a  journey  is  considered  to  be  a  great 
support. 

4  in%fz  ^ft  ^I  ^  ngqrfx:.    Nakati  devi  ko  padu  pujyari. 

JPadu  is  the  worshipper  of  a  Goddess  who  has  no  nose. 

The  name  "Padu"  signifies  a  mean  or  inferior  person  who  is 
therefore  fit  to  worship  a  goddess  who  has  no  nos,e  fsense  of  shame). 
Worthy  men  have  worthy  companions  and  seryants,  and  unworthy 
men  have  unworthy  companions. 

SOLITARY  MAN, 

Bacbalo  ta  natp  kati  kbalo  ato  maralo  ta  nato  kiriya  na 
kdto. 

One  withQut  afapiily  may  live  to  eat  as  much  food 
(flour  )  as  he  can,  but  tchen  he  dies  no  one  will  perform 
hisfunerq^l  perfmony. 


(     352    ) 

Used  in  ridicule  of  oue  who  is  unmarried  and  has  no  children 
to  urge  him  to  marry. 

2  ^T^t  ^5i  CJlfj"  ^^.     Api  naika  apl  paika. 

Simself  a  master  as  well  as  a  hero  (  servant ). 

E.  g.  A  king  has  an  army  to  fight  with,  and  as  the  head  of 
a  family  has  many  members  of  his  family  to  execute  his  orders.  But 
the  proverb  is  applied  to  a  solitary  man  who  has  neither  family  nor 
servants  to  help  him  in  any  business. 


STOLEN  PROPERTY. 

1  ^T"^  ^r  ^^  f^3f.    Chori  ko  gurha  mitho. 
GurJia  ( treacle  )  obtained  by  theft  is  sweeter. 
C.  f.  "Stolen  waters  are  sweet." 

SUSPICIONS. 

1  ^7^  ^  ^T^T*     Dala  men  kalo. 
Something  blade  in  the  DM. 

{Dal  is  a  pulse  cooked  in  turmeric  etc,  and  eaten  with  rice), 
when  cooked  it  becomes  yellow,  so  the  smallest  speck  of  black  in  it 
is  easily  seen.     Hence  it  means  a  cause  of  suspicion. 

Story.  A  Brahman  being  conscious  of  the  intrigues  and 
stratagems  of  the  other  sex  repaired  to  a  dense  forest  and  began 
to  live  there  quite  concealed  from  every  body.  The  man  used  to 
bring  in  khicliarhi  (  raw  rice  and  dala  mixed  together  )  by  begging, 
and  his  wife  used  to  cook  it  for  herself  and  her  husband.  In  this 
manner  they  lived  for  some  years  there.  One  day  his  wife  instead 
of  the  khicharhi  he  had  brought,  and  against  his  wish,  put  the 
Dala  and  rice,  cooked  separately,  before  her  husband  as  a  dinner. 
This  made  him  suspicious,  and  so  he  said.  "There  is  something 
black  (suspicion^  in  the  Dala."  He  left  the  food  and  went  away. 
Subsequently  by  patient  enquiries  from  the  shepherd-boys,  who 
used  to  graze  their  herds  there,  he  found  out  that  his  wife  was  in 
love  with  a  hermit  fjogi)  living  in  the  same  jungle,  whom  she  used 
to  feed  with  part  of  the  khicharhi  she  used  to  cook  for  herself 
and   her  husband.     And  the   hermit  being   tired   of  the   khicharhi 


(    353    ) 

requested  the  woman  one  day  to  get  hiiii  rice  and  dal  separately.  She 
did  not  hesitate  to  undertake  the  trouble  of  separating  the  rico  from 
the  ddl,a,nd  cooking  them  thus  in  order  to  satisfy  her  paramour. 

Used  to  express  suspicions  rising  from  odd  circumstances 
occurring  in  the  usual  course  of  events. 

2  "^IJIM  %^^  ^^fx:  ^^^        Sau^andha  khaibera  kasturi 

bechani. 

One  who  sells  musk  with  an  oath  as  to  its  genuineness. 

J.  e.  One  who  recommends  himself  or  his  wares  with  sus- 
picious eagerness.  The  scent  of  the  musk  should  be  sufficient  re- 
commendation. 


SYMPATHY, 

1  f^  f^cQ^r  ri]  %r^  lann.     DI  dhityuno  ya  boli  patyunu. 

Either  satisfy  a  man  by  giving   him  something,   or  let 
him  be  assured  {of  future  help)  by  kind  speeches. 

2  ^'^T  %T  ^13  ^r  ^J^      Dusara  ko  dukha  ko  jaaa. 

W^/io  knows  the  pain  of  another  ? 

C.  f.  "None  can  feel  the  weight  of  another's  burden."  "The 
heart  knoweth  its  own  bitterness  and  no  man  intermeddleth  with 
its  joy." 

3  %rr  IT  ^]  rTT.     Jo  mara  so  tara. 
A  dead  man  has  passed  over  pains. 

Used  to  console  the  relatives  of  the  one  who  is  dead. 

4  yi%  ^T.  m  %  '»TtTT  ^31^  ^^■^^  ^rf«»     -Eka  ghara  ka 
nau  mata  kushala  kan  bati  boli. 

A  household  which  is  governed  by  nine  (  dijfferent  )  opi. 
nions  will  not  thrive. 

S  2 


(     354     ) 

Used  by  members  of  a  family  when  one  of  them  dissents 
from  another  in  regard  to  domestic  affairs,  in  order  to  bring  them 
to  understand  that  disagreement  among  themselves  is  a  sure  sign 
of  their  impending  ruin. 

C.  f.  "A  house  divided  against  itself  cannot  stand.'' 

3  »Tn  TU\^1  f^^^I  ^^7?  "^ffW  lt%.      Ganwa  egala  bigala 

rita  bha'nta  ekai. 

Villages  are  scattered  here  and  there,  but  the  customs 
and  manners  of  all  are  the  same  (  i.  e.  they  are  in  similar 
circumstances.  ) 

Used  to  induce  the  people  to  help  and  sj-mpathize  with  others 
in  matters  that  affect  the  general  welfare. 

6  '^7^7  f%  f^  "'^r  ^  ^"^r  f%  f*JTt:T  s^.    Bala  ki  ni  marau 
mai  budha  ki  ni  marau  jwe. 

May  the  mother  of  an  infant  child,  and  the  wife  of 
an  old  man  not  die  (  otherwise  no  one  loill  take  care 
of  them) . 

These  events  render  them  helpless. 

7  161  ST  ■^TT  '^  '^^T  ^2T   •^-       Chhoto  badhau  nai  barho 

ghatau  nai. 

May  a  mean  man  not  he  in  'power  {for  he  will  do  mean 
things  ),  and  a  great  man  not  come  to  poverty  (^otherwise  he 
will  svffer  bitterly). 

TEMPTATION^ 

1  'fT'lt  ^T  ^^  ^^^m  IT  f^lt  ^T  3lT:»r  ^l^^.     Handi  ko 

mukha  khulo  chha  para  billi  ko  sliarama  chahenda. 

The  mouth  of  the  pot  is  open,  but  the  cat  ought  to  have 
some  sense  of  shame. 

The  good  man  will  often  be  tempted,  but  he  should  obey 
his  conscience  and  resist  evil.  C.  f.  "An  open  door  will  tempt 
a  saint." 


(    355     ) 

2  m^l  ^aillT  f^ZJ^  ^TH'     Jutho  khano  mitha  ka  lobba. 
One  eats  the  leavings  of  another  person  in  the  hope  of 
finding  some  thing  sweei  therein 

Men  will  condescend  to  do  mean  things  for  the  sake  of  gain. 

THIEVES,  PICKPOCKETS  &  BAD  CHARACTERS. 

1  ^fT  %\  ^T%  »l3^5r      Chora  ko  sakhi  gathakato. 
A  thief  calls  a  pickpoclcet  as  his  witness. 

Applied  to  the  combination  of  wicked  persons. 

2  %rT  f^  'ISIt:  ^frt^j  5f.      Chora  ki  nazara  bogacha  men 
A  thief's  eye  is  on  the  baggage. 

I.  e.  Waiting  for  an  opportunity  to  take  it  away. 
Applied  to  a  wicked  man  who  waits  for  an  opportunity  to  put 
his  evil  plans  into  execution. 

3  ^f''^  '^^  ^^T  ^"["^  51T  5|^T«    Chora  chara  cbaro  jara  jara 

jaro. 

A  thief  loses   his   temper,  and  a   paramour   becomes 
indignant. 

I.  e.  Both  try  to  hide  their  crimes  under  a  mask  of  apparent 
innocence. 

4  %j^  $f  ^rfr  ^fT«T  ^%'     Hatha  men  cbori  sarina  sacbo. 

The  stolen  property  in  his  hand,  but  the   thief  says   he 
is  an  honest  man. 

Applies  to  persons  who  try  to  hide  their  sins  and  crimes. 

5  ^IT  ^fx:  ^*T«B  SITX:  Wi\T.  ^Jefi.      Chora  cbora  sanka  jara 
jara  sanka. 

All  thieves  are  real  brothers,  and  so  are  all  paramours. 

This  is  applied  to  ail  bad   characters   as    being    unworthy    of 
Bny  trust.      C.  f.  "Birds  of  a  feather  flock  together.'' 


(    356    ) 

6  ^JK  ?^'S5TT  rijx  W^V^  ^ft  ^fK  11^  ^J^JX;.      Warn 

khandwara  para  khandwara  teri  ineri    eka  anwara. 
Huin  here,  rum  there,  you  and  I  have  similar  faces. 

1.  e.  You  are  ruined  and  I  am  ruined  four  character  is  stained) 
and  EC  we  are  in  the  same  box.     Union  of  bad  characters. 

halo  baga  le  lala  khaba  ni  kbai  baga  le  lalai  khaba. 

The  tiger's  mouth  is  red    whether  he  eats   animal  food 
or  not. 

Used  to  denote  those  who  have  tarnished  their  character,  for 
they  are  always  taken  for  criminals,  without  any  regard  toYacts, 

THINGS  IN  WHICH  ONE  HAS  NO  CONCERN. 

1  gf^  ^  «!  ^m  g.     Tuli  mu  na  kaina  mu. 

Neither  scales  nor  weights  . 

An  unfit  or  insignificant  person,  or  one  who  has  no  concero 
•with  the  matter  in  hand. 

2  ^^T  SITT  ii^T  ^}^  ^T^-      Kaiko  byau   kaika  ankhog 
dau. 

Whose  marriage  and  who  got  pain  in  his  eyes. 

Who  share  the  marriage  feast  and  who  get  pain  in  the  eyes'. 
People  who  are  simply  spectators  of  a  marriage  get  nothing  but 
aching  eyes. 

Used  when  one  gets  trouble  from  an  affair  iu  which  he  was 
not  concerned, 

TRUST  IN  PROVIDENCE. 

1  'TTT^T  ^  ^It  '^^.     Parmesbwar  ki  Iambi  banba. 

God's  arm  is  long  (  either  to  punish  or  to  help  ^. 

/.  e.  He  is  might}'  to  accomplish  anything  that  seems  im- 
possible to  a  man.  One  already  ruined  or  in  distress  draws  hope 
frorrj  this  phrase,  which  is  also  used  in  encouraging  or  consolinor 
one  in  poor  circumstances,  so  that  he  m&y  have  patience  in  distress 
and  trust  in  the  mercy  of  God  for  better  days. 


(     357     ) 

2  ^afrr  ^ZT  ^f^  ^^^  XTT.    Khawaya  beta  kani  dewaya 
rama. 
A  voracious  eater  is  fed  by  God. 

This  means  that  God  supplies  the  wants  of  every  ereature  ia 
the  world. 

TRUTH  AND  SINCERETY. 

1  VIX  5»  ^T  %r^  ^Tf  %T  ^JJT'^T^-      Yarana   so  chorf 
pirana  so  dagabaji. 

Concealing  things  from  friends,  and  acting  deceitfully 
with   one's  elders. 

2  ^  ^J?^^?!  ^t  ^I  ^^rf.     Jai  mun  n£  sata  ui  ko  nl  pata. 

The  man  in  whom  there   is  no   truth   cannot  be  trusted. 
Monest  and  truthful  persons  are  trusted  hj  every  one. 

3  ^I^  ^  epjj  ^7^.     Sancha  men  kya  ancha. 
There  is  no  danger  in  the  truth. 

This  is  used  in  encouragino;  one  to  speak  the  truth  and  act 
truthfully^for  his  own  safety.  C.  f.  "The  wicked  fleeth  when  no 
man  pursueth,  but  the  righteous  are  as  bold  as  a  lion."  "Tell  the 
truth  and  shame  the  devil." 

Illustration.  During  the  reign  of  native  princes  various 
crimes  against  the  person  were  tried  by  means  oi"I)ipa"  a  red  hot 
iron  ball.  If  any  body  was  accused  of  such  a  crime  his  innocency 
had  to  be  tried  by  his  taking  the  red  hot  iron  ball  in  his  hand  with 
seven  green  leaves  of  the  pipala  (ficus  religiosa),  the  holj-  fig  treCj  be- 
neath it,  and  then  going  round  the  parties  and  people  where  they 
had  stopped.  If  this  ordeal  did  not  scorch  the  palm  of  the  accused 
he  would  be  acquitted  of  the  charge,  and  considered  innocent.  Ia 
case  the  ball  scorched  his  hand  the  accused  had  to  be  punished  for 
the  crime,  and  was  made  to  pay  compensation  to  the  aggrieved 
party.     Hence  the  proverb  says  that  truth  does  not  barm. 

4  ^'T'ft  «iT^^  ^J^  ^^«      Sanclii  bolanu  sulcLi  rauno. 


(    358    ) 
One  who  speaks  truth  remains  in  peace. 

C.  f.  "Lying  lips  are  abomination  to  the  Lord  ;  but  they  that 
deal  truly  are  bis  delight." 

5  \\  TfTT  ^T^^I  Hl^r*     Pau  rati  bauna  tola. 
One  fourth  of  a  Rati  is  equal  to  fifty -ttco  Tolas. 

E.  g.  There  are  thirteen  mdshds  in  a  Told,  and  eight  Ratis  in 
a  Mdshd.    (Two  grains  make    a  Rati). 

A  hyperbolical  expression  denoting  that  a  genuine  unadul- 
terated article,  though  small,  is  worth  more  than  a  spurious  one 
valued  at  fifty-two  Tolas,  or  that  the  smallest  thing  if  it  is 
genuine  is  equal  to  fifty-two  tolas,  i.  e.  has  its  own  excellence 
or  worth. 

6  ^^  •^T'gr  (%  "i^T^T  f%  ^T'^r  "^"^^  2^  ^^^  '»%•    Eka  bacha 
dwi  bacha  tri  bacba  bacbana  tale  naraka  parhe. 

I  give  my  word   once,  twice,  and  the  third  time.     If  I 
break  it  I  incur  the  punishment  of  hell. 

Used  as  an  oath  to  assure  another  that  he  will  be  faithful  to 
his  word. 

7  TTTI  3i«}TSi.     Imana  jubana. 

Honesty  and  one's  word  {ought  to  be  kept  true ). 
Used  to  induce  one  to  act  up  to  his  words. 

8  ^^  ^JW  H^  ■^'JTi^r-     Kbasa  kbano  bhasa  bulano. 
Eat  what  you  get  and  speak  lohat  you  think. 

Do  not  be  fastidious,  and  speak  the  truth. 

UNANIMITY- 

1  i^TfT  ij^  f^  ^sslt  im  3!fai%T%r*fi.       SatapancLaki 
lakari  eka  jani  ko  bojba. 

When  five  or  six  persons  gather  each  one  stick  it  makes 
a  load  for  one  man.     (  "every  little  helps"  ). 

C  f.  "Union  is  strength," 


(    359    ) 

^  ^  ^T^  TT  ^  ^^  ^rfif      Dui  rajf  ta  ke  kara  kaji. 
If  two  are  agreed  they  have  no  fear  of  the  cadi  ^magistrate  ) . 

"Union  is  strength." 

para  dhanusha  hatha  me  bana  kahan  se  aj^e  Dilli  sulatana. 
Bana  ke  Eawa  bikata  ke  Rana  ankhara  barhe  ko  barhe  ne 
pahachydna. 

Saving  a  bow  (  plough  )  on  your  shoulder  and  an  arrow 
(a  stick  to  drive  btdlocks  with  )  in  your  hand,  where  do 
do  you  come  from  O,  Emperor  of  Delhi  ?  0,  Lord  of 
jungles  and  master  of  opportunity  you  are  a  great  person- 
age.    Take  me  also  for  a  great  one. 

Used  of  wicked  and  mean  unions. 

Once  in  a  narrow  ravine  a  fox  unexpectedly  met  a  plough- 
man. Having  no  opportunity  to  run  away,  and  fearing  that  he 
■would  bo  beaten  or  killed  by  the  ploughman,  the  fox  bfgan  to  flatter 
him,  as  in  the  first  half  of  the  proverb,  but  the  ploughman  at  the 
same  time  was  also  frightened  at  sight  of  the  fox,  taking  him  for  a 
tiger,  and  flattered  him  as  in  the  third  verse  of  the  same.  Thus 
each  of  them  passed  on  their  way  unhurt.  But  at  this  moment  an- 
other man  who  bad  observed  the  scene  ironically  uttered  the 
fourth  verse,  i.  e.     A  great  man  discerns  a  great  man. 

4  ^TSTT  ^  ^^T^T-     Sona  men  suhago. 
Sorax  in  the  gold. 

Borax  unites  well  with  gold. 

Used   to  describe   unions    when    both    parties    have    good 
qualities. 

5  ^T^T  ^T^t  ^  'I'B  Wf{*    Kala  kalon  ki  eka  jata. 
All  blacks  are  of  one  caste. 

Applicable  to  the  union  of  wicked  persons. 
C.  f.  "Birds  of  a  feather  flock  together." 


(    360    ) 

6  mit  ^WW  5)T^  TrT  5ffl«T  ^^I^-      Kuti  jugata  jaifhl 
puta  jugata  buwari. 

A  hoe  suited  to  its  handle,  and  a  son  fit  for  the  daughter- 
in-law, 

A  good  match. 

UNAVOIDABLE  EXPENSES  &  THINGS. 

1  ^  fli  W^T  ^Z  fh  f^^I?!«      Munda  ki  mundai  gliata 
ki  pisai. 

The  shaving  of  one's  head  and  the  grinding  of  one's  corn 
fmmt  be  paidforj. 

This  is  applied  to  denote  expenses  which  are  unavoidably 
necessary.  A  man  who  does  not  pay  for  his  shaving  will  become 
a  barber  in  the  next  birth. 

2  iTT^  ^  %  'iR  s^.     Marl  kelai  sasa  ni. 

Wliy  did  you  die?     Because  I  had  no  breath. 
Applied  to  one's  being  unable  to  do  a  thing. 

UNCERTAINTY  OF  LIFE  &  WORLDLY  THINGS. 

1  ^I^5T^  ^T^^.    Akasha  ka  phala. 

The  fruits  of  heaven  (may  or  may  not  come  down.) 

Used  to  denote  uncertainty  of  success  in  a  case  which  is  in 
the  hands  of  another  person,  in  whom  one  has  no  confidence. 

2  ^T  ^f^«l  ^T  s^r*     ^au  kwanrina  ko  by  a. 

The  marriage  of  nine  virgins. 

E  g.  The  marriage  of  a  single  girl  takes  a  considerable  time 
in  selecting  bridegroom  for  her,  and  then  arranging  for  the  mar- 
riage, notwithstanding  objections  brought  forward  by  relatives  of 
both  parties  who  wish  to  cancel  the   arrangement  made.     Thus   of 


(   361    ; 

course  the  marriage  of  nine  maidens  must  take  a  considerably  \ang 
time.     Used  to  denote  great  delay  and  uncertainty. 

3  ^^yq  ^TT^  %I''C  %J  ^I^-     Awa  ko  nawa  cbora  ko  sahu. 
:  The  (serviceable)  boat  is  called  Ndiva,  and  the  thief 

gets  the  title  of  sahu  {good  man). 

l^dwa  means  a  boat,  but  is  in  form  the  negative  of  Awa  which 
nreans  honor  and  blessing  ;  so  that  a  boat  which  is  really  a  useful 
thing  is  by  its  name  said  to  be  the  opposite  of  a  good  thing.  Sdhu 
means  a  rich  and  honest  man,  but  is  a  title  given  to  Baniyds  who 
are  notorious  for  their  false  dealings. 

Good  things  are  called  bad,  and  bad  things  good  by. the 
world. 

4  ^'!!f%^'nl%.     Swipa  ki  sampatti. 

Wealth  of  a  dream. 

Applied  to  one's  life  and  possession,  and  other  short-lived 
things. 

5  fwfTTTT  %1  ^^  ^  ^^l-     Tirira  ka  mukba  ki  lakshndi. 

•   Wealth  in  the   mouth  of  a  partridge   {very  difficult 
to  get ). 

E.  g.  Titird  is  a  very  shy  kind  of  partridge  which  flies  away 
o6  the  least  alarm,  and  one  cannot  expect  it  to  chirp  its  notes  just 
when  we  wish  it. 

Used  by  one  who  is  very  uncertain  of  success  which  depends 
on  the  judgment  or  discretion  of  another  (a  judge  etcj  who  is  not 
be  cajoled  or  influenced  by    any  means. 

6  fk^  ^,'%  ^  %^r    I^V-        Chhina  gharhi  me  kaiko  • 
p^haro. 

After  this  moment  whose  turn  conies  next.  ?  .  . 

.  Utter  uncertainty  as  to  what  will   ha.ppen  in    the   immediate 
fataro. 

C.  f  "After  that— the  Deluge." 

'7  517^^  ^  5J^.5»IT  ^-     Naukari  ki  jarha  dhunga  me. 
"^  T  2 


f     362     ) 

The  root  of  service  is  on  a  stone. 

1.  e.   It  may  wither  at  any  time. 

Applied  to  its  instability,  uncertainty  of  duration. 

8  ^g  ^7  ^^  ^J^'^  ^r  TI^^.      Aila  ko  maisa  pachhiya 
ko  rakasa. 

A  man  now,  but  a  ghost  this  evening. 

Applies  to  the  uncertainty  of  life.  A  man  now  livino;  may 
Le  found  dead  in  the  evening.  C-  f-  "Death  keeps  no  calendar." 
"Here  to-day  and  gone  to-morrow." 

9  wf  ■<Ti'%  ^ffT      Pau  tali  mauta. 
DeatJi  lurks  under  one's  foot. 

Uncertainly  of  life. 

10  ^r(%iTiJir5r«!JST^f^5ilii^I'-     Eaukljagadhanadhana 
ki  jaga  lau. 

Sand  in  place  of  pools,  and  pools  in  place  of  sand. 

The  transient  nature  of  worldly  goods. 

€.  f.  "Boast  not  thyself  of  tomorrow  ;  for  thou  knowest  not 
■what  a  day  may  bring  forth. 

11  yjT^T  ^T  f^"!  I^IT  ^T  1T^      Dhara  ma  ko  dina  gala  , 

ma  ko  gasa. 

The  sun  on  the  ridge  of  a  hill  and  a  morsel  in  the  throat 
will  both  soon  disappear. 

Applied  to  short-lived  things,  or  to  those  who  have  but  a 
short  time  to  continue. 

12  ti^^r  ^  •FT'JT  ^^  ^  WTir      Purusha  kl  maj^a  briksha 

ki  cbbaj'a. 

Tfealth   lasts    as    long   as  a  fortunate  man  lives,  like 
the  shadow  of  a  tree  which  disappears  with  its  removal. 

The  transient  nature  of  a  man's  wealth  or  prosperity  which 
disaprpears  with  his  life.'  Anything  amassed  by  him  for  the  use 
of  his  posterity  is  squandered  by  his  sons. 


(    363     ) 

■    13.  ^7  -rfts  f^fif  TTT  ff^*     Jan  taka  nibhi  tan  taka. 

A  man  should  go  on  as  long  as  he  can. 

1.  e.  Every  one  ought  to  take  advantage  of  his  opportunities, 
and  retain  his  advanta<fes  as  long  as  he  can  in  view  of  the  uncer- 
tainty of  world!}'  things. 

A  story  is  related  in  connection  with  this  saying. 

Once  a  rich  Hindu,  wishing  to  gain  merit  and  sahation,  em- 
ployed a  number  of  Brahmans  to  repeat  ^'Mantras"  or  invocations 
of  the.  divine  name  from  the  Shasti'as.  Having  secured  the  services 
of  several  Brahmans,  he  seated  them  in  a  row  before  himself  to 
begin  their  ^^Japa"  or  iuvo:ations,  which  are  repeated  thousands 
of  times  in  a  low  voice.  Among  the  Brahmans  was  an  illiterate 
poor  Brahman  who  was  anxious  to  se'care  the  fee,  but  had  no 
knowledge  of  the  Vedic  scriptures.  However,  having  already  en- 
gaged himself  for  the  sacred  service  and  seated  in  the  row  with 
others  concerned,  he  at  first  felt  himself  at  a  loss  how  to  behave  in 
this  difficult  position,  but  having  no  alternative  fas  he  was  too  pru- 
dent to  confess  that  he  did  not  know  the  Sanscrit  verse  which  was 
being  repeated^  he  at  last  began  to  encourage  himself  by  muttering 
the  above  proverb  in  a  low  tone  (for  during  all  this  tiuie  he  was  in  cons- 
tant fear  and  trembling  lest  his  ignorance  should  be  found  out,  with 
the  risk  of  his  being  expelled  from  the  companyj.  Meanwhile  his 
client  and  others  thought  that  he  was  performing  the  work  assigned 
to  him.  Afterwards  he  acknowledged  the  ruse  to  a  friend,  who  in- 
formed the  rich  man.  The  latter,  instead  of  being  angry,  declared 
thit  the  saying  was  a  very  good  on«,  and  applicable  to  every  con- 
dition of  life. 

UNGRATEFULNESS. 

1  ^^  I'Slf^  TR%  SI^^T^*      Meri  nathuli  mai  ku  nakha 
chaula. 

Jffi/  own  nose-ring  sneers  at  me. 

This  is  applied  by  a  mother  to  her  own  daughter  when  she 
"becomes  proud  and  turns  up  her  nose  at  her  after  having  been 
married  into  a  rich  family  ;  or  to  a  woman  to  whom  the  nose-rinc 
has  been  lent,  and  who  is  vain  of  herself  although  wearinor  a 
borrowed  nose-ring.     Also  to  a  student  who  disdains  his  teacher. 

2  ^T3J  ^T  f^^^  ^  "^If  ^,%5IT  ^r  f^^T  ^K  m]%     Aja  ko 
dinera  ji  rayai  beliya  ko  dinera  maiMJayai. 


Zetihe  m&n  who  gives  me  to-day  live  loiigy  but  let.  the 
one  loho  gave  me  yesterday  die. 

Ingratitude. 

3  fat^TT  ^T  ■^'^fT  ^ffT^r  5RT  1»1<3I  W^«      Shikara   ta 
bakhata  kutiya  kana  hagana  lagi. 

The  bitch  in  the  chase  wants  to  ease  herself. 

Used  of  one   who  has  been  fed  and  maintained  for   years,  but 
,  when  his  services  are  needed  maeks  some  excuse, 

4  ^^JTr  '^'^r^  ''^  ^^T'lt  ^^T'      Tela   ma  dubawa  para 
rukho  hi  rukho. 

After  being  bathed  in  oil  he  is  still  found  s(iff\ 
A  most  ungrateful  person. 

5  ^15  <3T?!^  ^'S  ^■'^T'^'  Luna  kbaika  luiia  haramf . 

One  who  eats  another's  salt  to  ruin  him 

Once  a  man  while  reposing  on  his  bed  at  night  asked  his  ser- 
vant to  go  and  see  whether  it  was  raining.  The  servant  instead  of 
.  obeying  the  order  said  that  it  was  (without  going  out  of  the  doorj 
-for  he  had  just  seen  that  the  claws  of  a  cat  were  wet.  The  master 
remarked  his  conduct  and  remained  silent  on  that  occasion.  On 
another  occasion  the  same  servant  was  told  to  put  out  the  lamp,  on 
which  he  said  to  his  master,  "Sir,  it  is  needless  to  da  so,  you 
should  close  your  eyes  and  sleep."  Though  this  exasperated  th& 
jinaster  he  nevertheless  kept  silent.  After  this  one  night  the  master 
encamped  in  a  field,  below  which  there  was  a  deep  precipice.  The- 
master  after  taking  his  evening  meal  went  to  bed,  and  told  tho 
servant  to  shampoo  his  legs.  (As  customary  among  the  well-to  do 
men  in  camp).  The  servant  at  first  sat  by  the  feet  of  the  gentle- 
man to  do  the  work,  but  after  having  placed  his  master's  luggage 
near  his  feet  quietly  withdrew  from  the  place,  and  seated  himself 
at  a  distance.  The  man  repeatedly  called  on  bis  servant  to  rub 
his  feet,  but  the  servant  did  not  reply  to  his  calls.  He  then 
thought  that  tho  servant  was  asleep  near  his  feet  ;  mistaking  tho 
packet  for  the  servant  and  remembering  iiis  former  ill-conduct  and 
words  intending  to  kick  the  servant  he  gave  a  kick  to  tho  packet 
and  threw  it  down  the  precipice.  After  this  the  servant  quietljc 
deserted  his  master,  leaving  him  alone  without  any  property^ 


•f     365     ) 

6  ^iT  iRf^  Tpf,  ^r»T  f^^X  ^f^  "WfTf  •fr*T.       Suma  kani  eka 

nama  dinera  kani  bhauta  nama. 

TJie  miser  is  only    blamed  once  {for  being  a  miser)  but 
a  munificent  person  many  times. 

The  recipients  of  a  generous  man's  Lounty  are  often  dis- 
satisfied in  various  ways. 

Used  by  one  who  is  troubled  by  beggars  for  more  alms. 

7  ^  17flf%  ^  ^TTWI  tt^  5^*1  «BTH.      Jai  patali  me  khano 

*  vl 

W'i  me  chhina  karanu. 

He  destroys  the  leaf  from  which  he  eats. 

Poor  people  in  villages  generally  take  their  food  on  leaves 
Bewn  together,  instead  of  on  dishes,  if  one  pierces  or  tears  the 
leaves,  the  food  (especially  fluid  food)  is  lost 

Applied  to  an  ungrateful  person. 

8  %^  ^?;  %x\^  %J  ta^r  %•      Kbai  p£  bera  ye  randi  ko 
khato  dai. 

After   eating    and    drinking     my    curds   you  say  they 
were  sour. 

Used  by  a  woman  who,  after  having  rendered  long  and  good 
services,  is  at  last  rejected  on  the  ground  of  some  pretended  fault. 

UNREQUITED  AFFECTION. 

1  ^  »tPJ  ^jxkX  ^1\W:  ^l^m  "^X  ^TT  ^t-      Mai  jhurun 
yara  son  yara  jhura  apana  gharabara  son. 

I  long  for  my  lover,  who  longs  for  Ms  own  family. 
■Said  to  one  who  loves  those  who  do  not  care  for  him. 

2  »TTTT^'^f'^^T?5lTTf  sU^TTf^T^TliT.    Ma  rowa 
dhi  ku  dhl  rowa  jara  ku  jara  rowa  gharbara  ku. 

The  mother  cries  for  her  daughter,  the  daughter    for  hev 
paramour,  and  the  paramour  for  his  oicn  family. 
Unrec[aited   affection. 


(    866     ) 

USEFULNESS. 

^^if  ^r^T  *r%^  ^r^  Ghara  men  gborho  matti  men 
mola. 

A  pjmy  in  the  stable,  and  manure  in   cne's  field. 
Will  both  be  of  much  use.     Always  serviceable. 

2  ^J^rTT  ^I  'SII  ^'t^T  f^  ^T1«     Sagxvarba  ko  saga  age  la 
ki  aga. 

The  vegetable  of  fields  dose  to  one's  house,  and  the  fire  in 
the  flint  and  steel  fare  always  at  hand  ). 

Applied  to  their  usefulness. 

3  gf%  ■^}^  %  1l.'%??T^  V^T-     Wtidyala  hal  padyala  bhalo. 

The  stranger,  who  is  of  vse  to  me,  is  better  than  the 
person  with  whom  I  have  collateral  interests  or  whose 
boundaries  affect  my  lands. 

E.  g.  One  is  liable  to  have  friction  with  the  latter,  while  he 
is  safe  in  dealing  with  the  former. 

4  ^  (SjTT  f%'^f%^«     Ghyu  giro  klucbarlu  men. 
The  Ghi  has  fallen  into   the  Khicharlii. 

E.  g.  Kldcharhi  consists  of  two  parts  of  rice  and  one  part  of 
dala  (pulse)  cooked  together.  It  is  delicious  when  eaten  with 
.Ghi  mixed  with  it.  If  GId  by  chance  falls  into  the  food  it  makea 
it  better.      Hence  the  point  of  proverb. 

Applies  to  a  loss  which  results  in  some  good  thing. 

C.  /.  "All  the  fat's  in  the  frying-pan  now." 

5  f5»%^   %  ^^   %J  ^"mxj.      KI  maisa  liai  kuraaisa  ko 
asaro. 

In  a  place  where  there  is  no  one,  even  the  presence  of  a 
had  man  (  not  fit  for  one's  society  )  is  a  suppoH  in  a 
journey  through  a  desert. 

C.  f.  Something  is  better  than  nothing. 


f    367     ) 

6  iBI'lt^^^  f^^  ^Tt  5Jt  (^WIi  ^ITH  ^lt»   Kdlf  kanbala 
kucbal  joi  jaa  bichhai  uttama  hoi. 

JBlack  blanket  and  dirly  loife  are  the  best  for  uss  everif 
where. 

Applies  to  usefulness  of  things  without  any  regard  to  their 
beauty. 

7  %f?T  ^Tf%  ^T  ^'^  ^Tf%f  m-       Klieti  ball  dyo  ghara  ball 
ban. 

It  rains  after  the  tillageis  spoiled  (for  want  of  rain  )atid 
the  bride  after  splitting  the  house  (becomes  useful). 

J.  e.  As  soon  ns  a  mail  is  married  he  is  separated,  na  a 
married  man,  from  his  parents  (house- hold '.  The  rain  is  wished 
for,  but  comes  at  the  wrong  time  or  inconveniently,  yet  afterwards 
■will  be  useful  ;  so  in  the  house  a  young  wife  causes  sorrow  at  first 
(to  her  husband)  but  afterwards  joy. 

8  ^nft  V  ^^X  5iT^  %7  fJ^m^.      lihani  ko  pathara  jati 
ko  manakbl. 

Stone  from   a  quarry  and  a  man  from  a  good  family. 
Showing  the  advantage  of  good  descent. 

USELESSNESS. 

1  ^sifr^T  ^Z  ^\  Ml  IZ^r-     Anyara  pata  ka  bhaun  mafca- 
ka. 

Making  signs  with  one's  eye-brows  in  the  dark. 

This  is  quoted  of  one  who  is  doing  any  thing  uselessly.  "A 
•wink  is  asgood  as  a  nod  to  a  lllnd  horse." 

2  ^Ti!?!  TI^I-     Aranya  rod  an  a. 
Crying  in  the  jungle  is  not  heard. 

Saying  or  doing  what  will  have  no  effect. 


f     368     ) 

-3  ^t^  ^^^  ^rf^^  ^r  f%^I^'      Bansa  diibana  poryun  kc> 

Lisaba. 

If  the  whole  hamhoo  goes  down,  lohat  is  the  use  of  counting 
the  knots  ? . 

Bamboos  are  used  in  measurint;  the  depth  of  water,  etc. 
VI.  g.  If  a  man  is  losing  the  whole  of  his   property    what   is 
the  use  of  troubling    about  small  pai'ts  of  it  ? 

4  ^T"?t  «6T  'Sf'^  'TSi  %tj  '^f^^T'     Dhaurhi  ka  upara  munja 

ko  bakbiya. 

Dhaurhi  {inferior  and  cheap  kind  of  leather)  sewn 
neatly  and  carefidly  with  Miwja  {in  the  way  in  which 
good  leather  ought  to  be  sewn). 

E.  g.  Much  labor  spent  on  a  worthless  object.     A  poor  man 
sum])tuously  dressed  in  a  manner  unsuited  to  his  circumstances. 
"No  man  putteth  a  piece  of  new  cloth  on  an  old  garment." 

o  ^^3«ot  ^T^^  ^T^T  'It^'?  ^^'flT  ^Rfll^t  '^JZ\  #5^  ^T* 
Dekbani  darsani  daba  si  cbbarba  karana  kamuna  son  ata 
ki  si  larba. 

To  look  at  a  very  heautiftd  woman,  like  a  reed  of  ddbd, 
{a  kind  of  long  grass  that  flowers  in  September),  Intt  for 
usefulness  or  worth  like  a  string  of  paste. 

Applied  to  a  lazy  woman,  more  ornamental  than  useful. 

6  «|J5!  5«!T5l  'S1'!I  ^T^«     Naja  ku  naja  dumana  moti. 
The  grain  is  had,  and  the  woman  is  a  fat  and  strong 

Dumani  (  a  low  caste  woman). 

These  are  of  no  use.     Applied  to  a  useless  person. 

7  %f^  xn-|%  frl^  TTfni  <5'^g^%T  ^'T'ar  fTT^.     Jaikl  rani' 
taiki  rani  kbankala  rayo  ankha  tani. 

S/ie  is  the  queen  of  somebody  or  otkcr^  but  n  wicked 
man  fixed  his  eyes  on  her. 

Caution  aganist  looking  at  another's  wife. 


(    369    ) 

8  ?7«FT  ^m  ^^  fqfT  ZZV  %  2Zrr.      Tatuwa  khaya 
batuwa  pliira  tntuwa  ko  tatuwa. 

A  pony  after  eating  up  a  purse  of  money  is  still   only 
a  pony. 

Caution  against  spending  money  uselessly  and  to  no  purpose. 

9  n^TU  "^g  ^tx.^  fi'iM'      Pakayun  anna  maiiyun  man- 

aklii. 

Coolccdfood  and  a  dead  man  (  should  be   disposed  of 
quickly  or  else  they  wilt  rot). 

10  f^^PJT  %r  Tf  r  ^«T  1  ^^T*     Simala  ko  harho  sukho  na 

Barho. 

The  trunk  of  the  Simal  tree,  silk  cotton  tree   {JBombax 
heptaphyllum)  neither  dry  nor  rotten. 

Thi.s  is  applied  to  one  disliked  for  his  being  l.izy  and  use- 
less.    Tlie  useless  man  neither  does  Lis  work  nor  dies. 

11  ^iFT  ^T 'J^T'     Lanka  ko  &uno. 

Gold  at  Lanka  {Ceylon). 

It  is  snpj  osed  th;it  the  earth  of  Ceylon  is  all  gold  dust  which 
to  one  who  is  not  there  is  useless,  for  it  is  out  of  his  reiich.  Plence 
the  point  of  the  proverb  apj>lied  to  a  thing  which,  though  it  is 
his  own,  is  out  of  reach  at  the  time  he  needs  it.  C.  f.  ''Like  the 
Datchinan's  anchor." 

12  MfKTij  ^^T  m[  ^^  Jit!I«lT-      Mariya  cnela  ka  barsa 
ganana. 

To  count  the  age  of  a  son  who  is  dead. 

Used  when  one  occupies  himself  with  things  that  have  passed 
teyond  control  or  are  out  of  his  reach. 

C.  /.  "It  is  no  use  crying  over  spilt  milk." 

13  ^if^  'gf^^  "5/%  ^Jr{X'     Khali  khassiya  budhi  patar^i. 

"*  U  2 


(     370   .) 

A  Khassiyd  without  employ,  and  an   old  harlot,   are 

useless. 

Spoken  to  a  useless  person   with   a   view    to   goad    him   to 
industry. 

14  ^TO  «R^11^t  "^ITf^  ^-      Hatha  kankana  son   arasi 
ke. 

2^0  looking  glass  is  needed  for  putting  on  bangles. 

No  further  proof  is  necessary. 

"Clear  as  a  pikestaff."     "Plain  as  the  nose  on  one's  face." 

15  ^jifT  g^^  ^I^T  ^^T«     Kalo  larhika  khoto  paisa. 
A  dumb  and  deaf  son  and  a  counterfeit  pice. 

Both  are  useless. 

16  ^sTT'^  f^^I  3?3gi  g«g.      Kharhu  diyo  wokhala  luna. 

One  gave  a  ram  salt  in  the  wokhala  (mortar). 

E.  g.  The  horns  of  the  ram  made  it  impossible  for  him  to 
reach  the  salt  with  his  mouth. 

Applied  to  useless  benefactions. 

17  ^ifk  MX.  5|  'q7$7  WTf  •     Kodhi  mara  na  bato  chhorha. 

The  leper  neither  dies  nor  gets  out  of  the  way. 

An  expression  of  displeasure  applied  to  one  who  is  both  trouble- 
some and  useless. 

18  ^  fi|'^^  %J  *TI^T  ^1^-     Kai  birasa  ko  tato  pani. 

For  what  consideration  or  inheritance  should  I  give 
you  warm  water  ? 

(A.  rich  man  gets  warm  water  for  bathing.  Here  ii  is  a 
symbol  of  comfort). 

Applied  to  one  who  is  of  no  use  to  any  one,  and  so  why  should 
people  render  him  service  or  help  ? 

19  f%  MJT  'CTTT  ^T  %Tf%  ^  ^T^  ^F-     Dwi  bhai  Rama  ka 
kaurhi  na  kama  ka. 


(    371     ) 

Both  brothers  of  Rdmd  have  neither  money  nor  in- 
dtisfrt/. 

Used  when  all  the  sons  of  any  one  are  idle  and  worthless. 

20  mi^i^  ^T^TSTT  ^  ^f%  f^f^^r.      Katiya  angula  men 
muti  ni  dino. 

Se  won't  even  make  water  on  one's  finger  that  is  cut 

or  hurt. 

E.  g.  It  is  believed  that  when  the  finger  gets  cut  it  is  quickly 
healed  if  immediately  washed  with  fresh  nrine,  which  costs  nothing 
fa  common  practice).  So  if  one  refuses  to  render  thia  small  servica 
in  time  of  need  he  is  considered  a  worthless  being. 

Used  of  one  who  is  totally  useless. 

21  fqe  ^fSI.     Pishta  peshana. 

To  grind  four,  i.  e.  to  repeat  arequest  already  rejected, 
or  to  say  something  over  and  over  again. 

22  %  ^  ^ps^T^Tf^*     K^3,i  kai  kanya  rashi. 
Told  and  told  again  but  proved  to  6e  a  virgin. 

Used  of  one  who  is  instructed  to  no  purpose. 

Told  something  over  and  over  again,  but  either  not  attending 
to  it  or  not  understanding.  "A  virgin"  here  means  a  minor, 
a  useless  bit  of  a  lass,  unable  to  understand  anything  or  do  any 
work. 

23  ^HH  3!  MT^  fsWT  ^T  ^^1^'     Bhauua  na  bhasa  jiya  ko 
tipasa. 

Neither  good  words  nor  tact,  but  grieving  (fasting )  of 

the  soul. 

Used  of  one  disliked  both  for  his  bad  temper  and  incom- 
petency by  another  interested  in  Jhim  by  relationship,  and  who 
laments  that  he  is  good  fornothing. 


(     372    ) 
VACILLATION. 

1  ^f^WT  if  ^  Jim  *IT1T  (^^  •>  ^IT   Dubidha  men  duwai 
gaya  inaya  niili  na  raina. 

Vacillation  loses  both  wealth  and  salvation   {lit.  Ham). 

Thtt  hesitating  and  undecided  man  can  neither  be  soceessful 
in  worlilly  afFiirs  nor  can  he  devote  himself  thoroughly  to  th& 
couccrns  of  eternity. 

C.  f.  "Dnstfible  aa  water,  he  shall  not  excel." 

2  "^  ^^%  I^T  ^1^  %^V  "^^r  Si  'Tl^*    Duwai  dina  hai 
ga3'o  pande  haluwa  rayo  na  mande. 

The  Pdnde  has  lost  both  worlds  (objects),  neither  is  he 
Saluwd  (a  valuable  svoeet)  nor  mande  {the  water  in  which 
the  rice  teas  cooked,  or  in  other  words  "too  fluid  a 
Haluwa)." 

A[)[)lies  to  one  who  spent  money  on  works,  or  laid  it 
out  in,  speculations,  which  have  failed.  The  business  did  not 
yield  any  profit  as  anticipated,  and  he  lost  both  capital  aod 
interest. 

3  %/%  %j  ^tJT  ^^%r  51  W3  ^r-     Dliobi  ko  kutta  ghara 

ko  na  giiata  ko. 

The  washerman's  dofj  is  neither  at  (he  Ghat  {river- 
bank  or  landing-place  where  he  washes  clothes)  nor  at 
home. 

1.  e.  A  vagrant,  belongino;  to  n-otody.  On  seeing  a  bundle 
on  the  shoulder  of  a  washerman  a  dog  followed  him  from  a  town 
to  the  ghat  in  the  hope  of  getting  something  to  eat  when  the 
parcel,  which,  the  dog  supposed,  contained  food,  was  opened. 
When  the  dog  arrived  at  the  (fhdt,  to  his  utter  disappointment  ha 
saw  nothing  but  clothes.  The  dog  th'^n  returned  to  the  town, 
bat  before  his  return  the  jieaple  had  done  taking  their  nieals^ 
which  threw  him  into  a  state  of  despair.  As  an  act  of  charity, 
when  Hindus  finish  their  meals  they  bring  a  handful  af  the  remain-, 
ing  food  to  bo  thrown  out  to  the  dogs  and  crows,  etc.  The  vagrant 
dogs  live  on  these  morsels. 

Hence  the  proverb;  the  meaning  of  which  is  that  by  vacilla- 
tion one  loses  everything. 


(     373    )    . 
VANITY,  ASSUMPTION  AND  PRETENSION. 

1  ^^5^  %T  ^T  sfR  sisf^^*      Ankljana  ko  andho   naina 
nainasuk^  a. 

A  man  devoid  of  sight  is  named  "Nainasukha." 

Thy  phrase  is  ninde  nse  of  in  two  wnys. 

First,  that  a  blind  ninn  cannot  get  into  trouhles  due  to  the 
"lust  of  the  eyes,"  so  he  is  cjillpd  Nainasnkha,  which  means  "for- 
tunate as  to  hi?  eyes.'  Secon'lly,  to  express  the  iuconsistenciea 
of  life,  e.  g.  when  u  rogue. is  called  good  etc. 

2  •^\^  f^  TTITI  fltf"?  ^^r  vrkj  frlX^jm       Bapa  ni  maro 

gidirlia  beta  blia^^o  tirandaja. 

The  father  has  never  killed  even  a  jackal,  but   the  son 
calls  himself  an  archer. 

The  son  of  a  poor  man  who  puts  on  airs  and  behaves 
haughtily. 

3  KW  »T^r  'S'S  ^15^  ^TflfT  f%  ^15!.     Bhala  bliald  mukha 
cLani  katari  ki  laj:i. 

When  big   people    look    at    me    I  feel   ashamed    of 
my  rags. 

The  desire  of  havinc;  things  better  than  they  are  when  visited 
by  superiors,  or  by  one  whose  favour  we  wish  to  gain. 

4  ^^S  51  5^  ■^'a^I  4t  ^"I-       Dukha  na  sukba  bukharho 
ei  niukha. 

TP  ithout  (cavse  for)  either  pain  or  pleasure  yet  with  a 
face  like  a  deviVs. 

One  who  alwaj-s  looks  angry  without  cause. 

5  ^ifil  51   ITc^^r  •iT'3  i^H-      Pothi  na  patarho  naraina 
pandita. 

Me  has  neither  book  nor  almanack,  but   is  called  iVa- 
rain  Fandit. 

An  illiterate  pretender,  a  quack. 


(374     ) 

6  ^^^  SI  risi«J7  M51  TT»r  ^T^^TT.      Talaba  na  tanakha 

Bhaja  Rama  Hauladara. 

Neither  pay  nor  wages,  yet  is  called  Bhaja   Mama 
Savildar. 

This  is  said  by  a  man  when  he  is  made  to  work  without  pay 
for  another  on  account  of  friendship  or  relationship  :  or  when 
one  makes  pretensions  which  are  beyond  one's  deserts. 

7  ^?:j  ^T^%  TEi  ^x^T  ^^T  ^I'':  ^T*    Mera  babu  le  gbyu 
khayo  mero  jora  dekbau. 

My  father  ate  ghi,  now  see  how  strong  I  am! 

Applied  to  one  who  boasts  of  past  prosperity  or  strength. 

8  ^^T«fT  ^1  «T^TT  ^T^iT-    Bbekana  laga  jukbama  lago. 

A  frog  even  caught  cold. 

Applied  to  one  who  makes  undue  preteusions,  or  assumes  tha 
airs  of  a  great  man. 

A  common  saying  throughout  India. 

9  ^^T  "^15^  HI  ^T^T  ^^T  "51^  ^T«     Mera  bapu  le  gbyu 
kbayo  mera  batba  sungau. 

My  father  ate  Ghi  and  now  there  is  the  smell  of  Ghi  in 
my  hand. 

This  is  applicable  either  to  one  who  demands  respect  on. 
account  of  his  ancestry,  or  is  suspected  for  the  faults  of  others. 

10  $T^  W^  ^^f^  U^     Cbboto  mukba  barbi  bata. 

Small  mouth,  but  big  words. 

An  insignificant  fellow  who  talks  of  great  folks  and  censures 
them,  or  comments  on  their  actions. 

11  Ti"!  M|T  ^5R^^Tf^^  ^^I-      P»^  ^^^"  ^^^^"'^  *^^^" 
tne  dero. 


(     375    ) 

^l  ^JH  iTjft  ^>i^^  if  "Sfir*      Baga  mari  baganbara  men 
baitbo. 

One  kills  a  leopard  and  then  sits  on  its  skin. 

Used  of  one  who  after  some  achievement  grows  proud  and 
consequential,  and  does  not  remember  his  former  position. 

Also  applied  to  cheats  and  selfish  persons  who  after  obtaining 
their  ends  become  stiff  and  unyielding, 

22  ^^  S)  "mx  '^%W('^J'^*     Gbara  na  bara  muballadara. 

A  man  having  no    house  and  family   is  called  "Mo- 
halldddrP 

Applied  to  so  called  great  persons,  who  have  no  property. 


23  WS  ^T^I  T'a'T^*^  ^T  "^^^si.      Gurba  kbano  gula- 

gulana  ko  parabeja. 

One  eats  gurha  {treacle")  bnt  abstains  from  sweet  loaves 
{made  loith  gurlia). 

C  f.  "Strain  at  a  gnat  and  swallow  a  camel." 
Applied  to  showy  and  fastidious  people. 

42  ^Tf^  t^lJras!  fV^X.  ?|gT  ^*1^T«      Hatbi  ningalanu 
macbbara  gala  lagano. 

To  choke  over  a  fly  and  swallow  an  elephant. 

E.  g.  To  make  much  ado  about  the  performance  of  unim- 
portant duties,  but  to  make  no  difficulties  about  neglecting  much 
more  important  things. 

Applied  to  fastidious,  haughty  people. 

25  ^T^^T  «Hf^  ^  f^  SfZt'      Kala  ko  jogi  kaba  ki  jata. 
An  ascetic  of  yesterday  but  with  very  long  hair* 

Applied  to  one  who  makes  great  pretensions  with  small 
foundation. 

^&  ^it^r  %T  ^TI^I-     Kanda  ko  gbagaro. 
A  skirt  for  Kdndd. 

V  2 


(    376     ) 

People  who  are  of  no  use  but  pretend  to   be,  or   wish  to   bo 
considered  expert. 

16  ^s^  ZZ  'm^  ^^T-     Derha  tntu  baga  men  dero. 

A   pony  and  a  ha/f  encamped  in  a   garden  (or    large 
camping  ground ' . 

Applies  to  one  who  makes  a  great  show  of  a  very  Httla 
property. 

17  fk^  If  »T%iiT  »I"?  ^  ^7^  TicT  »igfwi!iT  ^Z-    Dina  men, 
guriiiya  gurlui  ni    khawa  lato  gulainina  cliatn. 

One    who  does  not  eat  treacle  in  the  day  time    lids   the 
refuse  of  treacle  at  night. 

Used  of  one  who  Hfsumes  a  haughty  or  fastidious  air  in  the 
presence  of  people,  but  his  circumstances  are  totally  incapable  of 
maintaining  his  pride  or  his  pretended  position. 

18  ^T«^  ^T  'tTf'i  ''UT'l^I  i%^«    l^ala  ko  jogi  aja  ko  siddha. 

The  ascetic  if  yei<terd<iy  has  become  a  saint  to-day. 

An  iiscetic  becomes  a  saint  after  a  long  preparatory  course 
dnring  which  lie  has  to  lend  a  pure  and  pious  life,  undergo  pen- 
ances, pmctising  abstinence  from  worldly  tliingt.,  jind  subjecting 
or  controlling  his  senses  for  the  sake  of  meditation  and  devotion. 

Used  of  one  who  assumes  an  air  of  pride  or  is  puffed  up  by 
the  little  he  possesses. 

19  f  ^T  ^T  ^T^  "^s^rf^i  »/l2  '^Tfil  ^^f^  ^^f^  "^sr-     Musa 

ka  hatlia  balada  ki  gantha  lagi  pasari  bani  b:iitl)0. 

A   mouse  that  happened  to  find  a  root  of  tuimeric   bC' 
came  a  grocer. 

Conceit  of  small  people. 

20  s^m  •if^^I'Sl  »JTT^  '^f%.      phakina  na  bichhflna 
marorha  barhi. 

Nothing  under  nor  over  him,  yet  very  proud. 
C.  f.  "Pride  and  poverty." 


(     378     ) 

4  f5|iT^«!FT  >T^  f5i  M^(%  ^T«      Nlmakhana  Bhainsa  ki 
bhaisaini  khira. 

Rice  pudding  prepared  with  the  milk  of  a  buffalo  which 
one  dislikes  smells  of  the  buffalo. 

Applies  to  the  work  and  good  services  of  one  who  is  disliked 
being  unacceptable.  JS.  g.  If  a  Zemindar  (agriculturist)  who 
keeps  three  or  four  wives  to  work  for  him  in  the  fields  dislikes 
one  of  them,  he  will  never  be  pleased  with  her  work,  and  she  will 
quote  this  proverb. 

5  >l«ir  %^%\  3ItOt  f^  ''Ilt^'       Grand  duma  ko  gaiyo  ni 
gaiyo.     "^ 

The  singing  of  a  Duma  {low  caste)  having  a  goitre  in 
his  throat  is  no  singing  at  all. 

Used  by  one  who  being  disliked  by  his  superior  finds  that 
the  work  done  by  him  is  not  appreciated. 

WANT  OF  SYMPATHY. 

1  ^T  ?RT  ^l»ITf%  ^TII  ^^  ^'»'9r  ^1T«  Andha  fca  agarhi 
roya  ankha  apana  khoya. 

To   cry  before  a    blind  man   is   but   to  pain  one's 
own  eyes. 

I.  e.  Nothing  should  be  asked  of  a  man  who  has  no  sym- 
pathy in  the  matter.  Generally  used  when  a  reasonable  request  is 
rejected  without  consideration. 

2  ^qJOT  JRT'aT  ^T^3[T  f%X^jmj  m^  ^T^.     Apana  kala 
rowawana  birana  kala  hasawana. 

One's  own  dumb  children  cause  us  to  weep,  but  those  of 
others  make  us  laugh. 

Applied  to  one  who  gloats  over  the  distress  of  another. 

3  ^T^^  X^^  ^T'J^T  ^^  ^T^T  ^^  ^T.rkj  ^T.  Balaka 
ni  dekha  apano  ghara  pauno  ni  dekha  parayo  gbara. 

A  child  does  not  know  what  there  is  in  his  own  house, 
nor  a  poor  relative  who  comes  as  a  guest  what  there  is  in 
the  house  of  his  host. 


(    377     ) 

2  ^3t   fM^T  l^^^r   ^I^.      Desha   bbiksbya  paradesha 
chori. 

To  beg  in  one's  own  country   and  sleal  in  a  J^oreign 
country. 

A  man  sbould  not  beg  in  his  own  country,  v?heTe  he  would  ba 
disgraced  by  doing  so,  and  so  one  who  steals  should  not  steal 
in  a  strange  land  where  be  will  have  no  one  to  defend  him  or 
his  cause. 

3  «rr5lT^  cR^^tIT  ^  ^T?  'Sl^'^W-      «^o  j^wa  Kalakatta  gu 
khawa  alapatta.        "^ 

One  who  goes  to  Calcutta  will  have  to  eat  human  dung. 

Used  to  dissuade  orthodox  Hindus  from  going  to  Calcutta. 

4  TI31   T^iU   ^qiSIT  \'^  ^^  wmfC!  'J-^^SI.     Ea'ja  rajanu 

apana  desha  bhikha  mangani  paradesha. 

To  reign  in  one's  own  country   and  to  heg  alms  in  a 
foreign  country. 

1.  e.  Seek  fame  and  good  repute  in  j'our  own  countrv :  it 
does  not  matter  what  ycu  do  in  a  foreign  land,  where  nobody 
knows  you. 

WANT  OF  APPRECIATION. 

1  "^^T  eRT  '^T^  ^TT^.    Andha  ka  hatha  arasa. 

A.  looking  glass  in  the  hand  of  a  Hind  man. 

Want  of  appreciation.  Giving  a  thing  to  one  who  does  not 
know  its  value. 

2  oiRx:  ^  -^m  ^7^7  %i  ^^^.      Banara  ke  jana  ada  ko 
sawada. 

A  monhey  is  no  judge  of  the  taste  of  ginger. 
C.  f.  "Throwing  pearls  before  swine." 

3  V^  ^7  ^JI7f%  Ji^Jl.     Bhaisa  ka  agharhi  mirdanga. 
Drumming  {playing  music)  to  a  buffalo. 

C.  f.   "Throwing  pearls  before  swine." 


(     379     ) 

JE.  g.  A  child  asks  for  things  which  the  father  cannot  afford 
to  give.     So  a  poor  relative  often  makes  preposterous  demands. 

4  ^^  f%  fk\^  12  ?iTW  f%  'R^in  ^^*      Dekhanchhu  ki 
pibala  pata  khanchhu  ki  aluna  pata. 

Quite  yellow  to  look  at,  but  to  the  taste  without  any 
salt. 

Applied  to  one  who  is  very  polite  and  gentlemanly  but 
good  for  nothing,  i.  e.  has  no  sympathy  or  consideration  for 
others.  Nearly  every  kind  of  vegetable  food  has  turmeric  put 
into  it  which  gives  it  a  yellow  colour. 

5  ti\z  ^  ^'Slf^i  ^f%  ^^^T  TT'H?  si%^f%.     Gantha  men 

nai  luna  ki  dali  larhaka  tnagancbha  gbyu  khicharhi. 

Se  lias  not  even  a  hit  of  salt  (  tied  up  in  a  corner  of  his 
sheet )  but  his  son  asks  for  Ghi  khicharhi  ( an  expensive 
article  of  food). 

6  ^%  311^  ^%T  5TT^  VJ^  5(1  "m^  %\  ^r  SITf-    Jaiko  jawa 
taiko  jawa  dhobi  ka  bapa  ko  kya  jawa. 

A.  dhobi  washes  clothes  by  beating  them  on  a  stone  with 
such  force  that  they  are  torn,  since  they  do  not  belong  to 
him,  but  to  other  people. 

Applied  to  one  who  injures  the  property  of  other  people 
which  has  been  consigned  to  him. 

7  ^z  ^T  VT^J  ^'R  «6T  ^^r^»      I-iuta  ka  dbana  pbuphu  ka 
saradba. 

One  offers  "sarddha"  to  his  "phuphu"  {father's  sister) 
out  of  the  rice  he  obtained  by  plunder  or  for  nothing. 

E.  g.  The  religious  rites  performed  for  one's  fore-fathers, 
during  which  balls  of  rice  are  consecrated  to  them,  and  Brahmins 
and  relatives  are  fed  with  rice  &c.  are  called  "Sarddh."  No  one 
ever  performs  this  ceremony  for  his  father's  sister.  But  when  he 
gets  rice  for  nothing  he  remembers  even  his  father's  sister;  which 
he  would  not  do  if  he  had  furnished  the  rice    at  his   own    expense. 


(    380    ) 

Sicll  Vealth  inclines  a  man  towards  extravagance.  This  13  all 
jStjtaivalent  of  the  Peisian  proverb  which  says  that  one's  heart 
becomes  cruelly  liberal  with  the  money  or  property  of  another 
which  has  cost  him  nothing. 

What  is  called  "cheap  kindness." 

8  ^fq^T  Wl^T-     Lai  pichho  janaro. 
Take  the  mill  stone  on  your  back. 

E.  g.  One  who  was  carrying  a   load  on    his    head    was    told 
by  another  to  take  his  mill  stone  on  his  back  also. 
A  good-natured  man  is  imposed  on. 
C.  f.  "Riding  a  willing  horse  to  death." 

9  ^fr  ^JJH  %m'[^  ^T^  ^T  "^g^  ^1?J  ^girf .      Meri  gbana 
aijawa  barhe  ka  balada  baga  lijawa. 

If  my  fields  are  ploughed  I  do  not  care  if  the  Darn's 
bullocks  be  killed  by  a  leopard. 

This  is  applicable  to  one  who  after  borrowing  and   using  an- 
other's property,  takes  no  care  of  it. 

10  ^T  ^I^T"!  '«IT'^  ^3  '^T^'     ^^^  mausydna  bapa  katha 
bapa. 

{lam  in  sad  plight)  my  mother   is  a  step   mother  and  I 
am  but  the  bastard  of  my  father. 

This  is  used  when  one  represents  his  helpless  condition,  having 
no  one  to  sympathize  with  him. 

11  f^^^a^l  ^7 '^^^T  ^''^T-      Nimakbano  gbata  busa  ka 
wera. 

The  water  millwhich  has  no  master  (  or  no  one  to   look 

after  it)  is  made  use  of  by  putting  into  it  handfuls  of 

chaff  (  for  grinding,  instead  of  grain). 

Used  to   denote  the    treatment   an   oiphan   or   poor    person 
generally  gets  in  the  world. 


(    381    ) 
12  "Sfmx.  f%  QfI<T^.     Bauara  ki  sukha  puchbai. 
Enquiring  after  one's  health  like  a  monkey. 

m.  g.  A  pet  monkey  taken  into  one's  arms  at  first  bites 
and  scratches.  So  the  proverb  refers  to  a  friend  who  either  makes 
but  one  visit  or  commences  his  visit  by  quarrelling.  Want  of 
sympathy. 

WICKEDNESS. 

1  ^T'WnT  ^J^  «RTfe  f^^'^I^T  ^^^T.      Apano  nakha  kati 
birano  asakunu. 

To  cut  one's  own  nose  in  order  to  act  as  a  had   omen 
for  other  people. 

1.  e.  To  injure  oneself  in  order  to  bring  trouble  on  others. 

2  'axiT  %fe  ^TcTTT  'St'.     Bura  dekhi  kartara  dara. 

Even  the  creator  fears  a  wicked  man. 
1.  e.  Every  one  is  afraid  of  a  tricky  person. 

3  ^^Ff  %  ^^  ^  «tSt  ^T  "^TTSi  »15T^%r«      Lanka  men 
jo  sabana  hai  chhoto  so  bauna  gaja  lambo. 

The  shortest  monster  man  found  in  Lanka   (  Ceylon  ) 

measured  fifty-two  yards. 

This  is  used  to  signify  a  very  atrocious  iniquity  perpe- 
trated by  the  smallest  person  of  his  class  or  caste. 

4  x.j^  firSir  %T^  ^^  ^«IT  ^^  ^T?l"»     Rama  milai  jorhi 
eka  andha  eka  korhi. 

A  God-made  pair,  one  Mind  and  the  other  leper. 

By  chance  a  blind  man  and  a  leper  met  and  struck  np  friend- 
ship. This  is  applied  to  bad  and  mean  people  when  they  are  in 
concert  with  each  other  for  evil  designs.  Spoken  ironically  of 
two  persons  when  one  is  as  bad  ^s  the  other.  C  f.  "Birds  of  a 
feather  flock  together.'' 


(    382     ) 

5  ^7*11  f%  9^lt  ^  f^HTT  %t»    Sona  ki  chhupai  peta  ni 
mara  koi. 

A  knife  will  cut  even  when  made  of  gold. 

A  man  who  is  dangerous  and  untrustworthy  must  be  avoided 
though  he  be  of  noble  descent. 

6  ^ifk  >rat  si^^T  f%%  »TT^  'a:^  ^W.      Kali  bhali  na  seta 
dwiyai  marau  ekai  kheta. 

Neither  the  black  nor  the  white  are  good,  both  should  be 
killed  (  at  once  )  at  the  same  place. 

Applied  to  two  persons  who  are  alike  in  wickedness.  (The 
black  and  white  refer  to  two  insects  that  destroy  crops  J. 

7  *iTT  ^''f^  fH-^I  ^  ^TTOf  Wr{\  qif^  ^ri.      Mai  apani 
bhikshya  ni  de  apana  kutta  kani  thama. 

O,  mother  never  mind  giving  me  anything,   but  do 
not  let  your  dog  bite  me. 

A  beggar  once  went  to  the  house  of  a  woman  to  ask  the 
usual  alms,  who  instead  of  giving  him  anything  set  dog  upon  him 
to  drive  him  away.  He  entreated  her  to  keep  her  dog  back,  and 
he  would  not  ask  for  alms.  Hence  the  proverb  is  applied  to  one 
who  instead  of  complying  with  the  request  of  another  tries  to  do 
him  an  injury. 

8  56TW  ^\^\  f^  H^  3!rw«     Kala  kalon  ki  eka  jata. 

All  black  people  belong  to  one  caste. 

1.  e.  All  who  have  evil  designs  in  concert  with  each  other 
remain  in  unity  among  themselves. 

C.  f.  "Birds  of  a  feather  flock  together." 
"Honor  among  thieves." 

9  W^  ^I  ^^  ^T'»  'll'^T'ST'     Syapa  ka  paira  syapa  paha 
chanau. 

A  snake  discerns  the  way  of  {another)  snake. 
C.  f.  "Set  a  thief  to  catch  a  thief." 


C     383     ) 

10  ^^x  %  "fz  sf^^T.     Pathara  hai  inta  narama. 

A  brick  is  softer  than  a  stone. 

Used  in  comparing  two  wicked  persons  or  actions,  which 
though  both  bad,  difFer  in  the  nature  or  degree  of  atrocity,  for 
instance  a  theft  is  less  atrocious  than  a  murder,  a  slanderer  than 
a  thief. 

11  %T  '^^mj  %J  ^n  ^T  ^T^l  ^r  ^T^-      Jo  apana  ko 
khawa  so  aurana  kya  rakha. 

One  who  devours  Ms  own  people  will  hardly  spare 
others. 

Applied  to  an  extravagant  and  wicked  person. 

WILFULNESS. 

1  «T«i  ^T  '^I^.     Mana  ko  sauda. 

One's  own  choice,  or  such  is  my  wish. 

Used  when  anyone  acts  in  an  unusual  or  irrational  manner 
asserting  his  own  independence, 

WITNESS. 

Chulo  boda  ki  maina  bara  pakawana  karena  aundo  boda 
main  dagarhi  cbhaun. 

"Chtild"  fthe  oven  J  said  thai  it  had  cooked  12  kinds 
of  sweetmeats.  "The  Aundo"  (which  is  adjoining  J  said 
"I  was  near  at  hand". 

Anything  done  in  the  presence  of  two  or  more  persons 
cannot  be  concealed.  Don't  boast  unless  there  have  been  no 
witnesses.  Aundo  is  a  small  compartment  adjoining  to  and  behind 
a  Chuld  enclosed  with  the  Chuld  wall  or  stone. 

The  custom  of  making  a  Chula  or  open  oven  upon  the 
ground  having  an  empty  space  behind  is  peculiar  to  Garhwal.  The 
reasons  of  this  arrangement  are  (1)  to  provide  a  receptacle  for 
cooked  food,  and  (2)  to  avoid  the  "evil  eye."  Cooked  food  thus 
"overlooked"  is  supposed  to  be  injurious. 

W  2 


f     384     ) 
WOMEN. 

1  fVrft^lT  '^f^'^  ^]^  ^  ^J  ^^T  »TTf^  ^  ^r*       Tiriya 
charitra  jane  na  ko  khasaina   mari  satti  ho. 

Kills  her  husband  and  then  becomes  a  satti  :  who  knows 

the  ways  of  women  ? 

A  certain  woman  being  in  love  with  another  man  killed 
her  husband  at  night  at  the  instigation  of  her  paramour,  giving 
out  that  thieves  had  done  it.  But  in  the  morning  she  went  as  a 
Satti  with  the  body  of  her  husband. 

2  %f^  ^^^  ^T.     Syaini  libera  ghara, 
One^s  household  depends  on  a  woman. 

If  a  woman  is  not  dexterous  in  the  management  of  the 
household  affairs,  or  being  clever,  docs  not  give  her  attention  to 
it  the  house  will  not  thrive  or  prosper.  The  story  noted  below  will 
illustrate  the  proverb. 

Once  a  king  with  his  queen  consort  was  taking  a  drive  along 

a  public  road.     Seeing  a  man  in  rags  with  a  load    of  firewood    orr 

his  head,  he  remarked  to   the  queen    that    this    was    evidently    an 

improvident  man,  but  the  qneen  instead  of  maintaining  the  king's 

opinion  about  the  man  said    that    he    was    not    to    be    blamed    for 

his  poverty,  but  it  must  be  due  to  his  wife,  who  must   either   be  a 

foolish     woman    or   indifferent   to    her    duty.        The    noble    pair 

began  to  dispute  about  the  matter.     At  length  the  king    in  anger 

directed  his  queen  to  go  and  manage  the  man's  affairs  for  a  certain 

time.     The  queen  was  very   glad    to    obey   this    command    of  her 

husband.     Accordingly  she  went  to   the    house    of  the    poor   man 

and  found  his  wife  a  lazy  woman,    and  ascertained    that    the    poor 

man  used  to  earn  only  two  pice  a  day   by    the    sale    of  fuel,    with 

which  he  used  to  buy    flour  whereon  the  man  and   his    wife    could 

barely  subsist.       The  first  thing  the  queen   did   was    to    direct   the 

man  to  sell  two  loads  of  wood  in  a  day  instead  of  one    as    he    used 

to  do,  and  to  get  two    pice   worth    of  wheat   instead  of  flour,  and 

his  wife  was  made  to  grind  the  wheat.     This  arrangement  secured 

them  enough  food,  and  saved  twa  piee  a    day.     After    a    time   the 

saving  amounted  to   five    rupees,   with    which   the   queen    bought 

him  an  ass    foE    conveyance   of   firewood.     By  this    arrangement 

the  poor  man  was  enabled  to  sell  sixteen  loads  of  wood  instead    of 

two.     Thus  after  some  time   she  effected    a    further   saving,    with 

which  she  purchased  many  oxen  and  asses  to  convey  the  fuel  to  the 

g  pital  town  for  sale.     She  also  employed  many   men   to    cut    and 


(    385    ; 

prepare  ^firewood  in  the  jungle.  In  fhis  vVay  the  p66f  tlian 
monopolized  the  whole  trade  of  firewood  in  the  toWH.  ^dbtl 
afterwards  the  jungle  caught  fire.  On  hearing  of  it  the 
queen  ordered  that  all  the  charcoal  made  by  the  fire  should  be 
brought  to  the  poor  man's  house.  All  this  charcoal,  on  being 
carried  to  his  house,  became  gold  (i.  e.  sold  at  a  high  rate).  In 
this  way  the  poor  man  became  very  rich.  One  day  by  the  advice 
of  the  queen  the  man  invited  the  king  to  a  feast  at  his  own  house, 
when,  seeing  the  immense  wealth  of  which  the  man  had  become 
possessed,  the  king  admitted  the  truth  of  what  the  queen  had 
said.     The  king  then  took  away  his  queen  to  his  own  palace. 

3  >T  ''CI^  *{jR  ^  ^T5!  ^Tf^«     Bhai  randa  nari  ge  laja  sari. 
2Vb  sooner  does  a  icoman  become  a  widow  then  she  loses 

all  shame. 

1.  e.  Having  no  one  to  control  her  she  does  what  she 
pleases. 

4  TTl  5!  ^I  «JT^T  if  ^m  "^t^r*      Randa  na  ko  panjo  gaun 
parho  banjo. 

If  women  manage  a  village  it  will  become  a  desert. 

This  corresponds  with  what  is  elsewhere  said,  that  one  who 
acts  on  the  advice  or  direction  of  woman,  boy,  or  enemy  is  sure  to 
meet  with  ruin  eventually. 

WORK  AND  WAGES. 
1  ys^  jfrTI'ft  set  IST^^  "S"^  Z^fF^  \l  1^-     Unne  ganguli 
ki  ebhakull  unne  Tukanya  ko  hala. 

The  ploughing  of  TuTcanyd  is  as  the  food  given  him  by 
Ganguli. 

As  the  wages  so  will  be  the  work  (the  man  hired  for  plougk- 
ing  is  fed  by  those  who  hire  him). 

WORLD. 
1   fr?T:t^  ^T  f%^^-     Tatah  kin  ya  phira  ke. 
What  is  to  he  done  then  ?  or  what  to  do   in   the  end^ 
thereof?. 


(    386    ) 

E.  g.  This  means  that  if  one  succeeds  ia  his  enterprise  what 
will  he  do  thereafter  since  all  worldly  things  are  of  transient  na- 
ture and  will  vanish  some  time. 

Consolation  used  at  a  time  of  loss. 


2  of  ^^f?:  ^  ^T^fj^j'?;.     Je  sansara  te  manasara. 

What  there  is  in  my  mind  is  also  in  that  of  the   world 

(  what  I  wish  is  also  toished  by  the  world  ). 

Used  to  indicate  that  one  can  judge  the  state  of  the  world 
by  the  suggestions  of  his  own  mind. 

3  ^f«|^T  ^TI^*    Duniyan  sajhi 

The  loorld  is  the  joint  property  of  all  hvrnian  being s. 

E.  g.  An  act  either  good  or  bad,  done  by  one  individual 
affects  others  in  this  world.  C.  f.  "As  (he  world  leads  we 
follow." 

Used  to  induce  people  to  be  careful  of  what  they  do,  and  «lso 
to  do  what  the  world  does.  C.  f-  "We  are  members  one  of 
another." 

4  ^xx  f^5!  f%  ^T^f^l  f^T  "^fK  TTfl.     Chara  dina ki  chan- 
dani  phira  andheri  rata. 

Moonlight  for  a  few  days  and  then  the  dark  fortnight. 

This  is  used  to  impress  on  one's  heart  that  prosperity  and 
adversity  will  not  last,  but  are  of  transient  nature.  C.  f.  "Make 
hay  while  the  sun  shines."  "Work  while  it  is  called  to-day,  for 
the  night  cometh  when  no  man  can  work". 

5  f^TTWT  1»I  IT^ar^     Birano  mana  paradesha. 
The  mind  of  another  is  as  a  foreign  land. 

I.  e.  We  do  not  know  what  is  in  the  mind  of  others. 

6  ^1^  ^^  a^j^gi  ^*^T^«     Sapaka  swada  jhalaka  sansara. 
Taste  in  a  morsel,  and  the  world  in  a  glance. 


(    387     ; 

The  saying  of  an  ascetic,  who  declares  that  just  as  a  man  can 
tell  from  the  first  taste  of  a  dish  what  all  the  rest  will  be  like, 
so  from  a  very  briefer  slight  experience  of  the  world  he  can  find 
out  its  nature,  the  vanity  of  its  pleasures  etc. 

7  ^^T"'^ f^^Sf  ^T  ITfT*     Sansara  sisana  ko  pata. 
The  world  is  (like)   a   leaf  of  nettle  (priclcing  on  both 

No  one  can  escape  criticism,  however  he  may  act. 

8  ^%J  tz  git^T  ^I^T  »TT5i  W^t^  ^21  «ri%T-     Kapko   ita 
kanko  rorho  bhanamati  le  kutuma  jorho. 

The  hricks  of  one   'place  and  stones  of  another  formed 
the  conjurer's  family. 

1.  e.  The  conjurer  makes  up  his  show  from  bricks  and 
stones. 

This  proverb  declares  that  all  human  relationships  and  friend- 
ships are  merely  imaginary  conditions,  like  the  toys  with  which 
the  conjurer  constructs  his  plays.     All  is  a  dream. 


(    388    ; 


APPENDIX. 


1  f^«TT^  SRT^  f^^^t ff  "^1%:    Binashakale  biparitabuddhih. 

Se  wlio  is  about  to  perish  becomes  demetited. 

Illustration.  Ram  Chandra  when  in  exile  in  the  jangle  of 
the  Deccan  was  allured  by  a  deer  of  golden  hne,  which  was 
really  a  demon  or  phantasm.  In  pursuing  this,  Ram  wandered' 
far  from  his  home,  and  Rawan  took  this  opportunity  to  carry  off 
Raoa's  wife,  Sita.  Had  not  Ram  lost  his  senses  and  gone 
after  this  imaginary  and  inpossible  animal  he  would  not  have 
lost  his  wife  or  rather  had  that  loss  not  been  fated,  he  would  not 
have  been  so  senseless. 


2  ^J?f%  ^Tf'i'lT  f^5flfw  f5!^ri«      Chugali  lagija  binati  nt 

laga. 

Bachhiting  leaves  an  impression  in  the  mind   (  of  the 
hearer  )  hut  entreaty  {makes  no  impression  ). 

We  remember  a  fault  when  it  is  told  us  regarding  some- 
one, but  we  soon  forget  a  request  made  for  or  recommendation  of 
that  person. 

3  q^^T'6'';''  M«fTf%i  ^T51  «IiT5T  ^^T*    Pabaro  karanu  bbala 
ki  kboja  karanu  bbalo. 

Is  it  better  to  watch  one^s  possessions,   or  to  search 
for  them  when  lost  ? 

Prevention  is  better  than  cure. 

4  ^■^j;  tff  %j  ^^T^  %3  51  "^^If-     Bbaira  gaun  ko  bbasar- 
ha  jetha  na  asarba. 

A  villager  and  clown  who  does  not   know  Jetha   (  the 
month  of  May  )from  Asdrha(June  ). 
A  stupid  fellow,  unable  to  discriminate. 


(    389     ) 

5  e^  efii  ^5!T^  «iT^  ^T  "^^^  ^r  ^*TiE-      J"'e  ka  daija  le 

babu  ka  dhana  le  ko  khanchha. 

JFlho  will  live  on  his  wife\  dowry,  or  on  his  father's 
wealth  ? 

Every  man  must    earu    his    own  living,    and    not  depend  on 
such  sources  of  income. 

6  oiTfSl  f{\K.  "^f^^T  y??T(w  fKlT.  ^JX.  Jani  mara  baniyan 
pachhani  mara  chora. 

A  hanya  will  cheat  only  those  icith  whom  he  is  loell 
acquainted,  and  a  thief  tcill  rob  only  those  whom  he  knows 
(  cannot  bring  him  to  justice  or  overpower  him  ). 

7  ^f2  Jl^IcT  ^RiRt''^  "^f?  '"'T fT  '^wt'C  ^fk.  ?1?JT«T  ^T  Ghati 
gayata  phakira  badhi  gayata  amira  mari  gayata  pira. 

Mussalmans,  when  they  have  no  property,  call  them- 
selves faqirs ;  if  they  are  rich,  they  call  themselves  Amir 
(  noblemen  );  and  when   they   die,   they   are  called  JPir 

(  saints  ). 

A  satire  on  Mohammedans. 

8  5T^r  'EITT  ir^f^«     Chhala  ghama  balani. 
To  expose  a  man's  hide  to  the  sun. 

To  reveal  a  man's  faults  and  secret  crimes, 

9  TTTTSI  W  "»^^T«     Taraju  ka  palarba. 
The  scales  of  the  balance. 

The  alternation  of  prosperity  and  misfortune  in  people's  lives, 
"The  turning  of  the  tables." 

10  q^^  ifci.      Tala  me  puni. 

A  small  wisp  out  of  the  bundle  (  of  cotton,  in  spinning). 
I.  e.  A  very  small  part  of  the  work  done. 


(     390     ) 

11  ^T'^T'^'^nT*     Ankha  bujana. 
To  close  ( lit.  quench  )  the  eyes. 

Not  to  listen  to  or  grant  a  request. 

12  ^J^i  gfi7  fk<i\  ittT  ^''^•IT-     Kala  ka  dina  pura  karana. 

Completing  the  days  of  Fate  {or  Death). 

Said  by    an   unhappy    man,    waiting    for   deliverance    from 
this  life. 

13  S^m  ^t  m\fz  %  ^l^m  ^t  flt/3»J-       Tekana  son  janthi 
nai  kholana  son  s;anthi  nai. 

No  stick  for  support,  no  knot  to  unloose  (i.  e.  no  money, 
which  is  usually  tied  up  in  the  cotton  garment ). 

Weak  and  patron-less. 

14  ?)t3T  I'S'IT'      Gantha  ganana. 
To  count  knots. 

Build  castles  in  the  air. 

15  %r  ^ttt  ''T^  ^t  wij  %r  ^r  tit  ^t  ^tti  %f^  ^t  ^ 

^TlT  '^^^  ^■'^   5TW  %t[J.      Jo  kutta  pala  so  kutta  jo  kutta 

raara  so  kutta  baini  ghara  bhai  kutta  sasura  ghara  jawain 

kutta. 

Se  that  cherishes  dogs  is  a  dog ;  he  that  heats  dogs 
is  a  dog  ;  he  that  lives  in  his  sister's  house  (  spunges  on  his 
sister  )  is  a  dog  ;  and  he  that  lives  in  his  father-in-law's 
house  ( too  long  )  is  a  dog. 

A    satire    on   spunges    of    this    kind,    who    are    considered 
disgaceful. 

16  ^TT  'TfT  liT  ^^5!%  ^T^  %T  ^Ti  ^^T.  %%  f^  ^T^.    Jo  panta 
kau  sabana  le  karanu  jo  panta  kara  kaile  ni  karnu. 

Whatever  the  Tant  says,  do  it  ;  but  do  not  do  what  he 
does. 


(    s-oi    ) 

The  Pants  are  a  powerful  caste  of  Brahmins,  and  so  can  do 
■much  as  they  please. 

17  s^sjjTfsi.     Clihyuu  karani. 

To  sneeze. 

Sneezing  is  regarded  as  a  bad  omen,  on   setting    out   on    a 

journey  or  commencing  a  business,  if  anyone    sneezes,  the   project 

niTist  be  laid  aside  for  a  while.     A    man   beginning   a   march  and 

stopped  in  this  manner  will  return  for  a  few  paces  and  then  go  on. 

The  proverb  means  'to  dissuade'  one  from  his  purpose. 

18  ?]qr  3r]5ii  f\ixj  ^^^^J  ^I  fq^  ^I^  ^T'lT-     Graya  jaya 
myara  baba  ko  pinda  bati  aya. 

■Oo  to  Gay  a  and  offer  Find  to  my  father. 

The  ceremony  of  shraddh  can  only  be  performed  by  tbe 
son,  grandson,  nephew  or  other  near  relations  of  the  deceased. 
Hence  to  request  a  stranger  to  perform  the -ceremony  is    absurd. 

Means  "Look  after  your  own  affairs.^'  If  you  want  any- 
tliing  done,  do  it  yourself. 

19  ^^T  5i5|}"aiT  "^  ^f  ^J^.      Grhorba  jujma  duba   ko 
nasba. 

When  two  horses  fight^  the  dub  grass  is  destroy ed- 

That  is,  when  great  powers  come  into  collision,  common 
folk  suffer. 

A  caution  to  poor  people  aganist  interfering  ia  the  quarrels 
of  their  betters. 

20  'a|%«lT  fm  Z^  S^f'     Kbaslya  manai  thanga  tbango. 

The  Khasiya  ( rustic  hill-man  )  the  more  he  is  hesought 
the  surlier  he  becomes. 

I.  e.  The  only  way  to  manage  him  is  by  threais  and 
compulsion. 

21  «l^JT  'fT^  ^IK^^T  ^^W-      Nakato  nakha  Paramesh- 

wara  dekbalo. 

X  2 


<     392     ) 

A  nose  cut  off  {secret  sin)  is  knotvfi  to  God. 

Cutting  off  the  nose  is  a  common  figure  of  speech  meaning 
to  lose  one's  character,  become  disgraced,  as  in  former  days  the 
punishment  for  shameful  actions  and  heinous  crimes  took  this 
form.  Here  the  meaning  is  that  though  a  man  ma\-  conceal  his 
evil  deeds  from  his  fellow-men,  God  sees  his  wickedness,  lie  is 
disgraced  in  the  sight  of  God. 

Ironically  used  in  speaking  of  a  person's  secret  or  supposed 
sies. 

22  gqs^  f^tfj  ^7  ^^J.     Jyunu  jiya  ko  rnelo. 

J^fe  is  a  fair. 

t .  e.  As  lo'ng  as  men  are  alive  they  meet.  Spoken  "when 
acquaintances  come  across  each  other. 

23  ^7cT  ^fk.  WKfk-     Pota  puri  karani. 
To  fill  up  one's  basket. 

To  do  well  by  oneself, -to  look  after  number  one. 

24  ^•^^x:.      Tioatera. 

All  at  sixes  and  sevens  ( lit.  three  thirteen)^ 

Utterly  ruined  and  done  for. 

25  5^j-  g5l7.     Cbhakka  panja. 

Fitch  and  toss  (gambling  with  shells  ). 

Means  playing  tricks,  practising  by  dishonest  methods. 

26  ^m  %j  ffji  fj^  5(if^  \rifx  f^^J^^.      Bhaipsa  ko  singa 
bhainsa  kani  bbari  ni  laganu. 

The  horns  of  a  buffalo  are  not  heavy  to  him. 

One  is  not  unwilling  to  incur  cost  or  trouble  for  his  owo 
people. 

27  097  117^107.     Puwa  pakana, 
Cooking  sweetmeats. 

^Spoken  of  one  raised  to  sudden  prosperity.    Having  a  "good 


(    393    ) 

28  S^  VSr?«T.     Chhala  jharhanu. 

Exorcising  demons  (or  '^devil-driving"). 

A  class  of  mendicant  doctors  profess  to  exorcise  evil  spirits 
by  using  force,  E.  g.  burning,  beating,  shouting  loudly  in  the 
ear  of  the  possessed  person  etc.  When  one  is  threatened  and 
bawled  at  by  another  the  bystanders  facetiously  use  this  proverb. 

29  qsjH  U5!«r  ^Jat  ^J^  ^]5jt.     Pujanai  pujanai  aja  kama 

lago. 

A/ier  I  have  worshipped  you  so  long  you  are  of  use    to  me 
only  to-day. 

The  Bairagis  or  Vaishnavs  (devotees  of  Vishnu  who  worship 
the  god  in  the  form  of  a  black  stone  called  Saligram,  found  at 
Damudhar  Kund  ou  the  banks  of  the  river  Saligrama  in  Nepal), 
are  exceedingly  strict  in  their  religious  duties,  and  will  not  eat 
or  do  any  work  until  they  have  offered  the  food  to  the  Saligram 
stone  or  worshipped  it.  Once  a  Bairagi  who  had  worshipped  such 
a  stone  for  many  years  was  cooking  his  cakes  in  the  Plains. 
After  cooking  he  placed  all  the  cakes  in  front  of  the  stone  by  way 
ef  offering,  when  a  dag  coming  along  suddenly  snatched  one  of 
the  cakes  and  made  off.  As  there  were  no  stones  near,  the  man 
could  not  resist  the  temptation  to  fling  his  Saligram  at  the  dog, 
who  dropped  the  cake  and  fled.  The  Bairagi  then  made  use  of 
the  above  words. 

30  ^T^  »IT^  ^T^r  ^IZT*    Harha  garha  mato  gabtho.. 

Sones  go  into  the  river,  but  earth  remains  in  one's  knot.. 

I.  e.  Cattle  will  die  and  their  bones  will  be  swept  away  into  a- 
river,  but  land  property  or  money  invested  in  land  is  an  enduring 
possession. 

The  knot  is  equivalent  to  "the  pocket,"  and  hence  often- 
means  "money."  The  poorer  class  of  Hindus  carry  their  money 
tied  up  in  a  knot  of  their  sheet. 

Used  to  encourage  people  to  buy  land  and  not  to  invest 
their  money  in,  cattle. 

31  ^i  MfK  \k  «»I  ^fK  HIT5C.    Apun  mari  bera  laga  bairt 
maranii. 


(    394     ) 

One  should  kill  himself  in  order    to  bring  death  on  Ms 
enemy. 

It  is  a  popular  belief  that  if  a  man  is  unable  to  revenge  hirrself 
oil  his  enemy  in  this  lite  he  will  be  able  to  do  so  in  the  next  life, 
if  he  has  a  strong  desire  to  that  effect  on  his  death-bed.  It  is  also 
believed  that  a  man  can  torment  his  enemy  after  death  by  taking 
possession   of  him    or  bewitching  him. 

Once  there  were  two  sworn  enemies  living  in  the  sam.e 
village.  One  of  them  went  to  the  temple  of  a  goddess  to  pray 
for  blessings,  and  the  other,  hearing  of  this,  also  went  to  the- 
same  shrine,  and  besought  the  goddess  to  give  him  the  same 
boon  which  his  enemy  had  asked.  The  goddess,  knowing  his 
thoughts,  told  him  he  would  have  whatever  he  desired,  but  that 
the  first  petitioner  would  get  double  of  the  same  ;.  whereupon 
the  cunning  fellow,  after  a  moment's  thought,  prayed  the  goddess- 
to  deprive  him  of  one  of  his  eyes,  so  that  his  enemy  might  thu& 
lose  both  his  eyes. 

32  ijf^T  ^jg.     Phuto  dliola. 

A  broken  Drum, 

1.  e.  a  broken  drum  when  played  makes  all  kinds  of  unexpected' 
noises.  Applied  to  a  talkative  person  who  is  always  saying 
"awkward  things,"    without  due    reserve. 

33  ?iTt-^i  ^f%  ^T''l%  s^  %i^7T  ^^7^  Tfjji.  Garibale 
l)€chi  apani  jwe  saukara  udhara  manga. 

_  The  poor  fellow  was  so  hard  up  that  he  was  obliged  .to  sell 
his  wife,  but  the  rich  man  to  whom  he  was  going  to  sell  her 
wanted  her  on  credit. 

Used  when  a  man  wants  his  money  badly,  but  is  put  off  to- 
a  future  date. 

34  ^j-f%  %T'»fi'.     Kaurhi  to  puta. 

The  son  of  a  shell  (cowrie). 

A  miser  ;  one  who  will  do  anything  for  money  ;  or  who  will 
not  spend  a  fraction. 

35  H^  ^j  ^^gj.     Thuka  ka  thekala. 


(     395     ) 

Patching  with  spittle. 

Torn  cloth  if  mended  by  stickiug  bits  of  material  upon  it 
witli  saliva  used  as  paste  will  soon  be  as  bad  as  ever.  This  is  used 
of  baseless  statements  or  groundless  pleas. 

36  ^T21^  ^?JT  ^^r  ^1^  '^'H^  %I^T«      Lata  le  lagarba 
dekbo  bao-arLa  ba^arliai  daurho. 

CD  O 

A  dumb  idiot  found  a  cake  on  a  river  hank,  and  ran  along 
hoping  to  find  more. 

One  who  pursues  a  foolish  or  useless  course  because  he  has 
been  benefitted  once  by  it. 

37  "Sifki  arf^  %^  '^l\  ^^  1^5.     Bairi  mari  bera  laga  dukbu 
dicbba. 

An  enemy,  evtn  when  dead,  will  give  trouble. 

A  noted  bad  character  once  lived  in  a  village,  and  was  a 
great  pest  to  all  his  neighbours,  lodging  false  information  ao-ainst 
them  at  the  police-office  etc,  and  being  in  every  way  a  public 
nuisance.  When  on  his  death-bed  he  sent  for  all  his  neighbours 
and  implored  them  to  have  mercy  on  him  and  save  him  from 
penalties  in  the  future  existence  on  account]  of  his  many  crimes. 
He  besought  them  for  this  object  to  drag  his  corpse  round  to 
every  house  in  the  village  before  cremating  it.  Being  touched  by 
this  his  last  request  they  all  vowed  to  do  so,  and  accordingly  when 
the  breath  was  out  of  the  sly  rogue,  they  began  hauliuf  him 
along  the  street.  Here  they  were  met  by  some  police  and  "chau- 
kidars,"  who,  supposing  that  they  had  beaten  and  killed  the  man, 
arrested  them  all  and  took  them  off  to  a  magistrate.  They  were 
all  sentenced  to  a  long  term  of  imprisonment.  Thus  their  enemy 
had  his  revenge  on  them  even  after  he  was  dead. 

38  ^^i  ^T^T  Wi  ^r  f'T^.      Sai  ko  soro  lakba  ko  mitra. 

A  relation  of  the  same  caste  (  with  whom  one  has  collateral 
interests )  is  worth  a  .  hundred  rupees,  but  a  relation  by 
alliance,  or  a  friend,  ( who  is  a  stranger )  is  worth  a  lac  of 
rupees. 

Used  to  appreciate  the  genuine  usefulness  of  an  allied 
relation  or  friend 


(     39G     ) 

39  ^  "qj^^T  ^T«IT^^*T1%*    ^l^i  chakalo  bazara  sangurhu 

Se  is  too  big  for  the  bazaar  and  the  bazaar  is  too    narrow 
for  him. 

A  conceited  person,  puffed  np  with  pride. 

40  ir^  ^I'S.     Worba  kodiia. 

A  mason  or  the  leprosy  (both  very  difficult  to  get  ridof). 

The  masons  of  this  country  are  often  verj'  cunaino;,  delay- 
ing the  completion  of  their  work  from  day  to  day,  so  that  they 
may  get  the  extra  pay.  Until  their  work  is  completed  their 
employer  cannot  well  dismiss  them,  and  so  is  at  their  mercy, 
even  though  they  add  only  a  single  stone  to  the  wall  in  a  day's  work. 
In  the  same  way  leprosy,  an  incurable  disease,  is  a.  simile  for 
anything  that  cannot  be  got  rid  of. 

41  ^^^  IT^'a^   (ir^S.      Akala  le  Parameshwara  mi- 
lanchha. 

God  is  found  out  by  icisdom. 

By  close  application  of  the  mind  a  man  can  rise  even  to* 
the  knowledge  of  divine  things.  An  exhortation  to  wisdom  or 
mental  activity,  which  gains  all  things. 

42  ^^f%gBT  %!»!  -Sif  T  ^1^  ^^  ^^  ^ ITT'ii  ^If ft  fT'^'fi  ^^^« 

Ye  basti  ka  loga  barha  bekupha  cbhana  kabbain  ye  tarapha 

kabbaiB  wi  tarapba  basani. 

The  people  of  this  place  are  great  fools,  sometimes  they  live 
on  one  side  of  the  street,  sometimes  on  the  other, 

A  blind  man  led  by  another  went  begging.  He  found  it 
troutlesome  to  pass  from  one  side  of  the  road  to  the  other,  and 
thus  apostrophized  the  people  of  the  village,  instead  of  acknowledg- 
ing his  own  defect. 

The  unreasonable  criticism  of  ignorant  and  conceited  people.- 

43  ^T^  %  51»n"»T  ^Tf%*     Mala  bai  jagata  banki. 
The  commodity  not  worth  the  tax  or  duty  upon  it. 

"Not  worth  the  candle". 


(   3ar    ) 

■44  "^  q?:  'ft-     t)^'i  ?^^'^  d^'i- 

Two  for  two. 

When  an    inferior    puts    himself   on  ^n    equality    with    his 
superior  or  withstands  him.     Insubordination. 
"Jack's  as  good  as  his  master". 

45  ^5^1^:  ^r  ^^Rffsi  ^rf%  ^«B'^r      Sansara  ko  raukba  kwe 

ni  thami  sakano. 

No  one  can  stop  the  mouth  of  the  world,  for  men's  criti- 
cism ). 

A  man  should  not  heed  people's  remarks,  but  go  his  own  wav. 

An  illustration  is  given  as  follows  :  according  to  the  story 
oT  the  Ramayan  the  god  Kama  took  back  his  wife  Sita  after  she 
had  been  carried  off  by  Rawan.  Once  a  dhobi  (  washerman)  was 
seen  beating  his  wife,  telling  her  that  he  was  not  like  Rama  who 
took  back  his  wife  under  such  disgraceful  circumstances,  he  could 
not  behave  in  such  a  way  etc.  Thus  even  the  gods  are  not  exempt 
from  criticism.  In  consequence  of  this  unfavorable  popular  opi- 
nion Rama  was  compelled  to  put  his  wife  away. 

46  ^f?i^T-     Titlro. 

A  titira  (  lit.  a  partridge  ). 

A  knowing  person,  wide-awake  ;  cunning. 

47  ^^^r  f^  ^ilfS-     Bbekula  ki  janthi. 

A  stick  of  bhekuld  (  a  kind  of  free,  the  fibres  of  which 
are  very  slippery )  when  used  as  a  staff  it  slips  from  the 
hand  of  the  holder. 

An  untrustworthy  man,  who  cannot  be  depended  on  for 
support,  a  broken  reed. 


48  y%  f^  \fk  '^^J  T{\j  JJTW  ^f  r*    Gusain  ki  deli  badhau 
mero  gasa  badbau. 

»]W  ^TiaT  ^fZ  5»T5IT^  ^  %f^  *T5g.     Gusainkaankba 
pbuti  jana  ta  mai  cbori  karanyu. 

The  dog  withes  the  increase  of  the  family  ( so  that  his  food 
or  leavings  may  thereby  increase^  but  (he  cat  tvishes   that  all 


(     398     ) 

the  members  of  the  family  should  become  blind   {so  that  she 
may  steal  with  impunity  ). 

The  dog  is  considered  a  grateful  animal  and  auspicious, 
while  the  cat  is  regarded  as  ungrateful  and  unlucky.  The  cat 
is  supposed  to  be  the  mnternal  aunt  of  the  leopard,  whom  she  has 
taught  all  the  evil  he  knows,  excei.it  the  trick  of  climbing  a  tree, 
according  to  the  saying  that  ''one  thing  should  be  reserved  from 
a  pupil."  The  leopard  formerly  used  to  feed  on  dead  cattle,  but 
the  cat  instructed  him  to  kill  live  cattle,  so  that  she  also  might 
have  a  share;  since  that  time  the  leopard  has  preyed  on  live  ani- 
mals.    This  is  quoted  as  a  reproach  to  the  cat. 

The  dog  is  supposed  to  have  remarkable  powers  of  hearing, 
and  the  cat  of  sight.  Once  a  king  set  a  dog  and  a  cat  to  watch 
his  horse.  At  night  the  dog  began  to  bark,  hearing  some  sound. 
The  cat  reproved  him  for  making  such  a  noise,  saying  that  she 
had  seen  (in  the  dark )  only  a  hair  falling  from  the  horse. 

Evil  spirits  are  supposed  to  appear  often  in  the  form  of  a 
cat,  but  never  of  a  dog. 

49  ^T  ^  ^T2  '5SITVT  ^  ^JZ  \^  ?i^I  ^^  ^^^T  f  ^  ^f  ^- 
^Urj  %  ^107.  San  ki  sata  adha  k£  nata  dasha  dyunlo 
dasha  deunlo  dasha  kokelino  ke  dino. 

Out  of  a  hundred,  sixty:  out  of  that  sixty,  half  lost ;  I  will 
give  you  ten  rupees  and  have  ten  given  to  you  by  some 
other  person  ;  then  the  remaining  ten  is  not  worth  talking 
about. 

A  man  sent  one  hundred  rupees  by  the  hand  of  one  of  his 
couQtrymen,  to  his  family  in  another  country.  The  bear«r  of  the 
money  oe  arriving  said  he  had  only  set  out  with  sixty  rupees,  and 
half  of  that  had  been  lost  on  the  way.  He  very  generously  pro- 
mised to  give  ten  -of  the  remaining  thirty  at  some  future  time, 
and  said  he  would  cause  some  other  men  to  pay  them  another 
ten.  As  for  the  remaining  ten,  he  said  it  was  not  proper  that 
they  should  take,  such  a  paltry  sum,  nor  for  him  to  give  it,  so  ho 
ended  by  giving  them  nothing  at  all. 

Ironically  applied  to  dishonesty,  and  "cooked"  accounts  etc. 

50  ^f%%T  ^rl»I  f^'lt  %[^V.     Mudlyo  jogi  pisi  aukhadha. 

A  shaven  jogi  and  powdered  medicine  (  are    not  dis- 
tinguishable ). 


(     390     ) 

No  one  can  tell  whether  the  jogi  was  a  Brahman  or  Dom 
or  to  what  caste  he  belonged,  as  all  jogis  are  alike  ;  and  so  powder- 
ed aiedicine  is  difficult  to  analyse. 

Used  of  these  two  things, 

51  lii^fJr  Ob  ^"^ifj  TcTg«I.     Adami  ki  kasauti  matalaba. 

Motive  is  the  test  of  a  man. 

We  can  only  know  whether  a  man  is  good  or  bad  by  know- 
ing his  real  motives. 

52  ^^T^  ^f%^t  ■ft«'TT(%  ^■m^  *lf^^  n^  SRiTf^-    Akala 
dhaniyan  dwi  kaparhi  sukala  dhaniyan  dwiyai  kaparhi. 

In  time  of  famine  dhanyd  {coriander  seed)  has  two  capsules, 
and  in  time  of  plenty  two  also. 

(Coriander  seed  when  pressed  or  pounded  separates  into 
two  parts. 

Used  to  express  dissatisfaction  with  a  small  fixed  income. 

53  f^j^{  l^i^T   "^TfT   t:  5ltf^«      Dina  ni  runa  bata  rai 

janchhi. 

The  time  (  of  need  )  passes  away,   but  the  fact  remains 
{for  ever). 

"When  some  one  has  asked  another  for  help  and  been  refused, 
he  tells  him  my  time  of  need  will  soon  be  over,  but  your  refusal 
will  always  be  remembered. 

Used  to  induce  another  to  give  his  help. 


54  TT^  ^T  ^T'  ^f^  ^IT'I   ^T  ^T'^  ^ftl^      Rawana  ro 
apun  suni  Hanumana  ro  apun  suni. 

Hdwan   cries  for  himself,     and  Hanumdn  cries  for 
himself. 

Hanuman  was  the  hero-monkey  in  the  fiamayan,  sent  by 
Hama  to  look  for  his  wife  Sita,  who  was  in  the  power  of  Rawan, 
king  of  Ceylon.  Rawan  tried  to  slay  him  with  his  wonderful  sword 
with  which  it  is  said  he  could  cleave  mountains  and  even  earth  into 
two  parts.      With  this  sword  he    struck  Hanuman,  who    turned  his 

T  2 


(     400     ) 

back,  so  the  stroke  fell  on  his  tail,  and  cut  only  one  and  a  half 
hairs  from  it.  Kawan  was  grieved  at  the  failure  of  his  sword, 
and  Hanuman  at  the  injury  done  to  his  tail. 

Used  when  both  parties  in  a  business  are  dissatisfied  or 
unfortunate. 

55  »IT  ^T^T  HT^T'      P^f^  gbara  ko  thano. 

Vessels  of  another^ s  house. 

Daughters  are  thus  spoken  of  in  a  depreciatory  sense,  inas- 
much as  they  do  not  stay  in  their  father's  house,  but  go  to  another 
family  on  their  marriage. 

56  "a^  '^T^^T*    Bansa  balarho. 
The  ear  of  a  bamboo. 

When  a  bamboo  grows  ears,  it  is  regarded  as  an  omen  poi- 
tending  that  it  will  soon  be  destroyed  or  uprooted. 

Used  on  seeing  evil  deeds  and  habits  springing  up  in  a 
family,  regarded  as  signs  of  approaching  ruin. 


57  tj^  cRT  'SSJT^,    Thuka  ka  ansu. 
Tears  of  spittle. 

Unnecessary  grief,  or  sorrow  at  the  good  fortune  of  others. 

58  f5|^^  f^Wrf^   ^T  ^IT^T*       Nimuvva    pichharhi   ko 
banolo. 

I%e  dwarfed  aftei^growth  of  the  lemon  crop. 

Lemon  trees  sometimes  produce  a  second  growth  of  fruit, 
but  this  is  always  oT  a  very  stunted  and  poor  d'ejcription.  The 
simile  is  used  to  represent  the  last  child  of  a  married  pair,  or  the 
last  yield  of  anything. 

59  ^T'B?:  •fl^  ilT^T  ^T*S^  'H'^  ''^r^T*     Dophara  taka  mala 
dophara  matha  chala. 

Mala,  friend  in  the  morning,  enemy  in  the  afternoon. 

Mala  is  a  village  in  Patti  Boraki  Ran,  parganah  Baramandal, 
Kumaun,  the  people  of  which  have  the  reputation  of  being  very 
untrustworthy  and  cunning. 


(     40]     > 

60  ^n^i  ^^7  H^^T  f^^^^  ^^^T*     Aigayo  mero  maliiwa 
ni  ai  bhela  haluwa. 

If  it  comes  back,  it  is  my  Maluwd  ;  if  not,   let  it  fall 
down  a  precipice. 

A  certain  man  had  an  old  and  useless  ox.  named  maluwa 
(sweet  one  ).  One  day  the  poor  animal  did  not  return  home  from 
grazing.  Instead  of  going  to  seek  it,  the  owner  expressed  himself 
as  in  the  proverb. 

Used  of  a  person  or  thing  little  cared  for. 

Wala  ki  topi  pal  a  ka  khora  pala  ki  topiwala  ka  khora. 

Putting  the  cap  of  one  man   on  another's  head,   and 
vice  versa. 

Double-dealing. 

62  ^  q^^  gsT  fq^^T  ^5i;  g%  fijx:  fq^^^r-      Ye  murada 
ka  pihala  paira  tu  lai  shira  pitanai  a. 

This  dead  body  has  yellow  feet,   come  along,   beating, 
your  head. 

Expresses  suspicion. 

The  following  story  is  told  relative  to  the  cunning  and"  dis- 
honesty of  goldsmiths.  Once  a  king  required  a  number  of  ornaments 
made.  In  order  to  secure  himself  against  dishonesty  on  the  part 
of  the  goldsmiths  employed,  he  had  them  fastened  up  in  a  room, 
and  stripped  and  searched  when  they  went  home  at  night.  One 
day,  howeverj  they  represented  that  one  of  their  number  had  died, 
and  asked  permission  to  carry  out  his  corpse.  In  the  meantime 
they  had  made  a  figure  of  solid  gold,  fetched  from  the  treasury 
of  the  king,  and  dressed  up  this  figure  of  gold  in  a  winding  sheet 
and  carried  it  forth.  As  they  were  leaving  the  palace,  a  man  caught 
sight  of  the  golden  feet  of  the  figure,  and  cried  out.  ''This  dead  body 
has  yellow  feet."  On  hearing  this  from  him  the  goldsmiths  said, 
"Come  along,  and  join  the  procession  crying  for  the  dead,  you 
also  will  get  a  share." 

63  'sspgxl  g^ft^T  f^^  f^^  ^^f^^T  ^I^rT-     Amrita  lapetiya. 
bikha  bikha  lapetiyo  amrita. 


(     402     ) 

Outside,  nectar ;  inside y  poison.     Inside,  nectar  ;  out- 
side, poison. 

The  first  is  applied  to  gram,  the  husk  or  skin  of  which  is 
considered  good  and  digestive,  while  the  inner  part  of  gram  causes 
dyspepsia. 

The  second  clause  is  used  of  urd  dal,  the  inner  part  of  which 
is  considered  very  a  nutritive  while  the  black  covering  or  shell  is 
regarded  as  poisonous. 

Simple  villagers  relate  the  following  about  the  respectiv& 
merits  of  dal,  wheat  and  rice.  Once  theso  three  cereals  had  a 
dispute  as  to  their  relative  superiority,  and  it  was  at  last  agreed  io 
refer  the  matter  to  a  king.  The  king  at  first  put  them  off  by 
saying  that  he  would  require  twelve  years  to  consider  the  case. 
At  the  end  of  the  twelve  years  the  three  grains  again  went  to  the 
king  and  begged  him  to  give  his  decision.  This  time  the  kino» 
said  that  they  must  go  to  a  sick  man  and  ask  his  opinion,  and 
on  that  opinion  the  case  must  be  decided.  They  accordingly  re- 
paired to  the  house  of  a  sick  man,  and  laid  the  matter  before 
him.  He  replied  that  he  could  not  give  the  palm  to  urd  dal 
because  it  disordered  bis  stomach  whenever  he  ate  of  it.  nor  to- 
wheat,  because  he  found  it  very  difficult  to  digest.  The  onlv 
grain  which  he  could  eat  with  safety  and  comfort  was  rice,  and 
therefore  he  considered  rice  to  be  the  best.  On  this  wheat  was 
so  enraged  that  he  tore  open  his  own  body,  and  hence  the  form^ 
of  the  wheat  grain  with  its  split  body  ;  and  urd  dal  banged  his- 
head  so  severely  against  the  ground  that  he  broke  his  pate,  and 
ever  since  has  had  the  mark  of  the  wound  (a  white  speck)  oil 
his  head. 


64  ^^  5}f3  5q7^x;w.      Ke  mai  gotha  byanera  cbhian. 
Am  I  one  who  has  to  lie-in  in  the  loioer  story  ? 

A  protest  against  ill-treatment. 

In  ancient  times  men  of  wealth  used  to  purchase  girls  and 
boys  as  slaves.  The  females  were  not  permitted  to  give  birth 
to  a  child  in  the  upper  story  of  the  house,  this  being  reserved  for 
the  lawful  wife,  and  they  were  otherwise  ill-treated. 

65  ^T5  TTf%  5^r  %T^  Tlf^  ^T  (f^lf  T)-     Mukha  rakhi  nyo 
hatha  rakhi  ghau  (bigarhau). 

Se  who  speaks  awry  will  not  win  his  case  or  get  justice, 
and  he  who  strikes  unskilfully  will  miss  his  aim. 


(     403     ) 

fLiterally  will  make  a  bad  wound  in  the  material  in  which  he 
is  working). 

66  ^*i  ^TTIsir'Hlg  5i^T  W^^r 't)-^.     %J^m  e^T  ^I^T 

si  '^^  ^  vj 

%T  ^■^^T  '^1^1  'lt^«      £una  ho  raja  Bhila  jasa  ku  tasa 

rnila.        Nau  mana   luwa   ghunato   kbau  jarhaka   ligayo 

chila. 

Sear,  O  Icing  BhU,  as  a  man  is  so  he  gets.  Nine  ma,imds 

of  iron  were  eaten  up  by  worms,    and   the  eagle  in  like 

manner  has  carried  off  the  child. 

A  certain  man  deposited  nine  maunds  of  iron  with  a  friend  for 
safe  keeping.  On  asking  for  his  iron  some  months  afterwards  he 
was  told  that  it  had  been  devoured  by  insects.  As  he  had  no  means 
of  proving  the  deposit,  he  contrived  a  plan  for  forcing  the  dis- 
honest friend  to  give  up  the  property.  He  one  day  saw  his  friend's 
infant  playing  outside  in  the  sunshine,  so  darted  upon  him  and 
carried  him  off.  The  father  of  the  child  appealed  to  the  king,  and 
the  other  man  on  being  brought  before  the  court  declared  that 
just  as  his  iron  had  been  eaten  by  insects,  so  the  child  had  been 
carried  off  by  an  eagle.  The  king,  seeing  how  matters  stood,  ordered 
the  man  to  give  up  the  child,  and  the  dishonest  friend  in  turn  to 
give  up  the  iron. 

Q7  ^{X.  %\f^  f|5IJI?JT  1^5»  %T^  5!T»I^T-       Nara  kauni  dina 
gaya  dina  kaimi  nara  gaya. 

Men  say  that  Time  2oasses.      Time  says  that  men  pass 
away. 

A  warning  that  death  comes  to  all.  Each  day  brings  a  man 
nearer  to  his  end. 

68  %^r  ^%T  ^T'^'HT  ^■':  ^^r  "^^r  fk'^im  ^^'    Chelo  bad- 
hau  apana  ghara  paisa  badhau  birana  ghara. 

A  son  will  flourish  in  his  own  {father's  )  house,  but  not 
in  a  stranger's,  but  money  ivill  increase  in  another's  house. 
Referring  to  putting  money  out  at  interest. 


(     404     ) 

69  ^Ilf^  ^^fvs  ^^^  TII^«      Apani  apani  saba  gani. 

Every  one  sings  his  oion  song. 

Illiterate  but  shrewd  men  in  this  country,  seeing  the  strange 
variety  of  opinions  among  learned  men  and  professors  of  diffe- 
rent religions,  are  often  quite  sceptical,  and  they  assert  that  the 
doctrines  of  panishment  for  sin  in  the  future  world  etc.  are  all 
inventions  for  the  purpose  of  frightening  people  into  good  conduct. 
But  they  have  never  known  any  one  return  from  the  next  world,, 
and  so  they  disbelieve  in  a  future  life.  There  are  many  of  these 
nastiks  or  atheistic  philosophers,  who  attribute  everything  to 
chance,  in  Kumuon  and  Garhwal.  They  observe  no  sacred  days,, 
and  are  frankly  Epicurean.  They  say  a  tree  has  many  leaves, 
which  all  fall  in  autumn,  but  the  same  leaves  will  not  grow 
next  spring.  So  men  are  like  leaves,  which  flourish  and  decay, 
and  the  memory  of  them  is  lost. 

They  quote  in  derision  the  story  of  the  sweeper's  religionj 
as  follows  : — 

The  sweepers  are  considered  lowest  of  all  in  the  social  scale  :. 
even  the  doms  will  not  eat  with  them.  Their  spiritual  guide^ 
is  called  Lai  guru  or  the  Red  Teacher,  who  presides  over  the- 
sweepers  of  a  large  district.  When  he  visits  a  station  all  the  sweep- 
ers gather  around  him  with  presents  of  sweetmeats  etc;  and  treat  him. 
with  great  reverence.  He  preaches  to  them  on  an  appointed  day, 
and  also  acts  as  a  judge  or  umpire  in  cases  of  misconduct  among 
the  sweepers.  He  fines  the  culprit  a  certain  sum  which  is  spent 
in  feasting  all  the  sweepers,  and  then  the  offender  is  readmitted 
into  their  communion.  In  addressing  them  he  tells  them  they 
are  the  best  people  in  the  world,  and  God  honors  them  above  all 
nations,  and  they  alone  will  go  to  Heaven.  Their  souls  will  have- 
to  pass  three  terrible  rivers  in  going  to  Heaven,  one  consisting  of 
ODw's  blood,  the  second  of  pig's  blood,  and  the  third  of  filth.  The 
Hindus  will  be  unable  to  pass  the  first,  the  Mohammedans  the  se- 
cond, and  the  Christians  will  stop  at  the  third,  but  the  sweepers  will 
go  boldly  on  and  attain  felicit}^  (This  is  a  keen  sarcasm,  no  doubt,. 
on  the  cow  worship  of  the  Hindus,  the  Mohammedan  dread  of  the 
pig,  and  the  Christians'  zeal  for  sanitation,  to  which  they  themselves 
owe  their  living j. 

70  ■S(\^  ^X.l{  ^X.  %7lT  ?li%  5rif%  ^f^  ^  TT2T  l^ui  "?fm  ^- 
5iTf%'  Bapa  marata  mara  kainja  satti  jali  meri  mai  rota, 
pakuna  huui  raijali. 


(     405     ) 

If  my  father  dies  let  him  die.  Then  my  stepmother 
may  perform  satti  for  him,  but  my  mother  will  he  left  to 
cook  my  food. 

A  man  had  two  wives,  one  of  whom  he  liked,  but  neglected 
the  other.  The  latter  wife  had  a  son,  whom  he  also  disliked.  The 
son  when  his  father  was  iu  distress  and  about  to  die,  thus  speaks. 
By  Hindu  custom  both  wives  are  obliged  to  perform  satti,  that 
iSj  to  be  bnrnt  with  theirhusband's  body,  but  in  this  case,  the 
youth  considers  that  the  wife  who  was  beloved  should  accompany 
her  husband,  while  the  ill  treated  and  neglected  wife  (  his  mother) 
should  be  allowed  to  live. 

Illustrates  the  truth  that  selfish  conduct  produces  like  selfish- 
ness la  others  also. 

.71  5|[^   »iTfT  HT    m^J    »TTfT   KK    ^^    ^^f^   f^^^T. 

Goru  mara  ta  mara  bachho  mara  ta  mara  sera  bhara  duda 

dijl  kara. 

Ijet  the  cow  die  and  the  calf  too,  but  loe  must  have  a 
seer  of  milk  every  day. 

In  India,  when  a  cow  has  a  female  calf,  two  teats  of  the 
udder  are  left  for  it  to  suck,  when  the  calf  is  male,  only  one  is 
left.  As  a  rule  the  hill  cows  do  not  give  more  than  one  seer  a  day. 
If  the  calf  should  die  through  want  of  nourishment  the  cow  will  re- 
fuse to  give  milk.  Thus  the  foolish  man  in  the  proverb  demands  an 
impossibility.  Since  no  milk  will  be  left  for  the  calf,  which  will 
certainly  die,  and  so  the  supply  of  milk  will  be  lost  altogether.  ( The 
man  is  supposed  to  be  addressing  his  wife  ). 

Demanding  an  impossibilitiy. 

72  Ifififr  ^T  ^T'Tm  HJl,'?T?ir  ^T  ^^T-     Naumi  ka  bamana 
ghugatiya  ka  kawa. 

On  the  9th  of  Asoj  (  dark  fortnight)  JBrahmans  (  are 
to  be  got  with  difficiolty )  and  on  the  Makar  Sankrdnti 
(  12th  Jan  )  crows  are  scarce. 

On  the  former  date  the  shraddh  or  memorial  rites  for 
mothers  is  observed,  when  in  almost  every  family  the  presence  of 
Brahmans  is  required  and  so  their  services  are  greatly  in  request. 
On  the  latter  date  it  is  the  religious  custom  to  feed  the  crows. 
If  the  crows  come  to  take  one's  offering  it  is  considered  auspicious, 


(     406     ) 

if  not,  it  is  ominous  of  evil.  So  on  that  day  the  crows  finding 
abandance  of  food  everywhere,  are  not  so  eager  to  come  round 
the  houses  and  pick  up  the  food. 

Used  ironically  when  any  abundant  and  common  article  is 
suddenly  found  wanting. 

73  ^[^  ^T  ^g.     Hatha  ko  maila. 
The  sweat,  dirt  of  one's  hands. 

Used  to  describe  money — filthy  lucre — when  a  man  has  lost  a 
sum  and  pooh-poohs  the  loss  as  trifling. 

74  ^^  ^ifk^T^  ^  •IT'3  ■^l  ^-      ^i  pauniya  le  pai  nakha 

mukha  ai. 

Se  got  what  was  beyond  his  reach,  and  it  came    out   at 
his  motith  and  nose  (  he  could  not  manage   or  digest  it  ). 

When  a  man  exceeds  the  allowable  limit  on  getting  oppor- 
tunities which  were  formerly  beyond  him.  Want  of  self-control 
under  new  circumstances. 

75  efit^^  '^Tf^  'ir?      Kankarba  basi  gocbba. 

The  Kakar  (  wild  sheep  )  bleats. 

Applied  in  au  abusive  way  to  denote  a  man's  inaptitude  or 
failure.  "The  thing  has  turned  out  to  be  a  jungle  in  which  the 
voice  of  the  Kakar  only  is  heard."     (A    Garhwal  proverb). 

76  ^THJ  ■^t(%'^T5'     Kapuwa  basi  gocbba. 
Same  meaning.     The  cuckoo  titters  his  voice," 

In  the  Bhabar  the  people  work  diligently  until  about  April : 
when  they  hear  the  cuckoo's  voice  they  give  up  work,  regarding  it 
as  a  sign  of  the  approach  of  the  hot  season,  when  they  must  retire 
from  their  fields  etc.     (A  Bhabar  proverb}. 

Used  also  to  denote  hopelessness  or  inability. 

77  ^ig^I  '^T''"J!r    fTtfi   "BTJlf-      Datulo  apana   tarpba  ka 
tan  ebb  a. 

TJie  sickle  cuts  ( grass  )  to  its  own  side  {inwards ). 
Applied  to  clannishness. 


(     ^07     ) 

78  <3^HT  ^  *TT'nt-      Khaluwa  kubhagl. 

Khaluwd  is  a  loretched  bungler  in  speech. 

E.  g.  A  man  seeing  a  new  house  in  process  of  erection  by  his 
neighbour  finds  fault  with  the  arrangement  of  the  doors,  and  makes 
the  ill-omened  remark,  "when  one  of  the  members  of  your  family 
die,  how  will  you  carry  the  body  out  of  those  doors"  ?  -Such  an 
unfortunate  speech  would  be  considered  as  most  ill-omened  and  in 
the  worst  taste,  and  the  proverb  above-quoted  would  be  used. 

79  %  ^%  ^  ^%r«     Le  ghorho  khwe  ghoro. 

Take  my  horse  and  spoil  it. 

A  thing  which  no  sensible  person  would  do,  as  a  horse  is  a 
valuable  piece  of  property  in  the  hills.  Applied  by  a  person  who 
is  asked  to  do  hastily  something  damaging  to  himself. 


80  -^z  %T  f^^R  'gl^T  1^5  ^  fSf^IIIPI.      Bitha  ko  ni- 
chhanu  duma  ko  maranu  kwe  nijananu. 

No  one  believes  the  poverty  of  a  Bith  {patrician)  or 
the  dying  {from  starvation )  of  a  Dora. 

Bithas  are  always  supposed  to  be  wealthy,  and  Doms  are  a 
low  and  disregarded  class,  whose  death  is  a  matter  of  no  concern. 
Used  by  these  two  classes  of  each  other. 

81  >IT1^  ^T'RS!  Wa  ^T'T'I  %f)"^lg«        Gahakako   mana 
kala  ko  mana  ke  thika  chha. 

No  one  knows  the  mind  of  a  customer  or  the  will  of  Death. 

Both  choose  in  an  indiscriminate  and  uncertain  way,  and 
just  as  every  article  of  goods  in  a  shop  will  be  sold  some  time  or 
other,  so  every  man  will  be  taken  by  death  some  day. 

Mero  chhai  mero  cbhai  kai  apano  nihunu  jaga  jaga  kai 
dagarho  nihunu. 

No  one  becomes  our  { relation )  by  our  telling  him  "  You 
are  mine,  you  are  mine"  and  ice   cannot  make  friends 

z  2 


(     408     ) 

(  on  a  journey  )  with  others  by  saying  "Wait  for  me,  wait 
for  me"  {for  each  man  is  bent  on  his  own  purpose  ). 

83  ■^T  ^^IW^^  T^T-     S^"-  say  ana  eka  mato. 

Wise  men  {though  there  be  a  hundred  of  them)  are 
of  one  opinion. 

Good  sense  always  finds  out  the  right  course. 

A  story  is  sometimes  told  in  connection  with  this  proverb  as 
follows.  A  king  once  had  a  small  tank  made,  and  having  collected 
ninety-nine  of  his  wisest  subjects  and  one  foolish  man  ordered  them 
all  to  pour  in  a  certain  quantity  of  pure  milk  at  night  time.  The 
simple  man  did  so,  but  each  of  the  others  thinking  that  a  single 
seer  of  water  would  not  be  observed  in  so  much  milk,  poured  in 
water,  so  that  in  the  morning  there  were  ninety-nine  seers  of 
water  and  only  one  of  milk.  Thus  the  "truth  of  the  proverb  was 
established. 

84  T(KM  "^T^      Garaja  bauli. 

A.  man  in  need  is  a  man  insane. 

He  will  go  any  length  to  obtaia  what  he  wants,  without 
regard  to  right  and  wrong. 


85  3T3T  «1"^T'l.     Juwa  jabana. 

Gambling  and  malcing  a  promise  (  are  equal  ). 

That  is,  when  a  man  loses  in  gambling  be  must  certainly  pay, 
so  a  man  who  has  made  a  promise  must  keep  it.  Used  to  urge 
another  to  keep  to  his  engagement. 

86  1T«I  ^r  irr^  ^^r-     Hatha  sukho  jogi  bhukho. 

As  soon  as  thejogi's  hand  is   dry,  he  becomes  hungry 
again. 

That  is,  as  soon  as  he  has  eaten  the  portion  given  him  by 
some  benevolent  person,  he  goes  to  another  and  begs,  without 
telling  him  that  he  has  already  been  fed. 

Applied  to  greedy  and  ungrateful  people. 

87  f^^inr  ^T  '^TW»     Sisano  ko  pata. 

A  leaf  of  nettle  (stinging  on  both  sides  ). 


(     409     ) 

A'pplied  to  a  tricky,  untrustworthy  person,  who  will  injure 
Both  parties. 

The  fact  noted  here  is  that  the  nettle  leaf  stings  on  which- 
ever side  it  is  touched.  So  people  say.  "The  world  is  like  a  nettle 
leaf."     /.  e.  Whatever  one  does,  people  censure  and  criticize. 

88  ^7  f23S!^^2r^^«      Kotishcha  kitayate. 

There  are  millions  of  insects  of  the  same  kind'. 

A  phrase  used  to  one  who  is  boasting  about  something,  to- 
take  down  his  pride ;  or  spoken  by  one  who  is  complimented. 

89  >T  f5|%t  »I  f%%t  n  (^%t  ^  %%!•      Gu  nikhaun  gu  ni- 

Ov  Ov  ov  -    " 

khaun  gu  nikhaun  ta  ke  khaun. 

The  sitola  chirps,  I  wont  eat  dirt,  I  wont  eat  dirt. 

(tThen  he  says).     '^ If  I  don't  eat  dirt  what  shall  I  eat"  ? 

Used  of  force,  coercion  ;  E.  g.  When  a  man  has  lost  his  caste, 
and  at  first  refuses  to  eat  the  food  and  follow  the  customs  of  his 
new  associates,  but  is  at  last  compelled  to  do  soj  nolens  volens. 

90  "^  "^(a;  ^i?      Busa  baithigechha* 

The  chaff  has  got  into  the  mill. 

The  ordinary  water-mill  will  grind   grain,but   if  chaff  creeps 
into  the  aperture  the  mill  will  be  stopped.. 
Applied  to  inability  or  obstruction. 

91  ^^T  f%  SSJTtij.     Kawa  ki  by  ana. 

Giving  birth  to  a  crow. 

The  crow  is  supposed  to  have  offspring  only  once  in. its  lifetime. 
Applied  to  a  woman  who  bears  only  one  child. 

92  >iqt  ^'S^T-     Dhunwan  dekbano. 

Watching  the  smoke. 

Seeing  others  in  trouble  or  laboring  hard,  and  not  helping 
them. 

Derived  from  the  analogy  of  a  house  on  fire,  which  it  is  tbe 
dnty  of  persons  concerned  to  help  to  put  out. 


(     4i0     ) 

93  f^T.^^  i(5T  '^T-      Biralu  ko  glia. 

A  cat's  eating  grass. 

Cats  are  sometimes  observed  eating  a  particular  kind  of  grass^ 
■which  is  regarded  as  unnatural.     Used    of  a   man's    beginning   t-*' 
contract  bad  habits. 

94  If  f^^lTBT*     Chhain  cbitona. 
Smelling  one's  object. 

Eager  for  a  thing,  like  a  cat  scanting  a  mouse  ete, 

95  ^«l^i»lf%.     Kana  anguli. 

Putting  a  finger  in  one's  ear. 
At  ease  after  an  object  is  attained. 

96  '?:^^  ^^.     Rasa  me  kasa. 
Adulteration  of  a  pure  or  genuine  thing. 

This  is  considered  a  sin,  E.  g.  putting  water  in  milk  &c. 

97  si^ii'l)'.     Nachanachi. 
The  habit  of  dancing. 

Applied  to  established  bad  habits,  which  a  man  will  practise 
even  if  he  gains  no  profit  thereby. 

Once  a  king  was  much  pleased  with  the  performance  of  a 
dancing  girl,  but  contrary  to  custom  he  did  not  give  her  a  present, 
but  told  her,  "If  ever  you  fee]  inclined  to  dance  again,  3'ou  may 
come  here,"  implying  that  a  bad  habit  is  practised  for  its   own  sake. 

98  %T  ^T3T  ^im  ^l^T  ^^  ^T^T  f^.    ^sif^T^  ^T  w%t 


s^I^  ^'ST  "T      J^^^  1^^^  katha  matha  suna  kala  tu.    Anala 
le  ghara  muso  daurha  dunda  tu. 

O  dumb  man,  tell  stories.  O  deaf  man,  listen  to  them; 
O  blind  man  go  a  thieving,  and  lame  man,  rimaioay  with 
the  spoil. 

Bad  choice  of  agents,  or  faulty  management. 


(     411     ) 

99  ^q  Kt^I  ^  ^^  ^tSl  ^«  Rupa  risba  nai  karma  banto 
nai. 

.  No  one  should  envy  another^ s  fair  countenance,  and  no 
one  can  share  another's  fate. 

100  ^f%  ^g  51  TTT^  ^il5i  'l^^T^fT  lf%«n  ■^^^^TT 
^^^  5ij^  e|7  ^,  Hali  hala  ju  mala  halona  parsa  ka  seta 
haliya  bamorakheta  balada  goru  ka  peta. 

The  plough  share  is  being  hardened  in  the  fire,  the  yoke 
is  in  the  Bhdbar,  the  handles  are  being  matured  in  the  dung 
hill,  the  ploughman  is  in  Bamorlchet  {in  the  plains  )and 
the  bullocks  are  yet  unborn. 

A  man  wants  his  field  ploughed  at  once,  although  none  of 
the  requisites  are  at  hand. 

The  plough  is  made  of  three   different  kinds  of  wood.     The 
share  has  to  be  hardened  in  fire,  the  yoke  is  made  of  shisham  or  sal 
wood,  hrought  from  the  Bhabar,  and  the  other  parts   are   made   of 
another  wood,  which  is  fitte  d  for  nse  by  being  buried  in  a  dunghill 
for  several  months. 

Foolish  and  improvident  haste. 

101  ^"5^^   «ilfT%^T  ^^^  ^ITT  llfa  liT^.       Babarha 
sudbariyo  ko  balada  lorba  nali  ko  ke. 

The  Dom  employed  to  castrate  a  steer  demands  a  caS' 

trated  steer  as  wages,  and-  wants  something  to  pay  Jor  his 

tools  as  well.     That  is,   he  wants  wages  exceeding  the 

value  of  the  property  to  be  dealt  with. 

Expresses  astonishment  at  the  exorbitant  rate  of  interest 
or  wages  demanded  by  one  who  has  a  monopoly  of  his  particular 
business. 

102  5T^  »fl?IT  fl^  ^T^-     ^^^^  mangau  taba  bbola. 
Whenever  he  is  asked,  he  says  he  will  pay  to-morroio. 

Breach  of  contract. 


(     412    ) 

103  %^T  qg  qg  ^j  f%^  51T^T-       Lekho  pala  pala  ko  liji? 
jalo. 

Every  moment  will  have  to  be  accounted  for. 

Divine  judgment  on  all   actions,    moral    responsibilitj- ;  used. 
as  a  religious  admonition. 

104  ^^  ^^^  '^I^  ^T  '?tf^''''T'       Isbaka  mushaka 

khansi  kburrd  ni  chhipana. 

Love,  music,  and   a   cough  cannot   be    suppressed  or 
concealed. 

105  ^^Z  ^^JW^-     Un  ki  tun  ni  jananu. 

Se   doesnt  know  un  from    tun  i.e.  the  similar  signs  or- 
letters  ^  and  z 

That  is,  cannot  tell  a  bee    frooj  a   bull's   foot ;    a   simpleton^ 
ignoramus. 

106  eBT3  %j  ^^      Katha  ko  ullu. 
A  wooden  owl. 

A  perfect  booby. 

107  wTT  lf%  »t5»      Pura  parhigechha. 

You've  finished  it. 

You  have  been  and  gone  and  done  it,  made  a  fine    mess  of  it; 
Used  ironically. 

108  ^If  »i7f%   ^  sij-  ^H^l^  llfV'      Kabhain  garhi  me 
nau  kabbaip  nau  me  garbi. 

Sometimes  a  boat  is  carried  on  a  cart,   and  sometimes 
the  cart  is  carried  on  a  boat. 

Mutual  help  or  usefulness. 

109  '?|[^JTT«l  '»T"?TT^'    Asamana  patala. 
(  Makes  )  Beaven  of  Kelt. 


(    413    ) 

Makes  black  white,  a  liar. 

110  TT5JI  ^T  *ITft^T  f^  f^'ST^  irfe^r  ^  ^T^%      Raja 
ka  mariya  ki  Lila  me  lotiya  ki  laja  nai. 

There  is  no  shame  in  being  punished  by   a   hing,    nor 
in  falling  on  a  slippery  place. 

111  ^^7  ^^r  «lif^  f%5JTf%.     Karo  cbbiyo  kari  nijani. 

ISe  did  it,  but  bungled  in  the  attempt  {lit.  did  not  know 
how  to  do  it). 

112  ttlf%5lTf%  »T^^|%«     Jorhi  jarhi  maharurhi. 

Maharurhi  (  was  made)    by  gathering  from  here  and 
there. 

Maharurhi  is  the  name  of  a  small  parganah  of  the  Kumaun  district. 

Formerly  it  did  not  exist,  but  when  the  Gurkha  Government 
■was  obliged  to  assign  villages,  for  the  feeding  ot  pilgrims,  to 
iBadrinath  and  Kedarnath,  this  new  pargannah  was  formed  by 
catting  off  portions  from  the  neighbouring  ones. 

•Used  by  one  who  tries  to  raise  money  from  all  quarters 
(  by  begging  etc  )  for  some  purpose. 

213  ?I7f?5|  ^^  syt  ^JSI-     Nau  dina  chale  dhai  kosha. 
Nine  days  for  going  two  and  a  half  kosh  ( five  miles  ). 

There  are  temples  at  the  sacred  places  Kedar-nath  and  Badri- 
nath  which  formerly  were  connected  by  a  road  only  five  miles  long. 
These  temples  were  at  that  time  served  by  the  same  pujari  (priest), 
but  he  grew  weary  of  having  to  perform  service  at  both  places  on 
the  same  day.  So  the  gods  Kedar  nath  and  Badri  nath  caused 
a  huge  landslip  which  made  the  road  impassable,  and  the  two 
temples  are  now  separated  by  a  nine-days'  journey. 

Used  by  a  traveller  who  misses  his  way. 

114  %g  ^^Tf^  ^T  ^%r   ^5[T'^  ^T'      Kbaila  khilari  ko 
ghorho  sawara  ko. 
Plays  are  for  players,  and  horses  are  for  riders. 

Things  are  only  of  value  to  those  only  who  know  their  use 
and  are  able  to  handle  them. 


